6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 1/498
ORDINANCES PENDING CODIFICATION
Ordinances listed under this folder in the table of contents to the left, have been passed, but
have not been incorporated in the actual code. Please contact the office of the clerk if there are
any questions concerning the ordinances listed.
Disclaimer:
This is provided for informational purposes only. The formatting of this ordinance may vary from the official hard copy. In the case of any
discrepancy between this ordinance and the official hard copy, the official hard copy will prevail.
VILLAGE OF STREAMWOOD
----------------------------------------------------------------
ORDINANCE NO. 2019- 17
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING SECTION 3-4-8 ENTITLED “LICENSE CLASSIFICATIONS, FEES, NUMBER ISSUED” OF CHAPTER 4 ENTITLED
“ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR DEALERS” OF TITLE 3 ENTITLED “BUSINESS AND LICENSE REGULATIONS,” OF THE VILLAGE CODE OF
ORDINANCES
OF THE VILLAGE OF STREAMWOOD
----------------------------------------------------------------
ADOPTED BY THE BOARD OF TRUSTEES
OF THE VILLAGE OF STREAMWOOD
THIS 16th DAY OF May, 2019.
----------------------------------------------------------------
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 2/498
Published in pamphlet form by authority of the Board of Trustees of the Village of Streamwood, Cook County,
Illinois this 16th day of May, 2019.
ORDINANCE NO. 2019 - 17
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING SECTION 3-4-8 ENTITLED “LICENSE CLASSIFICATIONS, FEES, NUMBER ISSUED” OF CHAPTER 4 ENTITLED
“ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR DEALERS” OF TITLE 3 ENTITLED “BUSINESS AND LICENSE REGULATIONS,” OF THE VILLAGE CODE OF
ORDINANCES
OF THE VILLAGE OF STREAMWOOD
BE IT ORDAINED by the President and the Board of Trustees of the Village of Streamwood, Cook County, Illinois
as follows:
SECTION ONE: That pursuant to the provisions of Title 3, Chapter 4, Section 3-4-8 “License Classifications,
Fees, Number Issued” of the Village Code of the Village of Streamwood, Cook County, Illinois, the Class “J”
liquor license classification shall have the maximum number of licenses adjusted to three (3).
SECTION TWO: The remaining provisions of Title 3, Chapter 4, Section 3-4-8 shall remain in full-force and
effect and unamended by this Ordinance.
SECTION TREE: That all ordinances and resolutions or parts thereof in conflict with the provisions of this
ordinance are, to the extent of such conflict, expressly repealed.
(THE REMAINDER OF THIS PAGE LEFT INTENTIONALLY BLANK)
SECTION FOUR: That this ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage, approval and
publication in pamphlet form as provided by law.
ROLL CALL VOTE: AYES 6
NAYS 0
ABSTENTIONS 0
ABSENT 0
PASSED AND APPROVED this 16th day of May, 2019.
APPROVED:
/s/ Billie D. Roth
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 3/498
VILLAGE PRESIDENT
ATTEST:
/s/ Kittie L. Kopitke
VILLAGE CLERK
PREFACE
This Village Code of the Village of Streamwood, as supplemented, contains ordinances up to and including ordinance 2019-6, passed February 7, 2019.
Ordinances of the Village adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions of this Village Code to the extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent
therewith. Consult the Village office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision of the Code has been amended, superseded or repealed.
Sterling Codifiers
Coeur d'Alene, Idaho
Title 1
ADMINISTRATION
Chapter 1
OFFICIAL VILLAGE CODE
1-1-1: TITLE:
Upon adoption by the Board of Trustees, this Village Code is hereby declared to be and shall hereafter constitute the official Village Code of the Village of
Streamwood, and shall be known and cited as the STREAMWOOD VILLAGE CODE. This Code is hereby published by authority of the Board of Trustees
and shall be kept up to date as provided in Section 1-1-4 of this Chapter. Any reference to the number of any section contained herein shall be understood
to refer to the position of the same number, its appropriate chapter and title heading, and to the general penalty clause relating thereto, as well as to the
section itself, when reference is made to this Village Code by title in any legal document. (1994 Code)
1-1-2: ACCEPTANCE:
This Village Code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be received without further proof in all courts and in all administrative tribunals of
this State as the ordinances of the Village of general and permanent effect, except the excluded ordinances enumerated in Section 1-2-1 of this Code.
(1994 Code)
1-1-3: INTENT:
All general provisions, terms, phrases and expressions contained in this Village Code shall be liberally construed in the order that the true intent of the
President and Board of Trustees may be fully carried out. (1994 Code)
1-1-4: AMENDMENTS:
A. Procedure: Any ordinance amending this Village Code shall set forth the title, chapter and section number of the section or sections to be amended,
and this shall constitute a sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement pertaining to the amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of this
Village Code. All such amendments or revisions byordinance shall be immediately forwarded to the codifiers and the said ordinance material shall be
prepared for insertion in its proper place in each copy of this Village Code. Each such replacement page shall be properly identified and shall be
inserted in each individual copy of the Village Code.
B. Penalties: In case of amendment of any section of this Village Code containing the provisions for which a penalty is provided in another section, the
penalty so provided in such other section shall be held to relate to the amended section or to the amending section, whether reenacted in the
amendatory ordinance or not, unless such penalty is specifically repealed therein.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 4/498
C. Recording Amendments: It shall be the duty of the Village Clerk to keep at least one copy of the Municipal Code which he shall mark in the following
manner: whenever any ordinance which amends or makes an addition to the Code is passed and approved, he shall note on the margin of the section
or sections amended that such amendment has been made, with a reference to the location in the amendment book, hereinafter described where the
amendment may be found, and in the case of an addition, he shall mark in the appropriate place a notation that such addition has been made, with
similar reference to the aforementioned amendment book.
The Village Clerk shall also keep a separate book containing every amendment or addition passed to this Code, with a reference on each copy of such
amendment or addition as to the place in the record of ordinances where the original ordinance may be found.
The above mentioned records shall be kept in addition to the record of ordinances which the Clerk is required to keep by statute. (1994 Code)
1-1-5: CODE ALTERATION:
It shall be deemed unlawful for any person to alter, change, replace or deface in any way any section or any page of this Village Code in such a manner
that the meaning of any phrase or order may be changed or omitted. Replacement pages may be inserted according to the official instructions when so
authorized by the Village Board. The Clerk shall see that the replacement pages are properly inserted in the official copies maintained in the office of the
Clerk. Any person having in his custody an official copy of this Village Code shall make every effort to maintain this Code in an up to date and efficient
manner. He shall see to the immediate insertion of new or replacement pages when such are delivered to him or made available to him through the office
of the Village Clerk. Said Code books, while in actual possession of officials and other interested persons, shall be and remain the property of the Village
and shall be returned to the office of the Clerk when directed so to do by order of the Village Board. (1994Code)
1-1-6: DISTRIBUTION OF CODE:
All of the printed copies of this Code belonging to the Village shall be deposited with the Clerk. He shall deliver one copy thereof to the President and each
member of the Board of Trustees, and copies to such other persons as the President and Board of Trustees may direct.
The President and Board of Trustees shall have the power to extend or reciprocate courtesies of other municipalities by presenting them with a copy of
this Code, bound at the expense of the Village, as to them seem suitable, and they shall also have the power to present two (2) copies of this Code to the
Illinois Municipal League. (1994 Code)
Chapter 2
SAVING CLAUSE
1-2-1: REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES:
All general ordinances of the Village passed by the President and Board of Trustees prior to the adoption of this Village Code are hereby repealed, except
such as are referred to herein as being in force or are by necessary implication herein reserved from repeal subject to the saving clauses contained in the
following sections, from which are excluded the following ordinances: appropriation ordinances, ordinances relating to boundaries and annexations,
franchise and other ordinances granting special rights to persons or corporations; zoning ordinances; tax levy ordinances; contract ordinances and
ordinances authorizing the execution of a contract or the issuance of warrants; salary ordinances; ordinances establishing, naming or vacating streets,
alleys or other public places; improvement ordinances; bond ordinances; ordinances relating to elections; ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance
of real estate by or from the Village; ordinances adopting social security and all special ordinances. (1994 Code)
1-2-2: PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES:
No ordinances relating to railroad crossings with streets or other public ways, or relating to the conduct, duties, services or rates of public utilities shall be
repealed by virtue of the adoption of this Village Code or by virtue of the preceding section, excepting as this Code may contain provisions for such
matters, in which case this Village Code shall be construed as amending such ordinances in respect to such provisions only. (1994 Code)
1-2-3: COURT PROCEEDINGS:
No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a former ordinance, whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not, as to any offense
committed against such former ordinance or as to any act done, any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or claim arising
under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any such offense or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so
incurred or any rightaccrued or claim arising before the new ordinance takes effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall conform to the
ordinance in force at the time of such proceeding, so far as practicable. If any penalty, forfeiture or punishment be mitigated by any provision of a new
ordinance, such provision may be, by the consent of the party affected, applied to any judgment announced after the new ordinance takes effect.
This Section shall extend to all repeals, either by express words or implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making any new provisions upon the
same subject or in any other ordinance.
Nothing contained in this Chapter shall be construed as abating any action now pending under or by virtue of any general ordinance of the Village herein
repealed and the provisions of all general ordinances contained in this Code shall be deemed to be continuing provisions and not a new enactment of the
same provision; nor shall this Chapter be deemed as discontinuing, abating, modifying or altering any penalty accrued or to accrue, or as affecting the
liability of any person, firm or corporation, or as waiving any right of the Village under any ordinance or provision thereof in force at the time of the adoption
of this Village Code. (1994 Code)
1-2-4: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 5/498
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this Village Code or any part thereof is for any reason held to be
unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of the remaining
portions of this Code, or any part thereof. The Village Board of Trustees hereby declares that it would have passed each section, subsection, subdivision,
paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs, sentences,
clauses or phrases be declared unconstitutional, invalid or ineffective. (1994 Code)
Chapter 3
DEFINITIONS
1-3-1: CONSTRUCTION OF WORDS:
Whenever any word in any section of this Village Code, importing the plural number is used in describing or referring to any matters, parties or persons,
any single matter, party or person shall be deemed to be included, although distributive words may not have been used. When any subject matter, party or
person is referred to in this Village Code by words importing the singular number only, or the masculine gender or the female gender, several matters,
parties or persons and females as well as males and bodies corporate shall be deemed to be included; provided, that these rules of construction shall not
be applied to any section of this Village Code which contains any express provision excluding such construction or where the subject matter or content
may be repugnant thereto.
The word "ordinance" contained in the ordinances of the Village has been changed in the content of this Village Code to "Title", "Chapter", "Section" and/or
"subsection" or words of like import for organizational and clarification purposes only. Such change to the Village's ordinances is not meant to amend the
passage and effective dates of such original ordinances. (1994 Code)
1-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this Code, they shall have the meanings herein ascribed to them, unless the context makes such
meaning repugnant thereto:
AGENT: A person acting on behalf of another.
BOARD: Unless otherwise indicated, "Board" shall mean the Board of Trustees of the Village of Streamwood.
CODE: Unless otherwise indicated, "Code" shall mean the Village Code of Streamwood and amendments thereto.
COUNTY: The County of Cook, State of Illinois.
EMPLOYEES: Whenever reference is made in this Code to a Village employee by title only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of the
Village of Streamwood",and shall be taken to mean the employee of this Village having the title mentioned or performing the duties indicated.
FEE: A sum of money charged by the Village for the carrying on of a business, profession or occupation.
FISCAL YEAR: The fiscal year of the Village shall begin on January 1 and shall end the next succeeding December 31.
MISDEMEANOR: Any offense for which a sentence to a term of imprisonment in other than a penitentiary for less than one year may be imposed.
NUISANCE: Anything offensive or obnoxious to the health and welfare of the inhabitants of the Village; or any act or thing repugnant to, or creating a
hazard to, or having a detrimental effect on the property of another person or to the community.
OCCUPANT: Applied to a building or land, this term shall include any person who occupies the whole or any part of such building or land whether alone or
with others.
OFFENSE: Any act forbidden by any provision of this Code or the omission of any act required by the provisions of this Code.
OFFICERS: Whenever reference is made in this Code to a Village officer by title only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of the
Village of Streamwood", and shall be taken to mean the officer of the Village having the title mentioned or performing the duties indicated.
OPERATOR: The person who is in charge of any operation, business or profession.
OWNER: As applied to a building or land, this term shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or lessee of the whole or of a
part of such building or land.
PERSON: Any public or private corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization, government or any other group acting as a unit, as well as a
natural person.
PERSONAL PROPERTY: Every description of money, goods, chattels, effects, evidence of rights in action and all written instruments by which any
pecuniary obligation, right or title to property is created, acknowledged, transferred, increased, defeated, discharged or diminished and every right or
interest therein.
RETAILER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, the word "retailer" shall be understood to relate to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things in
small quantities direct to the consumer.
STATE: Unless otherwise indicated, shall mean the State of Illinois.
STREET: Alleys, lanes, courts, boulevards, public squares, public places and sidewalks.
TENANT: As applied to a building or land, said term shall include any person who occupies the whole or any part of such building or land whether alone or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 6/498
with others.
VILLAGE: The Village of Streamwood, County of Cook, State of Illinois.
VILLAGE BOARD: The President and the Board of Trustees of the Village of Streamwood.
VILLAGE PRESIDENT: The President of the Village may be referred to as "Mayor" or "President" of the Village.
WHOLESALER: In all cases where the words "wholesaler" or "wholesale dealer" are used in this Code, unless otherwise specifically defined, such terms
shall be understood to relate to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things in quantity to persons who purchase for the purpose of resale, as
distinguished from a retail dealer who sells in smaller quantities direct to the consumer.
WRITTEN, IN WRITING: These terms may include printing and any other mode of representing words and letters, but when the written signature of any
person is required by law to any official or public writing or bond required by law, it shall be in the proper handwriting of such person, or in case he is
unable to write, by his proper mark. (1994 Code)
1-3-3: CATCHLINES:
The catchlines of the several sections of this Village Code are, intended as mere catchwords to indicate the content of the section and shall not be
deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, not be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions
of any division or section hereof, nor unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are
amended or reenacted. (1994 Code)
Chapter 4
GENERAL PENALTY
1-4-1: GENERAL PENALTY:
Any person convicted of a violation of any section or provisions of this Code, where no other penalty is set forth, shall be punished by a fine of not less
than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for any one offense. (Ord. 1998-3, 1-8-1998)
1-4-2: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
The penalty provided in this Chapter shall be applicable to every section of this Code the same as though it were a part of each and every separate
section. Any person convicted of a violation of any section of this Code where any duty is prescribed or obligation imposed, or where any action which is of
a continuing nature is forbidden or is declared to be unlawful, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. A separate offense shall be deemed committed
upon each day such duty or obligation remains unperformed or such act continues, unless otherwise specifically provided in this Code.
In all cases where the same offense is made punishable or is created by different clauses or sections of this Code, the prosecuting officer may elect under
which to proceed; but not more than one recovery shall be had against the same person for the same offense; provided, that the revocation of a license or
permit shall not be considered a recovery or penalty so as to bar any other penalty being enforced.
Whenever the doing of any act or the omission to do any act constitutes a breach of any section or provision of this Code and there shall be no fine or
penalty specifically declared for such breach, the provisions of this Chapter shall apply. (1994 Code)
1-4-3: LIABILITY OF OFFICERS:
No provision of this Code designating the duties of any officer or employee shall be so construed as to make such officer or employee liable for any fine or
penalty provided for a failure to perform such duty, unless the intention of the Board of Trustees to impose such fine or penalty on suchofficer or employee
is specifically and clearly expressed in the section creating the duty. (1994 Code)
1-4-4: ALTERNATIVE PENALTIES:
A. In lieu of the general penalty set forth in Section 1-4-1 of this Chapter, any claim charging a violation of the following titles of this Code:
Title 3, Business and License Regulations;
Title 7, Public Health and Sanitation;
Title 9, Building Code;
Title 11, Zoning;
and any codes adopted by reference by and through such titles of this Code may be settled, compromised, and paid in the respective amounts set forth
in the following schedule:
If paid within 10 days of issuance of the citation $25.00
If paid after 10 days of issuance of the citation 50.00
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 7/498
B. In the event that payment is not made within twenty (20) days of the date of the citation, a local ordinance citation may be issued and filed in a court of
competent jurisdiction and served. Payment of any fine and costs shall be in such amounts as may be established by the court within the limits
prescribed by Section 1-4-1 of this Chapter or other applicable provisions of this Code. (Ord. 1999-30, 6-17-1999)
Chapter 5
VILLAGE PRESIDENT
1-5-1: ELECTION, TERM OF OFFICE:
The Village President shall be elected for a term of four (4) years, and he shall be the President of the Board of Trustees as is provided by statute. (1994
Code)
1-5-2: BOND, OATH:
Before entering upon the duties of his office, the President shall give a bond with sureties to be approved by the Board of Trustees, conditioned upon the
faithful performance of his duties, in the sum of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00). He shall take the oath of office as prescribed by statute. (1994 Code)
1-5-3: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The Village President shall be the official head of the Village for all legal purposes and shall have all such powers as may be granted by statute or Village
ordinance. He shall be President of the Board of Trustees and shall preside at all meetings. He shall be ex officio member of all Village Board committees
and commissions. He shall perform all such duties and make all such appointments as may be required of him by statute or Village ordinance. He shall
devote to the duties of his office whatever time the faithful discharge thereof may require. (1994 Code)
1-5-4: DESIGNATION OF DUTIES:
Whenever there is a question as to the respective powers or duties of any appointed officer of the Village, this shall be settled by the President; and he
shall have the power to delegate to any such officer any such which is to be performed when no specific officer has been directed to perform the duty.
(1994 Code)
1-5-5: VACANCY IN OFFICE:
A. President Pro Tem: During the temporary absence or disability of the Village President, the chairman of the Finance Committee of the Board of Trustees
of the Village shall act as President Pro Tem during such absence or disability of the President. The President Pro Tem shall perform all duties and
possess all rights and powers of the President. The President Pro Tem shall receive no additional compensation because of such temporary service.
B. Acting Village President: Whenever a vacancy occurs in the office of Village President, it shall be filled as follows:
1. If there are at least twenty eight (28) months remaining in the unexpired term and the vacancy occurs at least one hundred thirty (130) days before
the next scheduled general Municipal election, the vacancy shall be filled by the electorate at that general Municipal election.
2. Until such time as a successor to fill the vacancy has been elected and has qualified, the vacancy shall be filled by the Board of Trustees electing
one of its members as Acting Village President. The Acting Village President shall perform the duties and possess all the rights and powers of the
President and shall be compensated as the President.
3. Until such time as an Acting Village President has been elected by the Board of Trustees, the President Pro Tem shall perform the duties and
possess all the rights and powers of the President. (1994 Code)
1-5-6: AUTHORITY TO REMOVE BOARD AND COMMISSION MEMBERS:
The Village President shall have the authority to remove from any Village board or commission any member of that board or commission who has failed to
attend three (3) consecutive, regularly scheduled meetings or four (4) regularly scheduled meetings of that board or commission within a year. This
authority shall not be exercised unless said member of the board or commission was first appointed to the board or commission by a Village President and
only then with the advice and consent of a majority of the Village Board. (1994 Code)
Chapter 6
VILLAGE BOARD OF TRUSTEES
1-6-1: ELECTION, FUNCTIONS:
The Board of Trustees, consisting of six (6) members, shall be elected to office for the term of four (4) years, according to the method provided by statute.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 8/498
This Board shall be the legislative department of the Village government, and shall perform such duties and have such powers as may be delegated by
statute to such Board. (1994 Code)
1-6-2: OATH, SALARY:
The members of the Board of Trustees shall take the oath of office prescribed by statute, and shall receive such compensation as may be provided by
ordinance1. (1994 Code)
1-6-3: MEETINGS:
A. Regular Meetings: The regular stated meetings of the President and Board of Trustees shall be held pursuant to a calendar year schedule adopted by
the Village Board in November of the year preceding the calendar year schedule being adopted. This schedule shall be both published and posted in a
prominent place in the Village Hall.
Meetings shall be held in the Village Hall or at such other place in the Village as the President and Board of Trustees may provide.
B. Adjourned Meetings: An adjourned meeting of the President and Board of Trustees may be held for the purpose of completing unfinished business of a
regular meeting at such time or times as may be determined by the President and Board of Trustees.
C. Special Meetings: Special meetings may be called by the President or by any three (3) Trustees. A request for aspecial meeting stating specifically the
time and place of such meeting and the precise nature of the business to be transacted as such meeting shall be made to the Village Clerk, who shall
forthwith give the President, each member of the Board of Trustees and the public at least twenty four (24) hours' notice of the time and place of the
meeting and the specific business to be considered at the meeting.
Only such matters as are set forth in the notice provided by the Village Clerk shall be considered at a special meeting.
D. Committee Meetings: Committee meetings of the President and Board of Trustees shall be held pursuant to a calendar year schedule adopted by the
Village Board in November of the year preceding the calendar year schedule being adopted. This schedule shall be both published and posted in a
prominent place at the Village Hall.
Meetings shall be held in the Village Hall or at such other place in the Village as the President and Board of Trustees may provide. (1994 Code)
1-6-4: VACANCY IN OFFICE:
Whenever a vacancy occurs in the office of Village Trustees, it shall be filled as follows:
A. If there are at least twenty eight (28) months remaining in the unexpired term and the vacancy occurs at least one hundred thirty (130) days before the
next scheduled general Municipal election, the vacancy shall be filled by the electorate at the general Municipal election.
B. Until the office is filled by election, the Village President shall appoint a qualified person to the office, subject to the advice and consent of the Board of
Trustees. Any person appointed under this Section shall hold office until the successor has been duly elected and has qualified. (1994 Code)
1-6-5: ORDINANCE PASSAGE PROCEDURE:
A. Approval, Veto: All resolutions and motions: 1) which create any liability against the Village, or 2) which provide for the expenditure or appropriation of
its money, or 3) to sell any Village property, and all ordinances passed by the Village Board shall be deposited with the Village Clerk. If the Village
President approves of them, he shall sign same. Those of which he disapproves, he shall return to the Village Board with his written objection, at the
next regular meeting of the Village Board occurring not less than five (5) days after their passage. The Village President may disapprove of any one or
more sums appropriated in any ordinance, resolutionor motion making an appropriation, and if so, the remainder shall be effective. However, the
Village President may disapprove entirely of an ordinance, resolution or motion making an appropriation. If the Village President fails to return any
ordinance or any specified resolution with his written objections, within the designated time, such shall become effective despite the absence of his
signature.
B. Reconsideration, Passing Over Veto: Every resolution and motion specified in the preceding subsection, and every ordinance which is returned to the
Board of Trustees by the Village President shall be reconsidered by the Board of Trustees. If, after such reconsideration, two-thirds (2/3) of all the
Trustees elected to the Village Board shall agree to pass an ordinance, resolution or motion, notwithstanding the President's refusal to approve it, then
it shall be effective. The vote on the question of passage over the President's veto shall be by yeas and nays and shall be recorded in the journal.
(1994 Code)
1-6-6: QUORUM:
A majority of the Trustees or three (3) Trustees and the Village President shall constitute a quorum to do business. (1994 Code)
1-6-7: RULES OF ORDER, PROCEDURE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 9/498
A. Rescinded Action: No vote or action of the Board of Trustees shall be rescinded at any special meeting of the Board of Trustees unless there be present
at such special meeting as many members of the Board of Trustees as were present at the meeting when such vote or action was taken, as provided
by statute.
B. Resolutions: Any resolutions submitted to the Board of Trustees shall be reduced to writing before being voted upon, on request of any two (2)
members of the Board.
C. Addressing Meetings: No person other than the President or a member of the Board shall address that body at any regular or special meeting except
upon permission of the President or upon consent of a majority of the members present.
D. Suspension Of Rules: The rules of order, other than those prescribed by statute, may be suspended at any time by the consent of a majority of the
members present at any meeting.
E. Robert's Rules Of Order: Robert's Rules of Order shall govern the deliberations of the Board of Trustees except when in conflict with any of the
foregoing rules.
F. First Reading Of Ordinance: No ordinance shall be passed on the same date that it is introduced to the Board of Trustees,but each ordinance shall be
introduced for a first reading and may not be finally passed until a subsequent date; provided, that this requirement may be waived by a vote of four (4)
Trustees or three (3) Trustees and the President, and the same motion can include the question to waive this requirement and pass an ordinance for its
final passage.
G. Meetings Open To The Public: All meetings of the Village Board shall be open to the public as provided by statute. (1994 Code)
H. Disturbing Meetings: It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb any meeting of the Board of Trustees or of any committee thereof. Any person
violating the provisions of this subsection shall be fined as set forth in Section 1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 1998-4, 1-8-1998)
Chapter 7
VILLAGE MANAGER
1-7-1: APPOINTMENT:
There is hereby created the office of Village Manager of the Village who shall be appointed by the President by and with the advice, approval and consent
of the Board of Trustees, as provided by statute. (1994 Code)
1-7-2: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The Village Manager shall be the administrative head of the Village and shall be responsible for the effective administration of all departments. He shall
have the following powers and duties:
A. To enforce the law and ordinances within the Village.
B. To appoint and remove all directors of departments except as may otherwise be provided by the Village Code.
C. To exercise supervisory and administrative control of all of the Village departments and divisions of the Village except as may otherwise be provided by
the Village Code.
D. To prepare or cause to be prepared, not less than forty five (45) days prior to expiration of the current fiscal year, a report of estimated funds necessary
to defray the expenses of the Village for the forthcoming fiscal year; prepare or cause to be prepared the annual appropriation ordinance or budget
ordinance for consideration and enactment by the Board in accordance with statute, and prepare or cause to be prepared the tax levy ordinance for
consideration and enactment by the Board. The tax levy shall be filed with the County Clerk not later than the second Tuesday in September.
E. To attend all meetings of the Village Board with the right to participate in all discussions, but with no vote.
F. To recommend to the Village Board for adoption such measures as he may deem necessary or expedient.
G. To perform such other duties as may be required of him by ordinance, resolution, motion or reasonable request of the Village Board. (1994 Code)
1-7-3: VACANCY IN OFFICE:
A. Whenever a vacancy occurs in the office of Village Manager, such vacancy shall be filled by appointment of the President with the advice, approval and
consent of the Board of Trustees.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 10/498
B. Until such time as a successor has been appointed to fill the vacancy and has qualified, and in the case of the temporary absence or disability of the
Village Manager, the President may, by and with the advice, approval and consent of the Board of Trustees, appoint a qualified administrative officer or
director of the Village as Acting Village Manager who, while so acting, shall have all of the powers, rights and duties of the Village Manager. (1994
Code)
Chapter 8
VILLAGE CLERK
1-8-1: ELECTION, TERM:
The Village Clerk shall be elected and serve for a four (4) year term and until her successor is elected and qualified, as provided by statute. (1994 Code)
1-8-2: BOND:
Before entering upon her duties of office, the Village Clerk shall give a bond with sureties to be approved by the Village Board, conditioned upon the
faithful performance of her duties, in the sum of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00). She shall take the oath of office as prescribed by statute. (1994 Code)
1-8-3: DUTIES:
The Village Clerk shall perform the following duties:
A. Signatures: She shall seal and attest all contracts of the Village and all licenses, permits and such other documents as shall require this formality.
B. Meetings: She shall attend all meetings of the Village Board.
C. Minutes: She shall keep a full record of all proceedings of the Village Board.
D. Records: In addition to the record of ordinances and other records which the Clerk is required by statute to keep, she shall keep a register of all licenses
and permits issued; and the payments thereon; a record showing all of the officers and regular employees of the Village; and such other records as
may be required by the Board of Trustees.
E. Seal: She shall be the custodian of the Village Seal, and shall affix its impression on documents whenever this is required.
F. Documents: She shall be the custodian of all documents belonging to the Village which are not assigned to the custodyof some other officer.
G. Indices: She shall keep and maintain a proper index to all documents and records kept by her, so that ready access thereto and use thereof may be
had.
H. Additional Duties: In addition to the duties herein provided, the Clerk shall perform such other duties and functions as may be required by statute or
Village ordinance. (1994 Code)
1-8-4: VACANCIES:
In case the office of Village Clerk shall become vacant for any reason, the President and Board of Trustees shall appoint a successor, as provided by
statute. (1994 Code)
Chapter 9
VILLAGE COLLECTOR
1-9-1: OFFICE CREATED:
There is hereby created the office of Village Collector. (1994 Code)
1-9-2: APPOINTMENT:
The Village Collector shall be appointed by the President with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees as provided by statute. The same person
may hold the collective office of Village Clerk and the appointive office of Village Collector and if the Village Clerk is appointed and holds the office of
Village Collector, the President and Board of Trustees hereby authorizes the Village Collector to receive the compensation provided for each of these
offices. The Village Collector shall serve at the pleasure of the President and Board of Trustees. (1994 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 11/498
1-9-3: BOND:
Before entering upon his duties of the Village office, the Collector shall give a bond with sureties to be approved by the Village Board, in the sum of ten
thousand dollars ($10,000.00). This bond shall be conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties of the office of the Village Collector, and shall be
conditioned to indemnify the Village for any loss by reason or neglect of duty or any act of the Village Collector. (1994 Code)
1-9-4: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The Village Collector shall have and is hereby vested with all the rights, powers, privileges, authority and duties authorized and provided for in the Illinois
Municipal Code with respect to the office of Collector in the conduct of his office. In addition, the Village Collector shall perform such other duties as the
President and Board of Trustees may prescribe from time to time. (1994 Code)
1-9-5: DETENTION OF PUBLIC MONEY; PENALTY:
The Village Collector is prohibited from keeping the Village's money in his possession, or in the possession of any person for his use beyond the time
prescribed for its payment to the Village Treasurer. Any violation of this provision shall subject him to immediate removal from office. (1994 Code)
Chapter 10
OTHER VILLAGE OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
1-10-1: VILLAGE ATTORNEY:
1-10-1-1: COUNSEL:
The President, by and with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees, may from time to time retain an attorney to represent or advise the Village on
legal matters. (1994 Code)
1-10-1-2: SUITS AND ACTIONS:
The Attorney shall prosecute or defend any and all suits or actions at law or equity to which or which may be brought against or by, any officer of the
Village on behalf of the Village or in the capacity of such person as an officer of the Village. (1994 Code)
1-10-1-3: JUDGMENTS:
It shall be the duty of the Attorney to see to the full enforcement of all judgments or decrees entered in favor of the Village, and of all similar interlocutory
orders. (1994 Code)
1-10-1-4: ADVICE:
The Attorney shall be the legal advisor of the Village and shall render advice on all legal questions affecting the Village whenever requested to do so by
the President, Board of Trustees or the Village Manager. Upon request, he shall reduce any such opinion to writing. (1994 Code)
1-10-1-5: SPECIAL ASSIGNMENTS:
It shall be the duty of the Attorney to see to the completion of all special assessment proceedings, condemnation proceedings and bond issues. (1994
Code)
1-10-2: FINANCE DEPARTMENT:
There is hereby created the Finance Department of the Village, which shall be supervised and administered by the Finance Director, who shall be
appointed by the Village Manager. (1994 Code)
1-10-2-1: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The Finance Director shall have those powers and shall perform those duties as are prescribed by statute for Municipal Treasurers, Comptrollers, Budget
Directors and Budget Officers, and as may be prescribed by Village ordinance, resolution or motion, and as may reasonably be required by the Village
Manager. He shall pay out money only on vouchers or orders properly signed by the President and head cashier.
In addition, whenever there is a vacancy in the position of Purchasing Agent, the Finance Director shall assume the duties and responsibilities of the
Purchasing Agent as pertains to public works contracts as contained in section 1-12-3 of this title. (1994 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 12/498
1-10-2-2: BOND:
The Finance Director shall give a bond, before entering upon the duties of his position, in an amount of money equal to three (3) times the latest Federal
census population or any subsequent census figure used for Motor Fuel Tax purposes. This bond shall be conditioned upon the faithful performance of his
duties and shall be conditioned to indemnify the Village for any loss sustained by reason of any neglect of duty or any act or omission of the Finance
Director. (1994 Code)
1-10-2-3: SPECIAL ASSESSMENT FUNDS:
All monies received on any special assessment shall be held by the Finance Director as a special fund to be applied only to the payment of the
improvement or bonds and vouchers issued therefor, together with interest thereof, for which the assessment was made. Payments on bonds or vouchers
shall be made in accordance with statutes. (1994 Code)
1-10-2-4: ASSISTANT TO THE FINANCE DIRECTOR:
There is hereby created the Office of Assistant to the Finance Director which shall be supervised by the Village Finance Director. The Assistant to the
Finance Director shall be appointed by the Village Manager.
It shall be the duty of the Assistant to the Finance Director to assist the Finance Director in the performance of his duties as specified in section 1-10-2-1 of
this chapter and any other duties as the Finance Director shall direct his assistant to perform. (1994 Code)
1-10-3: PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT:
There is hereby created the Public Works Department of the Village, which shall be supervised and administered by the Public Works Director, who shall
be appointed by the Village Manager. (1994 Code)
1-10-3-1: DUTIES:
It shall be the duty of the Public Works Director to enforce all Village ordinances relating to subdivision control, the construction, maintenance and repair of
public improvements, including public streets and other Village owned properties, and, in addition, to perform such duties as may be prescribed by statute
or Village ordinance, resolution or motion and as may reasonably be requested by the Village Manager. (1994 Code)
1-10-3-2: ASSISTANT VILLAGE ENGINEER:
There is hereby created in the Department of Public Works the position of Assistant Village Engineer.
The duties of the Assistant Village Engineer shall be to assist the Director of Public Works in inspecting, reviewing and approving all public works related
components of new construction within the Village to assure proper compliances. (1994 Code)
1-10-4: ASSISTANT TO VILLAGE MANAGER:
1-10-4-1: OFFICE CREATED:
There is hereby created the Office of Assistants to the Village Manager which shall be supervised by the Village Manager. The Assistants to the Village
Manager shall be appointed by the Village Manager but at no time shall there be more than two (2) Assistants to the Village Manager employed by the
Village. (1994 Code)
1-10-4-2: DUTIES:
It shall be the duty of the Assistant to the Village Manager to assist the Village Manager in the performance of his duties as specified in section 1-7-2 of
this title and any other duties as the Village Manager shall direct his assistants to perform. (1994 Code)
1-10-4-3: ANNUAL SALARY:
The annual salary for the Assistant to the Village Manager shall be established by the Village Manager but at no time shall it exceed the maximum annual
salaries of department heads as established in subsection 1-11-2-2B of this title. (1994 Code)
1-10-5: COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT:
1-10-5-1: OFFICE CREATED:
There is hereby created the Department of Community Development which shall be supervised and administered by the Director of Community
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 13/498
Development, who shall be appointed by the Village Manager. (Ord. 1995-36, 6-22-1995)
1-10-5-2: DUTIES:
It shall be the duty of the Director of Community Development to direct and coordinate the activities of the Department of Community Development in the
enforcement of all Village ordinances relating to construction and relating to zoning and promotion of community development through planning and in
addition to, perform such duties as may be prescribed by statute or Village ordinance, resolution or motion and as may reasonably be requested by the
Village Manager. (Ord. 1995-36, 6-22-1995)
1-10-6: HOURLY WAGES FOR CERTAIN EMPLOYEES:
The following employment positions of the Village shall be compensated on an hourly basis as determined by the Village Manager at not less than the
Federal minimum wages, as set from time to time by the laws of the United States:
A. Exempt ninety (90) day seasonal employment.
B. Classified part time, temporary employment less than six hundred (600) hours and one hundred twenty (120) calendar days per year.
C. Classified part time, permanent employment in excess of six hundred (600) hours and one hundred twenty (120) calendar days per year.
D. Temporary, emergency employment to prevent a work stoppage not exceeding one hundred twenty (120) calendar days, with approval of the Civil
Service Commission. (1994 Code)
1-10-7: GOLF COURSE DEPARTMENT:
There is hereby created the Golf Course Department of the Village which shall be supervised and administered by the Golf Course Superintendent who
shall be appointed by the Village Manager. (1994 Code)
1-10-7-1: DUTIES:
It shall be the duty of the Golf Course Superintendent to plan, direct and supervise the operation and maintenance of the Village owned golf course and
related facilities. (1994 Code)
1-10-7-2: GROUNDS SUPERINTENDENT:
There is hereby created the Office of Grounds Superintendent which shall be supervised by the Golf Course Superintendent. The Grounds Superintendent
shall be appointed by the Village Manager.
It shall be the duty of the Grounds Superintendent to assist the Golf Course Superintendent in the performance of his duties as specified in section 1-10-7-
1 of this chapter and any other duties as the Golf Course Superintendent shall direct him to perform. (1994 Code)
1-10-8: PERSONNEL DEPARTMENT:
There is hereby created the Personnel Department which shall be supervised and administered by the Personnel Director who will be appointed by the
Village Manager. (1994 Code)
1-10-8-1: DUTIES:
It shall be the duty of the Personnel Director to manage and administer the Village's Personnel System and Labor Relations Program. In addition, the
Personnel Director shall perform such duties as may be prescribed by statute, Village ordinances, resolutions or motions or as may be directed by the
Village Manager. (1994 Code)
1-10-9: DEPUTY VILLAGE CLERK:
1-10-9-1: OFFICE CREATED:
There is hereby created the Office of Deputy Village Clerk which shall be supervised by the Village Clerk. The Deputy Village Clerk shall be appointed by
the Village Clerk with the advice and consent of the President and Board of Trustees. (Ord. 2010-9, 5-6-2010)
1-10-9-2: DUTIES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 14/498
It shall be the duty of the Deputy Village Clerk to assist the Village Clerk in the performance of her/his duties as specified in section 1-8-3 of this title and
any duties as required in the absence of or inability of the Village Clerk to perform said duties. (Ord. 2010-9, 5-6-2010)
Chapter 11
PERSONNEL REGULATIONS
1-11-1: PERSONNEL MANUAL ADOPTED:
The pamphlet entitled "Personnel Manual, Village of Streamwood" dated April 2, 1992, on file with the Village Clerk is hereby adopted by reference as if
set out at length herein. (1994 Code)
1-11-2: SALARIES AND WAGES:
1-11-2-1: ELECTED OFFICIALS:
A. Village President: The President of the Board of Trustees of the Village shall receive as monthly compensation for the performance of his/her duties the
amount of seven hundred dollars ($700.00). For any President whose term of office commences on or after April 13, 1999, the President of the Board
of Trustees of the Village shall receive the monthly compensation for the performance of his/her duties as set forth hereinabove, and the sum of fifty
dollars ($50.00) per regular or special meeting of the Corporate Authorities that such President attends. In addition, the Village President shall either be
provided with the use of an automobile to be purchased or leased by the Village and to be utilized in accordance with the policies and restrictions set
forth in section 11.2, paragraphs B, C and D of the Village's personnel policy manual, or receive reimbursement for auto expenses not to exceed five
hundred dollars ($500.00) per month, at the option of the Village President.
B. Village Trustees: Each of the Trustees of the Village shall receive as monthly compensation for the performance of their duties the amount of two
hundred ten dollars ($210.00). For any Trustee whose term of office commences on or after April 13, 1999, such Trustee of the Village shall receive the
monthly compensation for the performance of his/her duties as set forth hereinabove, and the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00) per regular or special
meeting of the Corporate Authorities that such Trustee attends.
C. Village Clerk: The Village Clerk shall receive as monthly compensation for the performance of his/her duties the amount of one thousand eighty three
dollars thirty three cents ($1,083.33). (Ord. 1998-60, 10-22-1998)
D. Effect Of Compensation: The increases in compensation provided for in this section shall not take effect during the current terms for which the above
mentioned Village officers have been elected. (Ord. 1996-47, 10-17-1996)
1-11-2-2: APPOINTED OFFICIALS:
The pay scale of the appointed officials of the Village shall be as follows:
A. Village Manager: The annual salary of the Village Manager shall be as specified from time to time by the Village Board and all benefits granted to the
Village Manager shall be pursuant to agreements as approved by the Village Board. (1994 Code)
B. Village Employees: The annual salaries for all employees of the Village, exclusive of any Village employee whose salary or wages are determined by a
collective bargaining agreement, shall be fixed from time-to-time by the Village Manager, within the limits of budgetary constraints as determined by the
President and Board of Trustees, and pursuant to the "proposed 2019 pay for performance plan" a copy of which is on file in the Village as exhibit A,
and is incorporated herein by reference. (Ord. 2019-1, 1-3-2019, eff. retroactive to 1-1-2019)
1-11-3: SALARY SCHEDULE AND JOB CLASSIFICATION:
The Village Manager shall maintain a matrix schedule of pay rates and an alignment of titles and job classifications for public review pursuant to the terms
and conditions of subsection 1-11-2-2B of this chapter. (1994 Code)
Chapter 12
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
1-12-1: CHECK SERVICE CHARGE:
There shall be an additional service charge of twenty five dollars ($25.00) for all checks which are returned to the village marked "Account Closed",
"Insufficient Funds", "No Account", etc. Said twenty five dollar ($25.00) service charge will be over and in addition to any rates or delinquent penalties
charged to said customer. (Ord. 2006-1, 1-5-2006)
1-12-2: VILLAGE DEPOSITORIES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 15/498
A. The finance director shall be required to keep all funds and monies in his custody belonging to the village in such places of deposit as shall be
designated by ordinance, and when requested by the finance director the corporate authorities shall designate a bank or banks in which may be kept
the funds and monies of the village in the custody of the finance director. If municipal funds or monies are deposited in a designated bank, however, the
amount of such deposits shall not exceed seventy five percent (75%) of the bank's capital stock and surplus and the finance director shall be
responsible for funds or monies in the bank in excess of this limitation.
B. No bank shall be qualified to receive village funds or monies until it has furnished the corporate authorities with copies of the last two (2) sworn
statements of resources and liabilities which the bank is required to furnish to the commissioner of banks and trust companies or to the federal
comptroller of currency. Each bank designated as a depository for such funds or monies shall, while acting as such depository, furnish the corporate
authorities with a copy of all statements of resources and liabilities which it is required to furnish to the commissioner of banks and trust companies or
the federal comptroller of currency.
C. Any financial institutions lawfully chartered and organized under the laws of the United States Of America and the state of Illinois are hereby designated
as depositories in which the funds and monies of the village in the custody of the finance director may be kept.
D. The finance director shall at all times be knowledgeable of the amount of federal deposit insurance corporation (FDIC) and federal savings and loan
insurance corporation (FSLIC) insurance applicable to the deposit of village funds. (1994 Code)
1-12-3: PUBLIC WORKS CONTRACTS:
1-12-3-1: LETTING OF PUBLIC WORKS CONTRACTS:
Except as otherwise provided by statute, any work or other public improvement which is not to be paid for in whole or in part by special assessment or
special taxation when the expense thereof will exceed twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00), shall be constructed either: (1994 Code; amd. Ord. 2013-34,
11-7-2013)
A. By a contract let to the lowest responsible bidder after advertising for bids, in the manner hereinafter prescribed, except that any such contract may be
entered into by the village manager without advertising for bids if authorized by a vote of two-thirds (2/3) of all the trustees then holding office; or (1994
Code)
B. In the following manner, if authorized by vote of two-thirds (2/3) of all the trustees then holding office: The village manager shall superintend and cause
to be carried out the construction of the work or other public improvement and shall employ exclusively for the performance of all manual labor thereon,
laborers and artisans whom the municipality shall pay by the day or hour, and all material of the value of twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) and
upward used in the construction of the work or other public improvement shall be purchased by contract let to the lowest responsible bidder in the
manner hereinafter prescribed. (1994 Code; amd. Ord. 2013-34, 11-7-2013)
However, nothing contained in this section shall apply to any contract by the village with the federal government or any agency thereof. (1994 Code)
1-12-3-2: ADVERTISEMENT FOR BIDS:
All proposals to award contracts for any work or other public improvement which is not to be paid for in whole or in part by special assessment or special
taxation when the expense thereof will exceed twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) shall be published at least ten (10) days, excluding Sundays and
legal holidays, in advance of the date announced for the receiving of bids, in a secular English language daily newspaper of general circulation through the
village and shall simultaneously be posted on readily accessible bulletin boards in the office of the purchasing agent. Nothing contained in this section
shall be construed to prohibit the purchasing agent from placing additional announcements in recognized trade journals. Advertisements for bids shall
describe the character of the proposed contract or agreement in sufficient detail to enable the bidders thereof to know what their obligations will be either
in the advertisement itself or by reference to detailed plans and specifications on file at the time of the publication of the advertisement. Such
advertisement shall also state the date, time and place assigned for the opening of bids, and no bids shall be received at any time subsequent to the time
indicated in the advertisement. However, an extension of time may be granted for the opening of such bids upon publication in a secular English
newspaper of general circulation throughout the village of the date to which the bid opening has been extended. The time of the bid extension opening
shall not be less than five (5) days after the publication thereof, Sundays and legal holidays excluded. (1994 Code; amd. Ord. 2013-34, 11-7-2013)
1-12-3-3: BOND REQUIRED:
Cash, cashier's check, or a certified check as a deposit of good faith, in a reasonable amount but not in excess of ten percent (10%) of the contract
amounts may be required of each bidder by the purchasing agent on all bids involving amounts in excess of twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) and, if
so required, the advertisement for bids shall so specify.
Said bond, with sufficient sureties, in such amount as shall be deemed adequate not only to ensure performance of contract in the time and manner
prescribed in the contract, but also to save, indemnify and keep harmless the village against all losses, damages, claims, liabilities, judgments, costs and
expenses which may in any way accrue, against the village in consequence of the granting of the contract or which may in any way result therefrom, may
be required by each bidder upon contracts involving amounts in excess of twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) when in the opinion of the purchasing
agent, the public interests will be served thereby. (1994 Code; amd. Ord. 2013-34, 11-7-2013)
1-12-3-4: AGREEMENTS AMONG BIDDERS; DISCLOSURES PROHIBITED:
Any agreement or collusion among bidders or prospective bidders in restraint of freedom of competition by agreement to bid a fixed price, or otherwise,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 16/498
shall render the bids of such bidders void. Each bidder shall accompany his bid with a sworn statement, or otherwise swear or affirm, that he has not been
a party to any such agreement. Any disclosure in advance of the opening of bids, of these terms of the bids submitted in response to an advertisement,
made or permitted by the purchasing agent shall render the proceedings void and shall require readvertisement and re-award. (1994 Code)
1-12-3-5: PROCEDURE FOR GRANTING OF CONTRACT:
A. Opening Of Bids: All sealed bids shall be publicly opened by the purchasing agent of the village or by an officer or employee in the office of the
purchasing agent duly authorized in writing by the purchasing agent to open such bids, and all such bids shall be open to public inspection in the office
of the purchasing agent for a period of at least forty eight (48) hours before an award is made. (1994 Code)
B. Awarding Of Contracts: The award of any contract in excess of twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) shall be to the lowest responsible bidder as
provided in section 1-12-3-1 of this chapter. Every contract involving amounts in excess of twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) shall be signed by the
president of the board of trustees, by the treasurer and by the purchasing agent, respectively, of the village. Each bid, with the name of the bidder, shall
be entered on a record which record with the name of the successful bidder indicated thereon, shall, after award of contract, be opened to public
inspection in the office of the purchasing agent of the village. (1994 Code; amd. Ord. 2013-34, 11-7-2013)
An official copy of each awarded contract together with all necessary attachments thereto, including assignments and written consents thereto of the
purchasing agent as authorized by section 1-12-3-6 of this chapter, shall be retained by the village clerk in an appropriate file open to the public for
such period of time after termination of contract during which action against the village might ensue under applicable laws of limitation. A true copy
shall also be retained by the finance director. After such period such contracts and attachments may be destroyed by direction of the finance director.
C. Determining Responsibility Of Bidders: In determining the responsibility of any bidder, the purchasing agent may take into account other factors in
addition to financial responsibility, such as past records of transactions with the bidder, experience, adequacy of equipment, ability to complete
performance within a specified time limit and other pertinent consideration.
D. Rejection Of Bids: Any and all bids received in response to an advertisement may be rejected by the purchasing agent if the bidder is not deemed
responsible or the character or quality of the services, supplies, materials, equipment or labor does not conform to requirements or if the public interest
may otherwise be served thereby.
E. Correction Or Withdrawal Of Bid: The purchasing agent shall issue regulations concerning the correction or withdrawal of bids based on mistake. (1994
Code)
1-12-3-6: ASSIGNMENT OF CONTRACTS PROHIBITED:
No contract awarded to the lowest responsible bidder shall be assignable or sublet by the successful bidder without the written consent of the purchasing
agent. In no event shall a contract or any part thereof be assigned or sublet to a bidder who had been declared not to be a responsible bidder in the
consideration of bids submitted in response to advertisement for the particular contract. (1994 Code)
1-12-4: NONRESIDENT FINGERPRINTING FEE:
There shall be a fifty dollar ($50.00) processing fee for individuals requiring fingerprints who do not reside within the village. Said fifty dollar ($50.00)
processing fee shall not be applicable when the fingerprints are a requirement for village employment or other village purposes. (Ord. 2010-9, 5-6-2010)
Chapter 13
ETHICS
1-13-1: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall be given these definitions:
CAMPAIGN FOR ELECTIVE OFFICE: Any activity in furtherance of an effort to influence the selection, nomination, election, or appointment of any
individual to any federal, state, or local public office or office in a political organization, or the selection, nomination, or election of presidential or vice
presidential electors, but does not include activities: a) relating to the support or opposition of any executive, legislative, or administrative action, b) relating
to collective bargaining, or c) that are otherwise in furtherance of the person's official duties.
CANDIDATE: A person who has filed nominating papers or petitions for nomination or election to an elected office, or who has been appointed to fill a
vacancy in nomination, and who remains eligible for placement on the ballot at a regular election, as defined in section 1-3 of the election code1.
COLLECTIVE BARGAINING: Has the same meaning as that term is defined in section 3 of the Illinois public labor relations act2.
COMPENSATED TIME: With respect to an employee, any time worked by or credited to the employee that counts toward any minimum work time
requirement imposed as a condition of his or her employment, but for purposes of this chapter, does not include any designated holidays, vacation periods,
personal time, compensatory time off or any period when the employee is on a leave of absence. With respect to officers or employees whose hours are
not fixed, "compensated time" includes any period of time when the officer is on premises under the control of the employer and any other time when the
officer or employee is executing his or her official duties, regardless of location.
COMPENSATORY TIME OFF: Authorized time off earned by or awarded to an employee to compensate in whole or in part fortime worked in excess of
the minimum work time required of that employee as a condition of his or her employment.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 17/498
CONTRIBUTION: Has the same meaning as that term is defined in section 9-1.4 of the election code3.
EMPLOYEE: A person employed by the village of Streamwood, whether on a full time or part time basis or pursuant to a contract, whose duties are
subject to the direction and control of an employer with regard to the material details of how the work is to be performed, but does not include an
independent contractor.
EMPLOYER: The village of Streamwood.
GIFT: Any gratuity, discount, entertainment, hospitality, loan, forbearance, or other tangible or intangible item having monetary value including, but not
limited to, cash, food and drink, and honoraria for speaking engagements related to or attributable to government employment or the official position of an
officer or employee.
LEAVE OF ABSENCE: Any period during which an employee does not receive: a) compensation for employment, b) service credit towards pension
benefits, and c) health insurance benefits paid for by the employer.
OFFICER: A person who holds, by election or appointment, an office created by statute or local ordinance, regardless of whether the officer is
compensated for service in his or her official capacity.
POLITICAL ACTIVITY: Any activity in support of or in connection with any campaign for elective office or any political organization, but does not include
activities: a) relating to the support or opposition of any executive, legislative, or administrative action, b) relating to collective bargaining, or c) that are
otherwise in furtherance of the person's official duties.
POLITICAL ORGANIZATION: A party, committee, association, fund, or other organization (whether or not incorporated) that is required to file a statement
of organization with the state board of elections or a county clerk under section 9-3 of the election code4, but only with regard to those activities that
require filing with the state board of elections or a county clerk.
PROHIBITED POLITICAL ACTIVITY: A. Preparing for, organizing, or participating in any political meeting, political rally, political demonstration, or other
political event.
B. Soliciting contributions, including, but not limited to, the purchase of, selling, distributing, or receiving payment for tickets for any political fundraiser,
political meeting, or other political event.
C. Soliciting, planning the solicitation of, or preparing any document or report regarding anything of value or intended as a campaign contribution.
D. Planning, conducting, or participating in a public opinion poll in connection with a campaign for elective office or on behalf of a political organization
for political purposes or for or against any referendum question.
E. Surveying or gathering information from potential or actual voters in an election to determine probable vote outcome in connection with a campaign
for elective office or on behalf of a political organization for political purposes or for or against any referendum question.
F. Assisting at the polls on election day on behalf of any political organization or candidate for elective office or for or against any referendum question.
G. Soliciting votes on behalf of a candidate for elective office or a political organization or for or against any referendum question or helping in an effort
to get voters to the polls.
H. Initiating for circulation, preparing, circulating, reviewing, or filing any petition on behalf of a candidate for elective office or for or against any
referendum question.
I. Making contributions on behalf of any candidate for elective office in that capacity or in connection with a campaign for elective office.
J. Preparing or reviewing responses to candidate questionnaires.
K. Distributing, preparing for distribution, or mailing campaign literature, campaign signs, or other campaign material on behalf of any candidate for
elective office or for or against any referendum question.
L. Campaigning for any elective office or for or against any referendum question.
M. Managing or working on a campaign for elective office or for or against any referendum question.
N. Serving as a delegate, alternate, or proxy to a political party convention.
O. Participating in any recount or challenge to the outcome of any election.
PROHIBITED SOURCE: Any person or entity who:
A. Is seeking official action: 1) by an officer or 2) by an employee, or by the officer or another employee directing that employee;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 18/498
B. Does business or seeks to do business: 1) with the officer or 2) with an employee, or with the officer or another employee directing that employee;
C. Conducts activities regulated: 1) by the officer or 2) by an employee, or by the officer or another employee directing that employee; or
D. Has interests that may be substantially affected by the performance or nonperformance of the official duties of the officer or employee. (Ord. 2004-
26, 5-6-2004)
1-13-2: PROHIBITED POLITICAL ACTIVITIES:
A. No officer or employee shall intentionally perform any prohibited political activity during any "compensated time", as defined herein.
B. No officer or employee shall intentionally use any property or resources of the village of Streamwood in connection with any prohibited political activity.
C. At no time shall any officer or employee intentionally require another officer or employee to perform any prohibited political activity: 1) as part of that
officer's or employee's duties, 2) as a condition of employment, or 3) during any compensated time off (such as holidays, vacation or personal time off).
D. No officer or employee shall be required at any time to participate in any prohibited political activity in consideration for that officer or employee being
awarded additional compensation or any benefit, whether in the form of a salary adjustment, bonus, compensatory time off, continued employment or
otherwise, nor shall any officer or employee be awarded additional compensation or any benefit in consideration for his or her participation in any
prohibitedpolitical activity.
E. Nothing in this section prohibits activities that are permissible for an officer or employee to engage in as part of his or her official duties, or activities that
are undertaken by an officer or employee on a voluntary basis which are not prohibited by this chapter.
F. No person either: 1) in a position that is subject to recognized merit principles of public employment or 2) in a position the salary for which is paid in
whole or in part by federal funds and that is subject to the federal standards for a merit system of personnel administration applicable to grant in aid
programs, shall be denied or deprived of employment or tenure solely because he or she is a member or an officer of a political committee, political
party, or of a political organization or club. (Ord. 2004-26, 5-6-2004)
1-13-3: GIFT BAN:
A. Prohibited Gifts: Except as permitted by this chapter, no officer or employee, and no spouse of or immediate family member living with any officer or
employee (collectively referred to herein as "recipients"), shall intentionally solicit or accept any gift from any "prohibited source", as defined herein, or
which is otherwise prohibited by law or ordinance. No prohibited source shall intentionally offer or make a gift that violates this section.
B. Exceptions: Subsection A of this section is not applicable to the following:
1. Opportunities, benefits, and services that are available on the same conditions as for the general public.
2. Anything for which the officer or employee, or his or her spouse or immediate family member, pays the fair market value.
3. Any: a) contribution that is lawfully made under the election code or b) activities associated with a fundraising event in support of a political
organization or candidate.
4. Educational materials and missions.
5. Travel expenses for a meeting to discuss business.
6. A gift from a "relative", meaning those people related to the individual as father, mother, son, daughter, brother, sister, uncle, aunt, great aunt, great
uncle, first cousin, nephew, niece, husband, wife, grandfather, grandmother, grandson, granddaughter, father-in-law, mother-in-law, son-in-law,
daughter-in-law, brother-in-law, sister-in-law, stepfather, stepmother, stepson, stepdaughter, stepbrother, stepsister, half brother, half sister, and
including the father, mother, grandfather, or grandmother of theindividual's spouse and the individual's fiance or fiancee.
7. Anything provided by an individual on the basis of a personal friendship unless the recipient has reason to believe that, under the circumstances, the
gift was provided because of the official position or employment of the recipient or his or her spouse or immediate family member and not because of
the personal friendship. In determining whether a gift is provided on the basis of personal friendship, the recipient shall consider the circumstances
under which the gift was offered, such as: a) the history of the relationship between the individual giving the gift and the recipient of the gift, including
any previous exchange of gifts between those individuals; b) whether to the actual knowledge of the recipient the individual who gave the gift
personally paid for the gift or sought a tax deduction or business reimbursement for the gift; and c) whether to the actual knowledge of the recipient
the individual who gave the gift also at the same time gave the same or similar gifts to other officers or employees, or their spouses or immediate
family members.
8. Food or refreshments not exceeding seventy five dollars ($75.00) per person in value on a single calendar day; provided that the food or
refreshments are: a) consumed on the premises from which they were purchased or prepared or b) catered. For the purposes of this subsection B8,
"catered" means food or refreshments that are purchased ready to consume which are delivered by any means.
9. Food, refreshments, lodging, transportation, and other benefits resulting from outside business or employment activities (or outside activities that are
not connected to the official duties of an officer or employee), if the benefits have not been offered or enhanced because of the official position or
employment of the officer or employee, and are customarily provided to others in similar circumstances.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 19/498
10. Intragovernmental and intergovernmental gifts. For the purpose of this chapter, "intragovernmental gift" means any gift given to an officer or
employee from another officer or employee, and "intergovernmental gift" means any gift given to an officer or employee by an officer or employee of
another governmental entity.
11. Bequests, inheritances, and other transfers at death.
12. Any item or items from any one prohibited source during any calendar year having a cumulative total value of less than one hundred dollars
($100.00).
Each of the exceptions listed in this section is mutually exclusive and independent of every other.
C. Disposition Of Gifts: An officer or employee, his or her spouse or an immediate family member living with the officeror employee, does not violate this
chapter if the recipient promptly takes reasonable action to return a gift from a prohibited source to its source or gives the gift or an amount equal to its
value to an appropriate charity that is exempt from income taxation under section 501(c)(3) of the internal revenue code of 1986, as now or hereafter
amended, renumbered, or succeeded. (Ord. 2004-26, 5-6-2004)
1-13-4: PENALTIES:
A. A person who intentionally violates any provision of section 1-13-2 of this chapter may be punished by a term of incarceration in a penal institution other
than a penitentiary for a period of not more than three hundred sixty four (364) days, and may be fined in an amount not to exceed two thousand five
hundred dollars ($2,500.00).
B. A person who intentionally violates any provision of section 1-13-3 of this chapter is subject to a fine in an amount of not less than one thousand one
dollars ($1,001.00) and not more than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00).
C. Any person who intentionally makes a false report alleging a violation of any provision of this chapter to the local enforcement authorities, the state's
attorney or any other law enforcement official, may be punished by a term of incarceration in a penal institution other than a penitentiary for a period of
not more than three hundred sixty four (364) days, and may be fined in an amount not to exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00).
D. A violation of section 1-13-2 of this chapter shall be prosecuted as a criminal offense by an attorney for the village of Streamwood by filing in the circuit
court an information, or sworn complaint, charging such offense. The prosecution shall be under and conform to the rules of criminal procedure.
Conviction shall require the establishment of the guilt of the defendant beyond a reasonable doubt.
A violation of section 1-13-3 of this chapter may be prosecuted as a quasi-criminal offense by an attorney for the village of Streamwood.
E. In addition to any other penalty that may be applicable, whether criminal or civil, an officer or employee who intentionally violates any provision of
section 1-13-2 or 1-13-3 of this chapter is subject to discipline or discharge. (Ord. 2004-26, 5-6-2004)
Chapter 14
FAIR HOUSING
1-14-1: GENERAL:
1-14-1-1: DECLARATION OF POLICY:
It is declared to be the public policy of this Village in the exercise of its power to regulate for the protection of thepublic health, safety, morals, and welfare:
to assure fair housing and freedom from discrimination throughout the community, to protect the community from the effects of residential segregation by
race, color, religion, creed, ancestry, national origin, age, sex, familial status, or physical or mental handicap, and to secure to its citizens the economic,
social, and professional benefits of living in a stable, integrated society. (Ord. 2000-18, 4-6-2000)
1-14-1-2: CONSTRUCTION:
This Chapter shall be constructed according to the fair import of its terms and shall be liberally construed to further the purposes and policy stated and the
special purposes of the particular provisions involved. (Ord. 2000-18, 4-6-2000)
1-14-1-3: SEVERABILITY:
If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge any provision of this Chapter to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect any other provision of this
Chapter not specifically included in said judgment. If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge invalid the application of any provision of this
Chapter to any person or circumstance, such judgment shall not affect the application of said provision to any other person or circumstance not specifically
included in said judgment. (Ord. 2000-18, 4-6-2000)
1-14-1-4: DEFINITIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 20/498
As used in this Chapter, the following terms have the following meanings:
ANSI A117.1-1986: The 1986 Edition of the American National Standard for buildings and facilities providing accessibility and usability for physically
handicapped people.
ACCESSIBLE: When used with respect to the public and common use areas of a building containing covered multi-family dwellings, means that the public
or common use areas of the building can be approached, entered, and used by individuals with physical handicaps.
ACCESSIBLE ROUTE: A continuous unobstructed path connecting accessible elements and spaces in a building or within a site that can be negotiated by
a person with a severe disability using a wheelchair and that is also safe for and usable by people with other disabilities. A route that complies with the
appropriate requirements of the American National Standards Institute's ANSI A117.1-1986, or a comparable standard, is an "accessible route".
ADMINISTRATOR: The Administrator of the Fair Housing Review Board.
AFFIRMATIVE MARKETING: Attempting to attract all prospective buyers and renters with special efforts to attract persons of a race or national origin least
likely to apply through the normal operations of the marketplace.
AGGRIEVED PARTY/PERSON: Includes any person who claims to have been injured by a discriminatory housing practice or believes that he or she will
be injured by a discriminatory housing practice that is about to occur.
BROKER: Includes any person authorized to perform an action on behalf of another person regarding any matter related to the sale or rental of dwellings,
including offers, solicitations, or contracts, and the administration of matters regarding such offers, solicitations or contracts, or any residential real estaterelated
transactions.
BUILDING: A structure, facility, or portion thereof that contains or serves one or more dwelling units.
BUILDING ENTRANCE ON AN ACCESSIBLE ROUTE: An accessible entrance to a building that is connected by an accessible route to public
transportation stops, to accessible parking and passenger loading zones, or to public streets or sidewalks, if available.
CIVIL RIGHTS VIOLATION: Includes, and shall be limited to, only those specific acts set forth in Sections 1-14-2, 1-14-3 and 1-14-4 of this Chapter.
COMMON USE AREAS: Rooms, spaces, or elements inside or outside of a building that are made available for the use of residents of a building or the
guests thereof. These areas include hallways, lounges, lobbies, laundry rooms, refuse rooms, mailrooms, recreational areas, and passageways among
and between buildings.
COMMUNITY RESIDENCE: A group home or specialized residential care home serving unrelated persons with disabilities.
COMPLAINT: The document filed by a complainant with the Fair Housing Review Board.
CONCILIATION: The attempted resolution of issues raised by a complaint, or the investigation of such charge, through informal negotiations involving the
aggrieved party, the respondent, and the Fair Housing Review Board.
CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE: Any drug or other substance, or immediate precursor included in the definition in section 102 of the Controlled Substances
Act (21 USC 802).
CORPORATE AUTHORITIES: The Village President and Board ofTrustees of the Village of Streamwood.
COVERED MULTI-FAMILY DWELLING: A building consisting of four (4) or more units if such buildings have one or more elevators; and ground floor units
in other buildings consisting of four (4) or more units.
DISCRIMINATION: To treat any person differently from others because of race, color, religion, creed, ancestry, national origin, age, sex, marital status,
physical or mental handicap, familial status, or unfavorable military discharge.
DWELLING: Any building structure, or portion thereof, which is occupied as, or designed or intended for occupancy as, a residence by one or more
families or unrelated individuals, and any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the construction or location thereon of any such building,
structure, or portion thereof.
ELDERLY PERSON: A person fifty five (55) years of age or older.
ENTRANCE: Any access point to a building or portion of a building used by residents for the purpose of entering.
EXTERIOR: All areas of the premises outside of an individual dwelling unit.
FAIR HOUSING REVIEW BOARD: The Fair Housing Review Board, a subcommittee of the Village President and Board of Trustees of the Village of
Streamwood.
FAMILIAL STATUS: One or more individuals who have not attained the age of eighteen (18) years being domiciled with:
A. A parent or a person having legal custody of such individual or individuals;
B. The designee of such parent or other person having such custody, with the written permission of such parent or other person; or
C. Persons who are pregnant or in the process of securing legal custody of any individual who has not attained the age of eighteen (18).
FINANCIAL INSTITUTION: Any bank, credit union, insurance company, mortgage banking company, savings and loan association, or other entity or
organization which makes or purchases loans or provides other financial assistance and which operates or has a place of business in the State of Illinois.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 21/498
HANDICAP: With respect to a person, a physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one or more major life activities, a record of such an
impairment, or being regardedas having such an impairment.
HEARING: That part of an adjudicative proceeding that involves the submission of evidence, either by oral presentation or written submission, and
includes the submission of briefs and oral arguments on the evidence and applicable law.
HOUSING ACCOMMODATION: Includes any improved or unimproved real property, or part thereof, which is used or occupied or is intended, arranged, or
designed to be used or occupied as the home or residence of one or more individuals.
HOUSING FOR OLDER PERSONS: A. All housing that is provided under State and Federal programs for elderly persons, as defined by the specific
programs, providing U.S. HUD approval has been secured;
B. Housing that is "intended for and solely occupied by persons 62 years of age or older";
C. Communities in which at least eighty percent (80%) of all units are occupied by one person fifty five (55) years of age or older, if the existence of
significant facilities and services specifically designed to meet the physical and social needs of older persons can be documented.
INDUCEMENT OF SALE OR RENTAL, MISREPRESENTATION: For profit, to induce or attempt to induce a person to sell or rent a dwelling by
representation regarding the entry or prospective entry into the neighborhood of a person or persons of a particular race, color, religion, sex, familial status,
national origin, or handicap.
INTERIOR: The spaces, parts, components, or elements of an individual dwelling unit.
LEASE: Includes any sublease, assignment, or rental, and any contract to enter into any of the foregoing.
LOAN: Includes, but is not limited to, the providing of funds, for consideration, which are:
A. Sought for the purpose of purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing, or maintaining a housing accommodation;
B. Sought for any commercial or industrial purposes; or
C. Secured by residential real estate.
MARITAL STATUS: The legal status of being married, single, separated, divorced, or widowed.
NATIONAL ORIGIN: The place in which a person or one of his or her ancestors was born.
OFFER: Means and includes every attempt by means of written or oral communications to present for acceptance or rejection, to hold out or proffer, to
make a proposal to, or to exhibit real estate that may be taken or received with the intention of ultimately entering a real estate transaction.
OWNER: Any person who holds legal or equitable title to, or owns any beneficial interest in, any real estate, or who holds legal or equitable title to shares
of, or any beneficial interest in, an equity which owns any real estate.
PERSON: Includes one or more individuals, corporations, partnerships, associations, labor organizations, legal representatives, mutual companies, jointstock
companies, trusts, unincorporated organizations, trustees, trustees in bankruptcy, receivers, and fiduciaries.
PHYSICAL OR MENTAL IMPAIRMENT: Includes:
A. Physiological disorders or conditions, cosmetic disfigurement, or anatomical loss affecting one or more body systems as defined in title II of the
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), 42 United States Code section 12131 et seq.
B. Mental or psychological disorders, such as mental retardation, organic brain syndrome, emotional or mental illness, and specific learning disabilities.
PREMISES: The interior or exterior spaces, parts, components or elements of a building, including individual dwelling units and the public and common
use areas of a building.
PROTECTED CLASSES: Includes all persons legally protected against discrimination.
PUBLIC USE AREAS: Interior or exterior rooms or spaces of a building that are made available to the general public. Public use may be provided at a
building that is privately or publicly owned.
REAL ESTATE TRANSACTION: The purchase, sale, fee, or equitable title to, or beneficial interest in, or rental or lease of, any real property or an option to
do any of the foregoing, or any negotiation, listing, contract, or agreement in connection therewith.
REAL PROPERTY: Includes buildings, structures, real estate, lands, tenements, leaseholds, interests in real estate cooperatives, condominiums, and
hereditaments, corporeal and incorporeal, or any interest therein.
SEX: The status of being male or female.
STEERING: Influencing or attempting to influence by words or acts the choice or location of housing of a prospective purchaser, occupant, or tenant in
connection with viewing, buying, leasing, or occupying real estate based on race, color, religion, national origin, sex, familial status, or mental or physical
handicap so as to promote or maintain segregation.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 22/498
TO RENT: Includes to lease, to sublease, to let, and to otherwise grant for consideration the right to occupy premises not owned by the occupant. (Ord.
2000-18, 4-6-2000)
1-14-2: PROHIBITED ACTS:
The following acts in this Section 1-14-2 shall be unlawful. (Ord. 2000-18, 4-6-2000)
1-14-2-1: DISCRIMINATORY TERMS:
Discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling or in the provision of services or facilities in connection
therewith because of race, color, religion, national origin, sex, familial status, or physical or mental handicap. (Ord. 2000-18, 4-6-2000)
1-14-2-2: REFUSAL TO NEGOTIATE OR DEAL:
Refuse to sell or rent, after the making of a bona fide offer, or to refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of, or otherwise make unavailable or deny a
dwelling to any person because of race, color, religion, national origin, sex, familial status, or physical or mental handicap. (Ord. 2000-18, 4-6-2000)
1-14-2-3: WITHHOLDING DWELLINGS:
Represent to any person because of race, color, religion, national origin, sex, familial status, or physical or mental handicap that any dwelling is not
available for inspection, sale or rental when such dwelling is, in fact, so available. (Ord. 2000-18, 4-6-2000)
1-14-2-4: ADVERTISEMENTS, SIGNS, NOTICES:
Make, print, or publish, or cause to be made, printed, or published, any notice, statement, or advertisement, with respect to the sale or rental of a dwelling
that indicates any preference, limitation, or discrimination based on race, color, religion, national origin, sex, familial status, or physical or mental handicap,
or an intention to make suchpreference, limitation, or discrimination.
Discriminatory notices, statements, and advertisements include, but are not limited to:
A. Using words, phrases, photographs, illustrations, symbols, or forms which convey that dwellings are available or not available to a particular group of
persons because of race, color, religion, sex, physical or mental handicap, familial status, or national origin.
B. Expressing to agents, brokers, employees, prospective sellers, or renters, or any other persons a preference for, or limitation on, any purchaser or
renter because of race, color, religion, sex, physical or mental handicap, familial status, or national origin of such persons.
C. Selecting media or locations for advertising the sale or rental of dwellings which deny particular segments of the housing market information about
housing opportunities because of race, color, religion, sex, physical or mental handicap, familial status, or national origin.
D. Refusing to publish advertising for the sale or rental of dwellings, or requiring different charges or terms for such advertising because of race, color,
religion, sex, physical or mental handicap, familial status, or national origin. (Ord. 2000-18, 4-6-2000)
1-14-2-5: INDUCEMENT OF SALE OR RENTAL, MISREPRESENTATION:
For profit, induce or attempt to induce any person to sell or rent any dwelling by representations regarding the entry or prospective entry into the
neighborhood of a person or persons of a particular race, color, religion, national origin, sex, familiar status, or physical or mental handicap.
Prohibited actions under this Section include, but are not limited to:
A. Engaging for profit in conduct (including uninvited solicitations for listings) which conveys to a person that a neighborhood is undergoing or is about to
undergo a change in the race, color, religion, sex, physical or mental handicap, familial status, or national origin of persons residing in it, in order to
encourage persons to offer a dwelling for sale or rental.
B. Encouraging, for profit, any person to sell or rent a dwelling through assertions that the entry or prospective entry of persons of a particular race, color,
religion, sex, familial status, or national origin or with handicaps can or will result in undesirable consequences for the project, neighborhood or
community, such as a lowering of property values, an increase in criminal or antisocial behavior, or adecline in the quality of schools or other services
of facilities. (Ord. 2000-18, 4-6-2000)
1-14-2-6: QUALIFICATION CRITERIA:
Use different qualification criteria or applications, or sale or rental standards, or procedures, such as income standards, application requirements,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 23/498
application fees, credit analysis, or sale, or rental approved procedures, or other requirements because of race, color, religion, sex, physical or mental
handicap, familial status, or national origin. (Ord. 2000-18, 4-6-2000)
1-14-2-7: EVICTION:
Evict tenants because of their race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin, or because of the race, color, religion, sex, physical or
mental handicap, familial status, or national origin of a tenant's guest. (Ord. 2000-18, 4-6-2000)
1-14-2-8: LISTINGS:
Enter into a listing agreement which discriminates against any person because of race, color, religion, national origin, sex, familial status, or physical or
mental handicap. (Ord. 2000-18, 4-6-2000)
1-14-2-9: MULTIPLE LISTING SERVICES:
Deny any person access to or membership or participation in any multiple listing service, real estate brokers' organization or other service, organization, or
facility relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings or to discriminate against any person in the terms or conditions of such access, membership,
or participation on account of race, color, religion, national origin, sex, familial status, or physical or mental handicap. (Ord. 2000-18, 4-6-2000)
1-14-2-10: STEERING:
Restrict or attempt to restrict, because of race, color, religion, sex, physical or mental handicap, familial status, or national origin, the choices of a person
by words or acts in connection with buying or renting a dwelling so as to perpetuate, or tend to perpetuate, segregated housing patterns, or to discourage
or obstruct integrated housing.
Prohibited actions under this Section, which are generally referred to as unlawful steering practices, include, but are not limited to, the following:
A. Discouraging any person from inspecting, purchasing, or renting a dwelling because of race, color, religion, sex, physical or mental handicap, familial
status, or national origin, or because of the race, color, religion, sex, physical or mental handicap, familial status, or national origin of persons in a
community, neighborhood, or development, so as to perpetuate, or tend to perpetuate, segregated housing patterns, or to discourage or obstruct
integrated housing.
B. Discouraging the purchase or rental of a dwelling because of race, color, religion, sex, physical or mental handicap, familial status, or national origin by
exaggerating drawbacks, or failing to inform any person of desirable features of a dwelling or of a community, neighborhood, or development, so as to
perpetuate, or tend to perpetuate, segregated housing patterns, or to discourage or obstruct integrated housing.
C. Communicating to any prospective purchaser that he or she would not be comfortable or compatible with existing residents of a community,
neighborhood, or development because of race, color, religion, sex, physical or mental handicap, familial status, or national origin, so as to perpetuate,
or tend to perpetuate, segregated housing patterns, or to discourage or obstruct integrated housing.
D. Assigning any person to a particular section of a community, neighborhood, or development, or to a particular floor of a building, because of race, color,
religion, sex, physical or mental handicap, familial status, or national origin, so as to perpetuate, or tend to perpetuate, segregated housing patterns, or
to discourage or obstruct integrated housing.
E. Failing to inform any person of available housing opportunities in a particular section of a community, neighborhood, or development, or in a particular
building or particular floor of a building, because of race, color, religion, sex, familial status, national origin, or handicap, so as to perpetuate, or tend to
perpetuate, segregated housing patterns, or to discourage or obstruct integrated housing. (Ord. 2000-18, 4-6-2000)
1-14-2-11: PARTICIPATION:
Act, or undertake to act, as a real estate broker, salesman, or agent, with respect to any dwelling, the disposition of which requires said person to
participate in discrimination. (Ord. 2000-18, 4-6-2000)
1-14-2-12: RESTRICTIONS:
Perform any act of discrimination with the intention or effect of restricting or limiting the housing choice of any person. (Ord. 2000-18, 4-6-2000)
1-14-2-13: AIDING AND ABETTING:
Aid or abet acts performed in violation of this Chapter. (Ord. 2000-18, 4-6-2000)
1-14-2-14: INTERFERENCE, COERCION, OR INTIMIDATION:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 24/498
Coerce, intimidate, threaten, or interfere with any person in the exercise or enjoyment of, or on account of, his having exercised or enjoyed, or on account
of his having aided or encouraged any other person in the exercise or enjoyment of any right granted or protected by this Chapter. (Ord. 2000-18, 4-6-
2000)
1-14-3: PROHIBITED ACTS; HANDICAPPED HOUSING:
In addition to those prohibited acts identified in Sections 1-14-2 and 1-14-4 of this Chapter, the following shall also be unlawful. (Ord. 2000-18, 4-6-2000)
1-14-3-1: DISCRIMINATION AGAINST THE HANDICAPPED:
A. To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the provision of services or facilities in
connection with such dwelling because of a handicap of:
1. That buyer or renter;
2. A person residing in or intending to reside in that dwelling after it is so sold, rented, or made available; or
3. Any person associated with that person.
B. To make an inquiry to determine whether an applicant for a dwelling; a person intending to reside in that dwelling after it is sold, rented, or made
available, or any person associated with that person has a handicap, or to make inquiry as to the nature or severity of a handicap of such a person.
C. However, this Section does not prohibit the following inquiries, provided these inquiries are made of all applicants, whether or not they have handicaps:
1. Inquiry into the applicant's ability to meet the requirements of ownership or tenancy.
2. Inquiry to determine whether an applicant is qualified for a dwelling available only to persons with handicaps or to persons with a particular type of
handicap.
3. Inquiry to determine whether an applicant for a dwelling isqualified for a priority available to persons with handicaps or to persons with a particular
type of handicap.
4. Inquiry to determine whether an applicant for a dwelling is a current illegal abuser or addict of a controlled substance.
5. Inquiry to determine whether an applicant has been convicted of the illegal manufacture of distribution of a controlled substance.
D. Nothing in this Section requires that a dwelling be made available to an individual whose tenancy would constitute a direct threat to the health or safety
of other individuals or whose tenancy would result in substantial physical damage to the property of others. (Ord. 2000-18, 4-6-2000)
1-14-3-2: UNIT MODIFICATION:
To refuse to permit, at the expense of the handicapped person, reasonable modifications of existing premises occupied or to be occupied by such person if
such modifications may be necessary to afford such person full enjoyment of the premises, except that, in the case of a rental, the landlord may, where it is
reasonable to do so, condition permission for a modification on the renter agreeing to restore the interior of the premises to the condition that existed
before the modifications, reasonable wear and tear excepted.
To refuse to permit, at the expense of the handicapped person, reasonable modifications of existing premises occupied, or to be occupied, by such person
if such modifications may be necessary to afford such person full enjoyment of the premises, except that, in the case of a rental, the landlord may, where it
is reasonable to do so, condition permission for a modification on the renter agreeing to restore the interior of the premises to the condition that existed
before the modifications, reasonable wear and tear excepted. (Ord. 2000-18, 4-6-2000)
1-14-3-3: RULES AND POLICIES:
To refuse to make reasonable accommodations in rules, policies, practices, or services, when such accommodations may be necessary to afford such
person equal opportunity to use and enjoy the dwelling, including public and common use areas. (Ord. 2000-18, 4-6-2000)
1-14-3-4: NEW CONSTRUCTION:
To fail to design and construct dwellings after March 13, 1991, in such a manner that:
A. The public use and common use portions of such dwellingsare readily accessible to and usable by a handicapped person;
B. All the doors designed to allow passage into and within all premises within such dwellings are sufficiently wide to allow passage by handicapped
persons in wheelchairs; and
C. All premises within such dwellings contain the following features of adaptive design:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 25/498
1. An accessible route into and through the dwelling;
2. Light switches, electrical outlets, thermostats, and other environmental controls in accessible locations;
3. Reinforcements in bathroom walls to allow later installation of grab bars; and
4. Usable kitchens and bathrooms such that an individual in a wheelchair can maneuver about the space. (Ord. 2000-18, 4-6-2000)
1-14-4: COVERAGE AND EXEMPTIONS:
Nothing in this Chapter other than the prohibition against discriminatory advertising, shall:
A. Apply to the following:
1. The rental, lease, or occupancy of a room in an owner-occupied single-family dwelling, provided the owner does not own or have any interest in
more than three (3) single-family houses at any one time.
2. Rooms or units in dwellings containing living quarters occupied or intended to be occupied by no more than four (4) families living independently of
each other, if the owner actually maintains and occupies one of such living quarters as his or her residence; or
B. Prohibit a religious organization, association, or society, or any nonprofit institution or organization operated, supervised, or controlled by or in
conjunction with a religious organization or society from limiting the sale, rental, or occupancy of dwellings which it owns or operates for other than
commercial purposes to persons of the same religion of from giving preference to such persons, unless membership in such religion is restricted on
account of race, color, religion, sex, national origin, familial status, or physical or mental handicap;
C. Prohibit a private club not, in fact, open to the public, which, as an incident to its primary purposes or purposes, provides lodgings which it owns or
operates for other than a commercial purpose, from listing the rental or occupancy of such lodgings to its members and their guests, or from
givingpreference to its members;
D. Prohibit the rental or sale of a dwelling on the basis of age or handicap when such dwelling is authorized, approved, financed, or subsidized, in whole or
in part, by a unit of State, local, or Federal government;
E. Limit the applicability of any reasonable local, State, or Federal restrictions regarding the maximum number of occupants permitted to occupy a
dwelling;
F. Require the rental or sale of a unit to any person convicted of the illegal manufacture or distribution of a controlled substance;
G. With regard to discrimination based on familial status apply with respect to "housing for older persons", as defined in Section 1-14-1-4 of this Chapter;
H. Apply to persons engaged in the business of furnishing appraisals of real property from taking into consideration factors other than those based on
unlawful discrimination or familial status in furnishing appraisals;
I. Prohibit financial institutions from considering sound underwriting practices in contemplation of any loan to any person. Such practices shall include the
following:
1. The willingness and the financial ability of the borrower to repay the loan.
2. The market value of any real estate or other item or property proposed as security for any loan.
3. Diversification of the financial institution's investment portfolio. (Ord. 2000-18, 4-6-2000)
1-14-5: IMPLEMENTATION; FAIR HOUSING REVIEW BOARD:
A. Creation Of Board: The Village President and Board of Trustees shall establish a panel of at least three (3) members of the Village President and Board
of Trustees to serve as the Fair Housing Review Board.
B. Duties Of Board: The administrative and adjudicative (hearing) responsibilities for this Chapter shall be in the Fair Housing Review Board. The Fair
Housing Review Board shall have and exercise, with respect to all dwellings and persons subject to this Chapter, the power:
1. To act to eliminate discriminatory housing practices;
2. To act to assure to persons living or desiring to live in the Village or in any particular dwelling, the opportunity to purchase, lease, or rent a dwelling
without discriminationbecause of race, color, religion, national origin, sex, familial status, or physical or mental handicap;
3. To engage in such recruitment, research, and public communication and create such advisory councils as may be authorized to effectuate the
purposes of this Chapter;
4. To coordinate its activities with Federal and State agencies in conformity with this Chapter;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 26/498
5. To gather and provide for the exchange of information relative to the provisions of this Chapter among real estate brokers and salesmen, lenders,
developers, employers, Village officials, and community groups within and without the Village;
6. To issue, receive, initiate, and investigate complaints charging discrimination in housing. Any complaint initiated by the Fair Housing Review Board
shall be in writing and signed by the Administrator of the Fair Housing Review Board, and shall state such detail as to substantially apprise any party
properly concerned, as to the time, place, and facts surrounding the charged violating of this Chapter;
7. To seek conciliation of, hold hearings, and make findings of fact with respect to any such complaint;
8. To administer oaths, take sworn testimony, and to subpoena witnesses and pertinent documents;
9. To enforce orders of the Fair Housing Review Board in conformity with this Chapter;
10. To publish and issue findings of fact and orders in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter;
11. To render, from time to time, but not less than every twelve (12) months, a written report to Village officials of its activities and recommendations
with respect to fair housing practices, which written report shall be made public after submission to the Village President and Board of Trustees. (Ord.
2000-18, 4-6-2000)
1-14-6: ADMINISTRATOR:
The Administrator of the Fair Housing Review Board shall be appointed by the Village President and Board of Trustees and shall have such duties,
responsibilities, and powers as are necessary for the implementation of this Chapter and, additionally, as may be provided by the Fair Housing Review
Board or Village President and Board of Trustees, including the issuing, initiation, receipt, and due processing of complaints. (Ord. 2000-18, 4-6-2000)
1-14-7: COMPLAINTS, CONCILIATION, HEARING PROCEDURES:
1-14-7-1: COMPLAINT:
A. Any person aggrieved in any manner by a violation of any provision of this Chapter may file with the Fair Housing Review Board a written verified
complaint setting forth their grievance within one year after the date of the alleged violation. The complaint shall state, on a printed form provided by the
Fair Housing Review Board, such detail as to substantially apprise any party properly concerned as to the time, place, and facts surrounding the
alleged violation of this Chapter.
B. A complaint may be filed against any person alleged to be engaged, to have engaged, or about to engage in a discriminatory housing practice.
C. A complaint may also be filed against any person who directs or controls, or has the right to direct or control, the conduct of another person with respect
to any aspect of the sale, rental, advertising, or financing of dwellings or the provision of brokerage services relating to the sale or rental of dwellings if
that other person, acting within the scope of his or her authority as employee or agent of the directing or controlling person, is engaged, has engaged,
or is about to engage in a discriminatory housing practice. (Ord. 2000-18, 4-6-2000)
1-14-7-2: NOTICE OF COMPLAINT:
Within fifteen (15) calendar days after a complaint has been received or initiated by the Fair Housing Review Board, the Administrator of the Fair Housing
Review Board shall serve, or cause to be served, either in person or by certified mail, a copy of said complaint on the person alleged to be in violation of
this Chapter, hereinafter referred to as the respondent. (Ord. 2000-18, 4-6-2000)
1-14-7-3: RESPONDENT RESPONSE:
The respondent shall serve a verified copy of his or her response to all allegations contained in the complaint within ten (10) calendar days of the date on
which respondent was served a copy of the complaint.
The Administrator shall issue a notice of default directed to any respondent who fails to file a verified response to a complaint within ten (10) calendar days
of the date on which the complainant was served, unless the respondent can demonstrate good cause as to why such notice should not be issued. (Ord.
2000-18, 4-6-2000)
1-14-7-4: INVESTIGATION:
A. The Fair Housing Review Board shall promptly investigate the complaint, completing such an investigation within one hundred (100) calendar days after
the filing of the complaint; and
B. Shall determine whether there is substantial evidence that the alleged ordinance violation has been committed or is about to be committed.
C. If the Fair Housing Review Board is unable to make the determination within one hundred (100) calendar days after the filing of the complaint, the
Administrator shall notify the complainant and respondent in writing of the reasons for not doing so.
D. If the Fair Housing Review Board determines that there is no substantial evidence, the complaint shall be dismissed and the complainant notified that
he or she may seek review of the dismissal order before the Village President and Board of Trustees. The complainant shall have thirty (30) calendar
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 27/498
days from receipt of notice to file a request for review by the Village President and Board of Trustees. The Village President and Board of Trustees
shall:
1. Uphold the finding of insubstantial evidence; or
2. Reverse the finding of insubstantial evidence and remand the complaint to the Fair Housing Review Board for conciliation.
E. If the Fair Housing Review Board determines that there is substantial evidence, it shall immediately notify the parties and schedule a conciliation
meeting. (Ord. 2000-18, 4-6-2000)
1-14-7-5: CONCILIATION:
A. During the period beginning with the filing of a complaint and ending with a dismissal or a referral to the Fair Housing Review Board, the Fair Housing
Review Board or Administrator shall, to the extent feasible, engage in conciliation with respect to such complaint.
B. If the Administrator determines:
1. That conciliation is feasible, the complainant and respondent shall be notified of the time and place of the conciliation meeting by registered or
certified mail at least seven (7) calendar days prior thereto and both parties shall appear at the meeting in person or by attorney; or
2. That attempts at conciliation would not further the objectives of this Chapter, or that the complaint cannot be resolved by conciliation, the
Administrator shall report andtransfer the complaint and filings to the Fair Housing Review Board.
C. The Administrator shall attempt, by all accepted methods of conciliation and lawful persuasion, to resolve the grievance delineated in the complaint.
D. Nothing occurring at the conciliation meeting shall be made public or used as evidence in a subsequent proceeding for the purpose of proving a
violation under this Chapter unless the complainant and respondent agree, in writing, that such disclosure be made.
E. An agreement arising out of such conciliation shall be treated as a settlement pursuant to Section 1-14-7-8 of this Chapter. (Ord. 2000-18, 4-6-2000)
1-14-7-6: HEARING ON COMPLAINT:
Within fifteen (15) days of receiving a complaint from the Administrator, the Fair Housing Review Board shall, upon due and reasonable notice to all
parties, schedule a public hearing on the complaint. The public hearing shall be scheduled no sooner than thirty (30) days from the date of the notice, nor
later than sixty (60) days from the date of the notice.
All parties shall be entitled to be represented by legal counsel at the parties' own cost and shall have the right to call witnesses in their own behalf and to
cross-examine witnesses. All parties to the proceedings may apply to the Fair Housing Review Board to have subpoenas issued in the name of the Fair
Housing Review Board. Testimony taken at the conference/hearing shall be under oath or affirmation and a transcript shall be made and filed in the office
of the Administrator. (Ord. 2000-18, 4-6-2000)
1-14-7-7: REPORT; DECISION:
A. The Fair Housing Review Board shall issue a written report within thirty (30) days of the conclusion of the public hearing. The report/decision shall
include a summary of the testimony, exhibits admitted into evidence, and a finding of whether a violation of this Chapter was proven by a
preponderance of the evidence. The report/decision shall also contain a recommendation/order of the relief that may include one or more of the
elements provided for in Section 1-14-8 of this Chapter.
B. If the Fair Housing Review Board determines that a respondent has not complied in a timely manner with the decision, the Fair Housing Review Board
shall refer the matter to the Village Attorney who shall seek judicial enforcement of the decision. (Ord. 2000-18, 4-6-2000)
1-14-7-8: SETTLEMENT:
A. Circumstances: A settlement of any complaint may be effected at any time prior to a decision/report by the Fair Housing Review Board upon agreement
of the parties and the approval of the Fair Housing Review Board.
B. Settlement: Each settlement agreement shall not be made public unless the complainant and respondent otherwise agree and the Administrator
determines that disclosure is required to further the purpose of this Chapter.
C. Form: Settlement of complaints prior to the issuing of a report/decision shall be issued, in writing, by the Administrator, signed by the parties, and
submitted by the Administrator to the Fair Housing Review Board.
D. Settlement Violation: When either party alleges that a settlement order has been violated, the Administrator shall conduct an investigation into the
matter. If the Administrator determines that the settlement agreement appears to have been violated, the Administrator shall refer the matter to the Fair
Housing Review Board. If the Fair Housing Review Board finds substantial evidence of a violation of the settlement agreement, the Fair Housing
Review Board shall refer the matter to the Village Attorney for judicial enforcement procedures in the Circuit Court of Cook County. (Ord. 2000-18, 4-6-
2000)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 28/498
1-14-8: PENALTIES, FINES; REMEDIES, RELIEF:
1-14-8-1: PENALTIES, FINES:
Any person violating any provision of this Chapter may be directed to:
A. Cease and desist from any violation of this Chapter;
B. Pay a civil penalty to vindicate the public interest in an amount authorized by any applicable law or this Code. (Ord. 2000-18, 4-6-2000)
1-14-8-2: REMEDIES, RELIEF:
In addition to the penalties and fines delineated in Section 1-14-8-1 of this Chapter, the Fair Housing Review Board may direct the Administrator to send
copies of the decision/report to the Department of Professional Registration of the State and recommend appropriate disciplinary action, including, where
appropriate, the suspension or revocation of the license of the respondent. (Ord. 2000-18, 4-6-2000)
1-14-9: APPEAL PROCEDURES:
Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Fair Housing Review Board shall have the right to appeal in accordance with the following procedures to the
Village President and Board of Trustees. The appeal shall be initiated within seven (7) calendar days of the initial decision or the upholding of the initial
decision, by filing with the Village Clerk a written statement under oath, setting forth specifically the grounds for appeal. These grounds shall be supported
by argument and served on all parties at the time they are filed with the Village Clerk. After reviewing the filed statement and reviewing the record, the
Village President and Board of Trustees shall:
A. Render a revised decision notifying all parties within thirty (30) calendar days of the filing of the appeal statement; or
B. Issue and serve on all parties a written order for rehearing the case, citing the cause and additional evidence; or
C. Uphold the decision of the Fair Housing Review Board.
The decision of the Village President and Board of Trustees on such appeals shall be final.
After a decision by the Village President and Board of Trustees, the aggrieved person may apply for judicial review under the writ of certiorari. (Ord.
2000-18, 4-6-2000)
Chapter 15
LOCALLY IMPOSED AND ADMINISTERED TAX RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES
1-15-1: SCOPE:
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the village's procedures in connection with all of the village's locally imposed and administered taxes. (Ord.
2000-60, 12-21-2000)
1-15-2: DEFINITIONS:
Certain words or terms herein shall have the meanings ascribed to them as follows:
ACT: The "Local Government Taxpayers' Bill of Rights Act".
LOCAL TAX ADMINISTRATOR: The village's finance director, who is charged with the administration and collection of the locally imposed and
administered taxes, along with staff, employees or agents to the extent they are authorized by the local tax administrator to act in the local tax
administrator's stead. The local tax administrator shall have the authority to implement the terms of this chapter to give full effect to this chapter. The
exercise of such authority by the local tax administrator shall not be inconsistent with this chapter and the act.
LOCALLY IMPOSED AND ADMINISTERED TAX OR TAX: Each tax imposed by the village that is collected or administered by the village, not an agency
or department of the state. It does not include any taxes imposed upon real property under the property tax code or fees collected by the village, other than
infrastructuremaintenance fees pursuant to title 3, chapter 13 of this code.
TAX ORDINANCE: Each ordinance adopted by the village that imposes any locally imposed and administered tax.
TAXPAYER: Any person required to pay any locally imposed and administered tax and generally includes the person upon whom the legal incidence of
such tax is placed and with respect to consumer taxes includes the business or entity required to collect and pay the locally imposed and administered tax
to the village. (Ord. 2000-60, 12-21-2000)
1-15-3: NOTICE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 29/498
Unless otherwise provided, proper notice is deemed to have been given in writing by first class or overnight mail to the last known address of the
addressee, or by personal service or delivery. (Ord. 2000-60, 12-21-2000)
1-15-4: LATE PAYMENT:
Any notice, payment, remittance or other filing required to be made to the village pursuant to any tax ordinance shall be considered late unless it is: a)
physically received by the village on or before the due date, or b) received in an envelope or other container displaying a valid, readable U.S. postmark
dated on or before the due date, properly addressed to the village, with adequate postage prepaid. (Ord. 2000-60, 12-21-2000)
1-15-5: PAYMENT:
Any payment or remittance received for a tax period shall be applied in the following order: a) first, to the tax due for the applicable period; b) second, to
the interest due for the applicable period; and c) third, to the penalty for the applicable period. (Ord. 2000-60, 12-21-2000)
1-15-6: REQUIREMENTS FOR THE ASSESSMENT OF LOCALLY IMPOSED AND ADMINISTERED TAXES:
A. Any notice of tax assessment due must be sent by United States registered or certified mail.
B. The local tax administrator shall send a written statement to a taxpayer whenever the local government issues a protestable notice of tax due, a bill, a
claim denial, or a notice of claim reduction regarding any tax. The statement shall include the following information:
1. The reason for the assessment;
2. The amount of the tax liability proposed;
3. The procedure for appealing the assessment; and
4. The obligations of the village during the audit, appeal, refund and collection process. (Ord. 2000-60, 12-21-2000)
1-15-7: CREDITS AND REFUNDS:
A. The village shall not refund or credit any taxes voluntarily paid without written protest at the time of payment in the event that a locally imposed and
administered tax is declared invalidly enacted or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction. However, a taxpayer shall not be deemed to have
paid the tax voluntarily if the taxpayer lacked knowledge of the facts upon which to protest the taxes at the time of payment or if the taxpayer paid the
taxes under duress.
B. The statute of limitations on a claim for credit or refund for all locally imposed and administered taxes shall be one year after the end of the calendar
year in which payment in error was made. The village shall not grant a credit or refund of locally imposed and administered taxes, interest, or penalties
to a person who has not paid the amounts directly to the village.
C. The procedure for claiming a credit or refund of locally imposed and administered taxes, interest or penalties paid in error shall be as follows:
1. The taxpayer shall submit to the local tax administrator in writing a claim for credit or refund, which consists of a statement specifying:
a. The name of the locally imposed and administered tax subject to the claim;
b. The tax period for the locally imposed and administered tax subject to the claim;
c. The date of the tax payment subject to the claim and the canceled check or receipt for payment;
d. The taxpayer's recalculation, accompanied by an amended or revised tax return, in connection with the claim; and
e. A request for either a refund or a credit in connection with the claim to be applied to the amount of tax, interest and penalties overpaid, and, as
applicable, related interest on the amount overpaid; provided, however, that there shall be no refund and only a credit given in the event the
taxpayer owes any monies to the village.
2. Within forty five (45) days of the receipt by the local tax administrator of any claim for a refund or credit, the local tax administrator shall either:
a. Grant the claim; or
b. Deny the claim, in whole or in part, together with a statement as to the reason for the denial or the partial grant and denial.
3. In the event the local tax administrator grants, in whole or in part, a claim for refund or credit, the amount of the grant for refund or credit shall bear
interest at the rate of eighteen percent (18%) per annum, based on a year of three hundred sixty five (365) days and the number of days elapsed,
from the date of the overpayment to the date of mailing of a refund check or the grant of a credit. (Ord. 2000-60, 12-21-2000)
1-15-8: AUDIT PROCEDURE:
A. A taxpayer must be notified in writing of a proposed audit of any locally administered tax. Each notice of audit shall contain the following information:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 30/498
1. The tax;
2. The time period of the audit; and
3. A brief description of the books and records to be made available for the auditor.
B. Any audit shall be conducted during normal business hours not less than seven (7) days from the date the notice is given. A reasonable effort should be
made to schedule the audit on a date and time convenient to the taxpayer, but such audit shall be conducted not more than thirty (30) days from the
date the notice is given.
C. Every taxpayer shall keep accurate books and records of the taxpayer's business or activities, including original source documents and books of entry
denoting the transactions which had given rise or may have given rise to any tax liability, exemption or deduction. All books shall be kept in the English
language and shall be subject to and available for inspection by the village.
D. It is the duty and responsibility of every taxpayer to make available its books and records for inspection by the village. If the taxpayer (or tax collector)
fails to provide the documents necessary for audit within the time period, the local tax administrator may issue a tax determination and assessment
based on the tax administrator's determination of the best estimate of the taxpayer's tax liability.
E. If an audit determines there has been an overpayment of a locally imposed and administered tax as a result of the audit, written notice of the amount of
overpayment shall be given to the taxpayer within forty five (45) days of the village's determination of the amount of overpayment.
F. In the event a tax payment was submitted to the incorrectlocal governmental entity, the local tax administrator shall notify the local governmental entity
imposing such tax. (Ord. 2000-60, 12-21-2000)
1-15-9: APPEAL PROCESS:
The procedure for appealing a determination of tax due or an assessment is as follows:
A. A taxpayer who believes his or her determination of tax due or assessment is in error may file with the local tax administrator a written appeal setting
forth the basis of the taxpayer's appeal. The written appeal must be filed with the local tax administrator within forty five (45) days of receipt of the
written notice of the tax determination and assessment.
B. If a timely written appeal is filed, the local tax administrator shall review the determination or assessment, and all documentation provided by the
taxpayer. If the local tax administrator determines the original determination or assessment was in error, he or she shall correct the determination of tax
due or assessment accordingly. If the local tax administrator determines the original determination of tax due or assessment was correct, he or she
shall reject the taxpayer's appeal, and the original determination or assessment shall stand. The local tax administrator shall rule on the taxpayer's
appeal within sixty (60) days of receipt of the written protest, and shall provide written notice to the taxpayer of his or her decision.
C. If a written appeal is not filed within the forty five (45) day period, the tax determination, audit or assessment shall become a final bill due and owing
without further notice.
D. Upon the showing of reasonable cause by the taxpayer and the full payment of the contested tax liability along with interest accrued as of the due date
of the tax, the local tax administrator may reopen or extend the time for filing a written protest. In no event shall the time for filing a written protest be
reopened or extended for more than ninety (90) days after the expiration of the forty five (45) day period. (Ord. 2000-60, 12-21-2000)
1-15-10: INTEREST AND PENALTIES:
In the event a determination has been made that a tax is due and owing, through audit, assessment or other bill sent, the tax must be paid within the time
frame otherwise indicated.
A. Interest: The village hereby provides for the amount of interest to be assessed on a late payment, underpayment, or nonpayment of the tax, to be
eighteen percent (18%) per annum, based on a year of three hundred sixty five (365) days and the number of days elapsed.
B. Late Filing And Payment Penalties: If a tax return is not filed within the time and manner provided by the controlling tax ordinance, a late filing penalty of
five percent (5%) of the amount of tax required to be shown as due on a return shall be imposed; and a late payment penalty of five percent (5%) of the
tax due shall be imposed. If no return is filed within the time or manner provided by the controlling tax ordinance and prior to the village issuing a notice
of tax delinquency or notice of tax liability, then a failure to file penalty shall be assessed equal to twenty five percent (25%) of the total tax due for the
applicable reporting period for which the return was required to be filed. A late filing or payment penalty shall not apply if a failure to file penalty is
imposed by the controlling ordinance. (Ord. 2000-60, 12-21-2000)
1-15-11: ABATEMENT:
The local tax administrator shall have the authority to waive or abate any late filing penalty, late payment penalty or failure to file penalty if the local tax
administrator shall determine reasonable cause exists for delay or failure to make a filing. (Ord. 2000-60, 12-21-2000)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 31/498
1-15-12: INSTALLMENT CONTRACTS:
The village may enter into an installment contract with the taxpayer for the payment of taxes under the controlling tax ordinance. The local tax
administrator may not cancel any installment contract so entered unless the taxpayer fails to pay any amount due and owing. Upon written notice by the
local tax administrator that the payment is thirty (30) days delinquent, the taxpayer shall have fourteen (14) working days to cure any delinquency. If the
taxpayer fails to cure the delinquency within the fourteen (14) day period or fails to demonstrate good faith in restructuring the installment contract with the
local administrator, the installment contract shall be canceled without further notice to the taxpayer. (Ord. 2000-60, 12-21-2000)
1-15-13: STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS:
The village, through the local tax administrator, shall review all tax returns in a prompt and timely manner and inform taxpayers of any amounts due and
owing.
A. No determination of tax due and owing may be issued more than four (4) years after the end of the calendar year for which the return for the applicable
period was filed or for the calendar year in which the return for the applicable period was due, whichever occurs later.
B. If any tax return is not filed or if, during any four (4) year period for which a notice of tax determination or assessment may be issued by the village, the
tax paid was less than seventy fivepercent (75%) of the tax due, the statute of limitations shall be six (6) years after the end of the calendar year in
which return for the applicable period was due or after the end of the calendar year in which the return for the applicable period was filed, whichever
occurs later.
C. No statute of limitations shall apply if a fraudulent tax return was filed by the taxpayer. (Ord. 2000-60, 12-21-2000)
1-15-14: VOLUNTARY DISCLOSURE:
For any locally imposed and administered tax for which a taxpayer has not received a written notice of an audit, investigation, or assessment from the local
tax administrator, a taxpayer is entitled to file an application with the local tax administrator for a voluntary disclosure of the tax due. A taxpayer filing a
voluntary disclosure application must agree to pay the amount of tax due, along with interest of one percent (1%) per month, for all periods prior to the
filing of the application but not more than four (4) years before the date of filing the application. A taxpayer filing a valid voluntary disclosure application
may not be liable for any additional tax, interest, or penalty for any period before the date the application was filed. However, if the taxpayer incorrectly
determined and underpaid the amount of tax due, the taxpayer is liable for the underpaid tax along with applicable interest on the underpaid tax, unless
the underpayment was the result of fraud on the part of the taxpayer, in which case the application shall be deemed invalid and void. The payment of tax
and interest must be made by no later than ninety (90) days after the filing of the voluntary disclosure application or the date agreed to by the local tax
administrator. However, any additional amounts owed as a result of an underpayment of tax and interest previously paid under this section must be paid
within ninety (90) days after a final determination and the exhaustion of all appeals of the additional amount owed or the date agreed to by the local tax
administrator, whichever is longer. (Ord. 2000-60, 12-21-2000)
1-15-15: PUBLICATION OF TAX ORDINANCES:
Any locally administered tax ordinance shall be published via normal or standard publishing requirements. The posting of a tax ordinance on the internet
shall satisfy the publication requirements. Copies of all tax ordinances shall be made available to the public upon request at the village clerk's office. (Ord.
2000-60, 12-21-2000)
1-15-16: INTERNAL REVIEW PROCEDURES FOR LIENS:
The local tax administrator shall establish an internal review procedure regarding any liens filed against any taxpayers for unpaid taxes. Upon a
determination by the local tax administrator that the lien is valid, the lien shall remain in full force andeffect. If the lien is determined to be improper, the
local tax administrator shall:
A. Remove the lien at the village's expense;
B. Correct the taxpayer's credit record; and
C. Correct any public disclosure of the improperly imposed lien. (Ord. 2000-60, 12-21-2000)
1-15-17: CONFLICTING TAX PROVISIONS:
This chapter shall be liberally construed and administered to supplement all of the village's tax ordinances. To the extent that any tax ordinance is in
conflict with or inconsistent with this chapter, this chapter shall be controlling. (Ord. 2000-60, 12-21-2000)
1-15-18: SEVERABILITY:
If any section, paragraph or provision of this chapter shall be held to be invalid or unenforceable for any reason, the invalidity or unenforceability of such
section, paragraph or provision shall not affect any of the remaining provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2000-60, 12-21-2000)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 32/498
Chapter 16
INTERESTED PARTIES REGISTRY
1-16-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in these registration rules, the following terms shall have the definitions set forth below:
ACT: Tax increment allocation redevelopment act, as amended1.
INTERESTED PARTY (PARTIES): Any individual, organization or entity registered in a specific registry whose registration has not been terminated in
accordance with these registration rules.
REDEVELOPMENT PROJECT AREA: An area which is intended to qualify, is qualified, or will qualify as a "Redevelopment Project Area" and is subject to
the "Interested Parties" registration requirements of the act.
REGISTRATION FORM: A form designated by the village clerk, or his or her designee, as the official form via which an interested party may register to
receive certain information consistent with the requirements of the act.
REGISTRY: Each interested parties registry established by the village pursuant to the act.
VILLAGE: Village of Streamwood. (Ord. 2001-23, 6-21-2001)
1-16-2: ESTABLISHMENT OF REGISTRY:
The village shall establish a separate interested parties registry for each redevelopment project area, whether existing as of the date of the adoption of
these rules or establishedhereafter. (Ord. 2001-23, 6-21-2001)
1-16-3: MAINTENANCE OF REGISTRY:
The registries shall be maintained by the village clerk or his or her designee. In the event the village determines that an individual other than the clerk
should maintain the registries, the village may transfer the responsibility for maintaining the registries to such other department provided that the village: a)
gives prior written notice to all interested parties not less than thirty (30) days prior to such transfer; and b) publishes notice of such transfer in a
newspaper of general circulation in the village. (Ord. 2001-23, 6-21-2001)
1-16-4: REGISTRATION BY INDIVIDUALS/ORGANIZATIONS:
An individual or organization seeking to register as an interested party with respect to a redevelopment project area must complete and submit a
registration form to the village clerk. (Ord. 2001-23, 6-21-2001)
1-16-5: DETERMINATION OF ELIGIBILITY:
All individuals and organizations whose registration form and supporting documentation complies with these registration rules shall be registered in the
applicable registry within ten (10) business days of the village clerk's receipt of all such documents. The clerk shall provide written notice to the registrant
confirming such registration. Upon registration, all interested parties shall be entitled to receive all notices and documents required to be delivered under
these rules or as otherwise required under the act with respect to the applicable redevelopment project area. If the village clerk determines that a
registrant's registration form and/or supporting documentation is incomplete or does not comply with these rules, the clerk shall give written notice to the
registrant specifying the defect(s). The registrant shall be entitled to correct any defects and resubmit a new registration form and supporting
documentation, as needed. (Ord. 2001-23, 6-21-2001)
1-16-6: RENEWAL AND TERMINATION:
An interested party's registration shall remain effective for a period of three (3) years. At any time thereafter, the village clerk may provide written notice by
regular mail to the interested party stating that such registration shall terminate unless the interested party renews such registration within thirty (30) days
of the clerk's mailing of written notice. To renew such registration, the interested party shall, within such thirty (30) day period, complete and submit the
same registration form then required of an initial registrant in the village. The registration of all individuals and organizations whoseregistration form is
submitted in a timely manner and complies with these registration rules shall be renewed for an additional three (3) year period. If the village clerk
determines that a registrant's renewal registration form is incomplete or does not comply with these registration rules, the clerk shall give written notice to
the registrant at the address specified in the renewal registration form submitted by such registrant, specifying the defect(s). The registrant shall be entitled
to correct any defects and resubmit a new registration form within thirty (30) days of receipt of the clerk's notice. If all defects are not corrected within thirty
(30) days of the interested party's receipt of the village clerk's notice, the interested party's registration shall be terminated. Any interested person whose
registration is terminated shall be entitled to register again as if a first-time registrant. (Ord. 2001-23, 6-21-2001)
1-16-7: AMENDMENT TO REGISTRATION:
An interested party may amend its registration by giving written notice to the village clerk by certified mail of any of the following: change of address for
notice purposes, change in the name of an organization contact person, and termination of registration. The clerk will revise the applicable registry upon
receipt. (Ord. 2001-23, 6-21-2001)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 33/498
1-16-8: REGISTRIES AVAILABLE FOR PUBLIC INSPECTION:
Each registry shall be available for public inspection during normal village business hours. The registry shall include the name, address and telephone
number of each interested party and, for organizations, the name and phone number of a designated contact person. (Ord. 2001-23, 6-21-2001)
1-16-9: NOTICES TO BE SENT TO INTERESTED PARTIES:
Interested parties will be sent the notices and other information to which they are entitled under the act with respect to the applicable redevelopment
project area. (Ord. 2001-23, 6-21-2001)
1-16-10: NONINTERFERENCE:
These registration rules shall not be used to prohibit or otherwise interfere with the ability of eligible organizations and individuals to register for receipt of
the information to which they are entitled under the act. (Ord. 2001-23, 6-21-2001)
1-16-11: AMENDMENT OF REGISTRATION RULES:
These registration rules may be amended or modified by the village clerk or his/her designee subject to and consistent with the requirements of the act.
(Ord. 2001-23, 6-21-2001)
Chapter 17
ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION OF ORDINANCE VIOLATIONS
1-17-1: PURPOSE:
The stated purpose of this chapter is to provide for fair and efficient enforcement of village of Streamwood (hereinafter referred to as "village") ordinances
as may be allowed by law and directed by ordinance, through an administrative adjudication of violations of such village ordinances and by establishing a
schedule of fines and penalties, and authority and procedures for collection of unpaid fines and penalties. (Ord. 2008-20, 7-31-2008)
1-17-2: CREATION OF CODE HEARING UNIT; JURISDICTION:
There is hereby created within the village of Streamwood an executive unit of the municipal government to be known as the code hearing unit, which is
authorized to provide for and operate a "system of administrative adjudication", which shall be defined as the adjudication of any violation of any municipal
ordinance of the village of Streamwood, including, but not limited to, those actions brought pursuant to title 3, "Business And License Regulations", title 4,
"Police Regulations", title 5, "Motor Vehicles And Traffic", and title 7, "Public Health And Sanitation", of this code as well as the zoning ordinance and
various building codes of the village of Streamwood; provided that proceedings not within the statutory or home rule authority of the village, any offense
under the Illinois vehicle code1 or similar offense that is a traffic regulation governing the movement of vehicles, and any reportable offense under section
6-204 of the Illinois vehicle code, shall not be subject to administrative adjudication pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2008-20, 7-31-2008)
1-17-3: HEARING PROCEDURES NONEXCLUSIVE:
The provisions of this chapter shall not preclude the village from using other methods or proceedings to enforce the ordinances of the village of
Streamwood, including, but not limited to, the institution of any action in the circuit court of Cook County, Illinois, or any administrative proceeding. (Ord.
2008-20, 7-31-2008)
1-17-4: CODE HEARING UNIT:
The code hearing unit shall be composed of an administrative hearing officer, an ordinance enforcement administrator, the chief of police or his designee,
hearing room personnel, and any other duly appointed person or persons deemed necessary for the efficient administration of the code hearing unit, with
the following powers, duties and authority:
A. All adjudicatory hearings shall be presided over by an administrative hearing officer who shall be appointed by the village president with the advice and
consent of the village board. Prior to conducting administrative adjudication hearings, the administrative hearing officers shall have successfully
completed a formal training program which includes the following:
1. Instruction on the rules of procedure of the administrative hearings which they will conduct;
2. Orientation to each subject area of the code violations that they will adjudicate;
3. Observation of administrative hearings; and
4. Participation in hypothetical cases, including ruling on evidence and issuing final orders. (Ord. 2008-20, 7-31-2008)
1-17-5: HEARING OFFICER QUALIFICATIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 34/498
The administrative hearing officer shall be an attorney licensed to practice law in the state of Illinois for at least three (3) years. (Ord. 2008-20, 7-31-2008)
1-17-6: POWERS AND DUTIES OF HEARING OFFICERS:
Administrative hearing officers are hereby authorized, empowered and directed to:
A. Hear testimony and accept evidence that is relevant to the existence of an ordinance violation;
B. Issue subpoenas directing witnesses to appear and give relevant testimony at the hearing, upon the request of the parties or their representatives;
C. Preserve and authenticate the record of the hearing, including all exhibits and evidence introduced at the hearing;
D. Issue a determination, based on the evidence presented at the hearing, of whether a code violation occurred or exists. The administrative hearing
officer's determination shall be in writing and shall include written findings of fact, decision, and order including the fine, penalty, or other action with
which the respondent must comply; and
E. Impose penalties consistent with applicable village of Streamwood code provisions and assess costs upon finding a party liable for the charged
violation, except, however, that in no event shall the administrative hearing officer have authority to: 1) impose a penalty of incarceration, or 2) impose
a fine in excess of seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) per violation. The maximum monetary fine under this subsection shall be exclusive of costs of
enforcement or costs incurred by the village to secure compliance with the village's ordinances and shall not be applicable to cases to enforce the
collection of any tax imposed and collected by the municipality. (Ord. 2008-20, 7-31-2008)
1-17-7: ORDINANCE ENFORCEMENT ADMINISTRATOR:
The ordinance enforcement administrator shall either be an employee of the village or an independent contractor or agency contracted by the village to
perform such duties as enumerated herein. The ordinance enforcement administrator who shall be appointed by the chief of police of the village is hereby
authorized, empowered and directed to:
A. Operate and manage the system of administrative adjudication of vehicular standing and/or parking regulation violations, vehicle compliance violations,
vehicle license or sticker requirement violations, building, fire and health code violations, and all other village ordinance violations as may be permitted
by law and directed by ordinance;
B. Adopt, distribute and process all notices as may be required under this chapter or as may reasonably be required to carry out the purpose of this
chapter;
C. Collect monies paid as fines and/or penalties assessed after a final determination of liability;
D. Certify copies of final determinations of vehicular standing and/or parking regulation violation liability, vehicle compliance violations, vehicle license or
sticker requirement violations, building, fire and health code violations or any other ordinance violation adjudicated pursuant to this chapter, and any
factual reports verifying the final determination of any violation liability which were issued in accordance with this chapter or the laws of the state of
Illinois, including 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-208.3, as from time to time amended;
E. Certify reports to the secretary of state concerning initiation of suspension of driving privileges in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and
those of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-306.5;
F. Promulgate rules and regulations reasonably required to operate and maintain the system of administrative adjudication hereby established; and
G. Collect unpaid fines and penalties through private collection agencies that may be retained by the village or by directing the village attorney to file
complaints in the county circuit court, or by selecting or appointing an individual or agency to act on behalf of the village in filing complaints, seeking
judgments for unpaid fines or penalties and pursuing all postjudgment remedies available under current law.
H. The ordinance enforcement administrator is hereby further authorized, empowered and directed to operate and maintain the computer programs for the
system of administrative adjudication hereby established, on a day to day basis, including, but not limited to:
1. Inputting of violation notice information;
2. Establishing hearing dates and notice dates;
3. Recording fine and penalty assessment and payments;
4. Issuing payment receipts;
5. Issuing succeeding notice of hearing dates and/or final determination of liability, issuing notices of immobilization, issuing notices of impending
impoundment, and issuing notices of impending driver's license suspension as may be required, in accordance with the Illinois vehicle code;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 35/498
6. Keeping accurate records of appearances and nonappearances at administrative hearings, pleas entered and fines and other penalties assessed
and paid. (Ord. 2008-20, 7-31-2008)
1-17-8: HEARING ROOM PERSONNEL:
Hearing room personnel appointed by the chief of police shall be any police officer or auxiliary police officer, and such persons are hereby authorized and
directed to:
A. Maintain hearing room decorum;
B. Have and execute authority as is granted to courtroom deputies of the circuit court;
C. Perform such other duties or acts as may reasonably be required and as directed by the administrative hearing officer or the ordinance enforcement
administrator. (Ord. 2008-20, 7-31-2008)
1-17-9: COMPENSATION OF CODE HEARING UNIT PERSONNEL:
Authorization for compensation for each of the above stated positions shall be made by the president and board of trustees through the annual
appropriation process, and such compensation shall be determined by the village board. (Ord. 2008-20, 7-31-2008)
1-17-10: COMPLAINTS AND NOTICES OF HEARINGS:
A. Filing Of Complaint: A proceeding before an administrative hearing officer shall be instituted upon the filing of a written sworn pleading or complaint by
any authorized official of the village, including police officers, code enforcement officers, and such other employees as authorized.
B. Serving Of Respondents: Respondents shall be served with a copy of the written sworn pleading or complaint along with a notice of adjudicatory
hearing in any manner reasonably calculated to give them actual notice of the proceeding instituted against them including:
1. Personal service upon a party or its employees or agents;
2. Service by certified mail, return receipt requested at the party's address;
3. Service by first class mail postage prepaid at the party's address; or
4. If the complaint is for a violation of the village building code, property maintenance code, zoning code or for a violation of title 3, chapter 14, "Rental
Residential Property", of this code, and service of the pleading or complaint has not been made pursuant to those methods provided in subsection
B1, B2 or B3 of this section, after at least one attempt, then service may be effected by posting a copy of the sworn pleading or complaint upon the
property where the violation is found when the party is the owner or manager of the property.
C. Notices Of Hearing: Notices of the adjudicatory hearing shall include:
1. The type and nature of the ordinance violation to be adjudicated;
2. The date and location of the adjudicatory hearing;
3. The legal authority and jurisdiction under which the hearing is to be held; and
4. The penalties for failure to appear at the hearing.
D. Options For Persons Charged With Certain Police Offenses:
1. Persons charged with a violation of section 4-3-3, "Disorderly Houses"; 4-3-10, "Trespassing Prohibited"; 4-5-1, "Curfew Hours For Minors"; or 4-5-4,
"Truancy Prohibited", of this code, shall have the option of avoiding an appearance at an administrative hearing by paying a mandatory fine of one
hundred dollars ($100.00) within ten (10) days, after service of the notice of violation. Payment of the fine is an admission of liability and will act as a
final determination of liability.
2. If the fine is not paid within ten (10) days after service of the notice of violation, or if the respondent requests a hearing, a hearing will be scheduled
in accord with section 1-17-11 of this chapter. (Ord. 2010-14, 8-5-2010)
1-17-11: ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING PROCEDURES:
Parties shall be provided with an opportunity for a hearing during which they may be represented by counsel, present witnesses, and cross examine
opposing witnesses. Parties may request the administrative hearing officer to issue subpoenas to direct the attendance and testimony of relevant
witnesses and the production of relevant documents. Hearings shall be scheduled with reasonable promptness, provided that for hearings scheduled in all
nonemergency situations, if requested by the defendant, the defendant shall have at least fifteen (15) days after service of process to prepare for a
hearing. For purposes of this section, "nonemergency situation" means any situation that does not reasonably constitute a threat to the public interest,
safety, health or welfare. If service is provided by mail, the fifteen (15) day period shall begin to run on the day that the notice is deposited in the mail. (Ord.
2008-20, 7-31-2008)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 36/498
1-17-12: RULES OF EVIDENCE SHALL NOT GOVERN:
The formal and technical rules of evidence shall not apply in an adjudicatory hearing authorized under this chapter. Evidence, including hearsay, may be
admitted only if it is of a type commonly relied upon by reasonably prudent persons in the conduct of their affairs. (Ord. 2008-20, 7-31-2008)
1-17-13: JUDICIAL REVIEW:
Any final decision by an administrative hearing officer that a code violation does or does not exist shall constitute a final determination for purposes of
judicial review and shall be subject to review under the Illinois administrative review law2. (Ord. 2008-20, 7-31-2008)
1-17-14: ENFORCEMENT OF JUDGMENT:
A. Any fine, other sanction, or costs imposed, or part of any fine, other sanction, or costs imposed, remaining unpaid after the exhaustion of or the failure
to exhaust judicial review procedures under the Illinois administrative review law are a debt due and owing the village of Streamwood and may be
collected in accordance with applicable law.
B. After expiration of the period in which judicial review under the Illinois administrative review law may be sought for a final determination of an ordinance
violation, unless stayed by a court of competent jurisdiction, the findings, decision, and order of the administrative hearing officer may be enforced in
the same manner as a judgment entered by a court of competent jurisdiction.
C. In any case in which a defendant has failed to comply with a judgment ordering that defendant to correct an ordinance violation or imposing any fine or
other sanction as a result of an ordinance violation, any expenses incurred by the village to enforce the judgment entered against that defendant, to the
extent permitted by law, including, but not limited to, attorney fees, court costs, and costs related to property demolition or foreclosure, after they are
fixed by a court of competent jurisdiction or a hearing officer, shall be a debt due and owing the village of Streamwood and may be collected in
accordance with applicable law. Prior to any expenses being fixed by the administrative hearing officer pursuant to this subsection, the municipality
shall provide a notice to the defendant that states that the defendant shall appear at a hearing before the administrative hearing officer to determine
whether the defendant has failed to comply with the judgment. The notice shall set the date for such hearing, which shall not be less than seven (7)
days from the date that notice is served. If notice is served by mail, the seven (7) day period shall begin to run on the date that the notice was
deposited in the mail.
D. Upon being recorded in the manner required by article XII of the Illinois code of civil procedure3, or by the uniform commercial code4, a lien shall be
imposed on the real estate or personal estate, or both, of the respondent in the amount of any debt due and owing the village under this chapter. The
lien may be enforced in the same manner as a judgment lien pursuant to a judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction.
E. The administrative hearing officer may set aside any judgment entered by default and set a new hearing date, upon a petition filed by the defendant
within thirty (30) days after the issuance of the order of default, if the administrative hearing officer determines that the defendant's failure to appear at
the hearing was for good cause, or at any time if the defendant establishes, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the village did not provide proper
service of process. If any judgment is set aside pursuant to this subsection, the administrative hearing officer shall have authority to enter an order
extinguishing any lien which has been recorded for any debt due and owing the village as a result of the vacated default judgment. When a judgment is
vacated, the administrative hearing officer shall set a new date for a hearing on the underlying violation(s). (Ord. 2008-20, 7-31-2008)
Chapter 18
POSTING BOND FOR VIOLATIONS
1-18-1: POSTING BOND FOR VIOLATIONS OF THIS CODE:
A. Posting Bond: Any police officer or village official authorized to issue violation notices for administrative adjudication of alleged violations of this code
may require the defendant or respondent charged with any violation of title 4, chapter 2, 3, 4 or 5 of this code to post a bond in the sum of one hundred
dollars ($100.00) at the time the violation notice is served, if the violation notice is served by handing the violation notice to the defendant or
respondent. No person shall be incarcerated for failure or inability to post bond as herein provided.
B. Bond Required; Payment: When bond is required to be posted, the bond shall be in the form of cash or a cash bond. For purposes of this section "cash
or cash bond" shall mean United States currency; traveler's checks issued by major banks or express companies which, alone or in combination with
currency total the exact amount required to be deposited as bond; and negotiable drafts on major credit card companies, under conditions approved by
the chief of police or such person as may be designated by the chief of police to have the authority to approve or establish the conditions for the
acceptance of negotiable drafts on credit card companies.
C. Bond To Be Applied To Fines Imposed: The village's administrative hearing officer is hereby authorized to apply any bond posted to satisfy all or a
portion of any fine(s) imposed against the defendant or respondent for a violation proven and after a finding of liable.
D. Bond To Be Returned For Violations Not Proven: Any bond posted shall be returned to the defendant or respondent after a finding of not liable or
dismissal of the violation charged. (Ord. 2010-16, 8-5-2010)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 37/498
Title 2
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
Chapter 1
PLANNING AND ZONING BOARD
2-1-1: CREATION AND MEMBERSHIP:
There is hereby authorized and established the planning and zoning board of the village. The planning and zoning board shall consist of seven (7)
members including its chairman to be appointed by the village president with the advice and consent of the board of trustees. All members of the planning
and zoning board shall reside within the village or within territory contiguous to the village and not more than one and one-half (11/2) miles beyond the
corporate limits and not included within any other municipality. The village president shall be a member ex officio of said planning and zoning board. (Ord.
2015-7, 5-7-2015)
2-1-2: TERM OF OFFICE:
A. Regular Members: The regular members of the planning and zoning board shall serve respectively for the following terms: one for one year; two (2) for
two (2) years; two (2) for three (3) years; and two (2) for four (4) years. The successor (or reappointment) for each term shall serve for a term of four (4)
years. (Ord. 2015-7, 5-7-2015)
2-1-2-1: ALTERNATE MEMBERS:
A. The village president with the advice and consent of the board of trustees may appoint three (3) alternate members of the planning and zoning board.
The president shall designate a first alternate, second alternate and third alternate member. Alternate members shall serve in the order of their
designation. All appointments for alternate members shall be for a period of four (4) years.
B. Alternate members must conform to the same requirements for residency as regular members of the planning and zoning board.
C. When a regular appointed member is absent for any reason from a meeting of the planning and zoning board, any alternate shall have such powers
and may exercise such duties as a regularly appointed member.
D. When there is a vacancy of a regular member and a new appointment is to be made, the alternate member who has been designated first alternate
shall then be appointed as a regular member. When the first alternate member is appointed as a regular member, the second alternate member shall
become the first alternate member, the third alternate member shall become the second alternative member and the new appointment shall be the third
alternate member. (Ord. 2015-7, 5-7-2015)
2-1-3: ORGANIZATION AND RECORDS:
The members of the planning and zoning board shall elect a vice chairman, who shall so serve during the period of his or her term, and such other officers
as they deem necessary. The secretary to the planning and zoning board shall be appointed and need not be a member of the planning and zoning board.
The planning and zoning board shall keep written records of its proceedings, which shall at all times be open to inspection by the board of trustees. (Ord.
2015-7, 5-7-2015)
2-1-4: COMPENSATION:
The chairman and members of the planning and zoning board shall serve without compensation. (Ord. 2015-7, 5-7-2015)
2-1-5: QUORUM:
Except as may otherwise be provided by law, four (4) members of the planning and zoning board shall constitute a quorum. No meeting (or hearing) shall
be conducted without a quorum being present. (Ord. 2015-7, 5-7-2015)
2-1-6: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The planning and zoning board shall have the following powers and duties:
A. To initiate, direct, draft and review the comprehensive plan for the village and each subsequently proposed amendment thereto, which, upon the
adoption by the president and board of trustees, shall become the "official comprehensive plan" of the village.
B. To act in the capacity of, and discharge the duties conferred upon the planning and zoning board referred to in the subdivision control ordinance of the
village, the zoning ordinance of the village, this code and the state statutes.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 38/498
C. To hear and review all matters upon which it is required to recommend under this code and such other matters as may from time to time be referred to
it, consistent with this code. (Ord. 2015-7, 5-7-2015)
2-1-7: MEETINGS AND RULES:
A. Open Hearings And Meetings: All planning and zoning board hearings and meetings shall be open to the public.
B. Calls And Quorum: In addition to regular meeting dates, special meetings shall be held at the call of the board of trustees, the chairman, or in his/her
absence, the vice chairman, or at the request of three (3) members. Except as provided by law, four (4) members of the planning and zoning board
shall be necessary for a quorum at each meeting.
C. Testimony: All testimony by witnesses at any public hearing shall be given under oath. The chairman, vice chairman or acting chairman may administer
oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses.
D. Minutes And Records: The planning and zoning board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon every question, or
if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact. The minutes of all hearings and meetings of the planning and zoning board shall be filed in the office of
the village clerk and shall be open to public inspection during normal business hours.
E. Rules Of Procedure: The planning and zoning board shall adopt its own rules of procedure not in conflict with title 10, "Land Subdivisions", title 11,
"Zoning", of this code or other provisions of this code. An official copy of these rules shall be filed in the office of the village clerk where they shall be
open to the public inspection during normal business hours.
F. Publish Meeting Dates: The planning and zoning board shall annually cause to be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the village a
listing of regular meeting dates for that year. Said list shall be kept on file in the office of the village clerk. (Ord. 2015-7, 5-7-2015)
2-1-8: JURISDICTION:
For the purpose of title 10, chapter 7, "Administration And Enforcement" and title 11, chapter 13, "Administration And Enforcement" of this code, the
planning and zoning board is hereby vested with the following jurisdiction and authority:
A. Map Amendments: To hear and make recommendations to the board of trustees on all applications or requests for amendments to the zoning map
which make up title 11, "Zoning", of this code.
B. Planned Unit Developments: To hear and make recommendations to the board of trustees on all applications for planned unit developments.
C. Annexations: To hear and make recommendations to the board of trustees on all applications for annexations to the village.
D. Review Of Comprehensive Plan: To review on a regular basis the comprehensive plan and to hear and make recommendations to the board of trustees
regarding any proposed changes.
E. Review Of Zoning Ordinance: To review the zoning ordinance (title 11 of this code) on a continuing basis and to hear and make recommendations to the
board of trustees to improve its effectiveness.
F. Appeals: To hear and decide appeals in which it is alleged there is an error in any order, requirement, decision, interpretation or determination made by
the community development director as set forth in this chapter.
G. Special Uses: To hear and report to the board of trustees on special uses as set forth in section 11-13-8 of this code.
H. Text Amendments: To hear and report to the board of trustees on requests for amendments to the text provisions of the zoning ordinance (title 11 of this
code).
I. Variations: To hear and make recommendations to the board of trustees on requests for variations for the requirements of the zoning ordinance (title 11
of this code) in the manner and subject to the standards set forth in this chapter and to file with the board of trustees findings of fact and
recommendations on said requests.
J. Other Matters: To hear and make recommendations upon all other matters referred to it by the board of trustees or upon which it is required to pass
under the zoning ordinance (title 11 of this code). (Ord. 2015-7, 5-7-2015)
Chapter 2
COMMUNITY RELATIONS COMMISSION
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 39/498
2-2-1: COMMISSION CREATED:
There is hereby created a commission which shall be known as the village of Streamwood "community relations commission", hereinafter referred to as
"commission". (Ord. 2003-21, 5-1-2003)
2-2-2: INTENT AND PURPOSE:
It shall be the intent and purpose of the community relations commission to be a recommending commission only and:
A. To promote fair and equal treatment and opportunity under the law to all persons, regardless of their economic, sex, age, racial, religious or ethnic
background;
B. To promote social harmony in the community of the village, and through education and action, including dispute resolution, to help deter prejudice,
discrimination and intolerance in whatever form these shall appear;
C. To develop services and projects which will assist residents in meeting practical problems and in adjusting to the changing circumstances, to enrich the
social and intellectual life of all residents;
D. To foster accord and cooperation among individuals or groups of different races, ethnic backgrounds or religious beliefs in order to improve the living
environment of all residents;
E. To provide a forum during regular meetings where citizens are encouraged to come forward with their human relations concerns and to make an honest
attempt to deal with those concerns in a constructive manner;
F. To safeguard the rights of all citizens as defined by the ordinances of the village and state and federal laws and constitutions;
G. To make comment to the village board regarding problems and issues affecting a culturally diverse community and make recommendations which may
be present in agenda items under consideration;
H. To be aware of human relations dilemmas nationally and worldwide, and to attempt to devise ways to positively address those dilemmas. (Ord. 2003-
21, 5-1-2003)
2-2-3: COMMISSIONERS, APPOINTMENT, TERMS, VACANCY, QUORUM:
The commission shall be composed of no less than nine (9) members who shall be known as commissioners. The commissioners shall be appointed by
the president with the advice and consent of the board of trustees.
A. At least three (3) of the commissioners shall be representatives from each of the following public entities: one park district, one library district, and one
township. (Ord. 2005-57, 11-17-2005; amd. Ord. 2015-7, 5-7-2015)
B. One commissioner shall be named as chairman and one commissioner shall be named as vice chairman. The chairman and vice chairman shall serve
for a period of one year and may be reappointed to successive terms.
C. It shall not be a requirement for appointment as a commissioner to be a resident of the village.
D. The initial members of the commission shall be appointed to staggered terms. Thereafter, their successors shall be appointed for two (2) year terms.
E. If for any reason a commissioner is unable to serve, the president, with the advice and consent of the board of trustees, shall appoint a replacement to
fill the unexpired term.
F. A majority of the then sitting commissioners shall constitute a quorum. (Ord. 2005-57, 11-17-2005)
2-2-4: ALTERNATE MEMBERS:
A. The president with the advice and consent of the board of trustees may appoint two (2) alternate members of the commission. The president shall
designate a first alternate and second alternate. Alternate members shall serve in the order of their designation. All appointments for alternate
members shall be for a period of two (2) years.
B. When a regular appointed member is absent for any reason from a meeting of the commission, any alternate shall have such powers and may exercise
such duties as a regularly appointed member.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 40/498
C. When there is a vacancy of a regular member and a new appointment is to be made, the alternate member who has been designated first alternate
shall then be appointed as a regular member. When the first alternate member is appointed as a regular member, the second alternate member shall
become the first alternate member and the new appointment shall be the second alternate member. (Ord. 2003-21, 5-1-2003)
2-2-5: MEETINGS:
A. Regular Meetings: Regular meetings of the commission shall be held at the call of the chairman, but not less frequently than once per quarter. (Ord.
2003-21, 5-1-2003)
B. Special Meetings: The chairman or any four (4) commissioners may call special meetings of the commission by the filing of a written notice with the
secretary of the commission. This notice shall contain the time and place of the special meeting and a brief statement of the business to be submitted
for the consideration of the commission at such special meeting, and no other business shall be considered at such special meeting. Notice of special
meetings to commissioners shall be given orally or in writing at least forty eight (48) hours in advance of the meeting. (Ord. 2004-6, 2-19-2004)
2-2-6: DUTIES:
It shall be the duty of the commission to make recommendations to the village board of trustees on programs to improve human relations in the village,
while recognizing, valuing and respecting the diverse cultures in our community, including, but not limited to:
A. Promoting diversity in our schools (winter_spring).
B. Community beautification awards program (spring_summer).
C. Diversity outreach (autumn_winter).
D. Community based programming. (Ord. 2003-21, 5-1-2003)
2-2-7: ADOPTION OF PROCEDURAL RULES:
The commission may adopt bylaws containing procedural rules and such substantive regulations as it deems necessary to accomplish the purposes of this
chapter. (Ord. 2003-21, 5-1-2003)
Chapter 3
COMMUNITY AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION
2-3-1: COMMISSION CREATED:
There is hereby created a commission which shall be known as the village of Streamwood "community and economic development commission",
hereinafter referred to as "commission". (Ord. 1998-13, 3-5-1998)
2-3-2: INTENT AND PURPOSE:
It shall be the intent and purpose of the community and economic development commission to be an advisory commission to the village board to assist in
the attraction, retention, maintenance and revitalization of economic and community growth within the village by assuring opportunities for development
and redevelopment, attracting sound, stable commercial growth and developing strategies to assist in the preservation and support of existing
development. (Ord. 1998-13, 3-5-1998)
2-3-3: COMMISSIONERS; APPOINTMENT, TERM, VACANCY, QUORUM:
The commission shall be composed of nine (9) members who shall be known as commissioners. The commissioners shall be appointed by the village
president with the advice and consent of the board of trustees. The president shall appoint, with the advice and consent of the board of trustees, one
commissioner to serve as chairman and one commissioner to serve as vice chairman. The chairman and vice chairman shall serve for a period of one
year and may be reappointed to successive terms.
It shall not be a requirement for appointment as a commissioner to be a resident of the village.
The nine (9) members of the commission shall be appointed to staggered terms. Five (5) members shall be appointed for two (2) years; four (4) members
shall be appointed for three (3) years. Thereafter, their successors shall be appointed for two (2) year terms. (Ord. 1998-13, 3-5-1998)
If for any reason a commissioner is unable to attend any meeting or meetings, that commissioner may appoint a designee to attend in his or her absence.
Appointed designees shall be counted for purposes of a quorum and shall have the right to vote in lieu of the absent commissioner. (Ord. 2015-7, 5-7-
2015)
Any five (5) commissioners shall constitute a quorum. (Ord. 1998-13, 3-5-1998)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 41/498
2-3-4: MEETINGS:
A. Regular Meetings: Regular meetings of the commission shall be held at the call of the chairman, but not less frequently than once per quarter. (Ord.
1998-13, 3-5-1998)
B. Special Meetings: The chairman or any three (3) commissioners may call special meetings of the commission by the filing of a written notice with the
secretary of the commission. This notice shall contain the time and place of the special meeting and a brief statement of the business to be submitted
for the consideration of the commission at such special meeting, and no other business shall be considered at such special meeting. Notice of special
meetings to commissioners shall be given orally or in writing at least forty eight (48) hours in advance of the meeting. (Ord. 1998-13, 3-5-1998; amd.
Ord. 2015-7, 5-7-2015)
2-3-5: ADOPTION OF PROCEDURAL RULES:
The commission may adopt bylaws containing procedural rules and such substantive regulations as it deems necessary to accomplish the purposes of this
chapter. (Ord. 1998-13, 3-5-1998)
Chapter 4
VETERANS COMMISSION
2-4-1: COMMISSION CREATED:
There is hereby created a commission which shall be known as the "Streamwood Veterans Commission" hereinafter referred to as "Commission." (1994
Code)
2-4-2: COMMISSIONERS; APPOINTMENT, TERMS, VACANCY, QUORUM:
The Commission shall be composed of seven (7) members who shall be known as Commissioners. The Commissioners shall be appointed by the
President with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees. One Commissioner shall be named as chairman and one Commissioner shall be named
as vice chairman at the time of his/her appointment. The chairman shall appoint a secretary of the Commission. Appointments shall be limited to veterans
of the United States and individuals who at the time of their appointment are on active duty with the United States military.
The terms of new appointments to the Veterans Commission shall be staggered so that the terms of the chairman and three (3) members of the
Commission shall expire December 31, 1992. The terms of the three (3) remaining members of the Commission shall expire June 30, 1993. All
subsequent appointments shall be for a term of two (2) years.
If for any reason a Commissioner is unable to serve, the President, with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees, shall appoint a replacement to fill
the unexpired term.
Any four (4) Commissioners shall constitute a quorum. (1994 Code)
2-4-3: MEETINGS:
A. Regular Meetings: Regular meetings of the Commission shall be held not less than monthly at such times as determined by the Commission; at the call
of the chairman.
B. Special Meetings: The chairman or any three (3) Commissioners may call special meetings of the Commission by the filing of a written notice with the
secretary of the Commission. This notice shall contain the time and place of the special meeting and a brief statement of the business to be submitted
for the consideration of the Commission at such special meeting and no other business shall be considered at such special meeting. Notice of special
meetings to Commissioners shall be given orally or in writing at least twenty four (24) hours in advance of the meeting. (1994 Code)
2-4-4: DUTIES:
To make recommendations to the Village Board of Trustees on matters pertaining to:
A. The presentation and enhancement of the Veterans Memorial.
B. The interactivity of the Veterans Memorial and the community.
C. All events to be held at the Veterans Memorial.
D. Funding for the maintenance of and/or addition to the Veterans Memorial. (1994 Code)
2-4-5: ADOPTION OF PROCEDURAL RULES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 42/498
The Commission may adopt bylaws containing procedural rules and such substantive regulations as it deems necessary to accomplish the purposes of
this Chapter. (1994 Code)
2-4-6: ALTERNATE MEMBERS:
A. The President, with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees, may appoint two (2) alternate members to the Veterans Commission. The
President shall designate a first alternate and second alternate member. Alternate members shall serve in the order of their designation and shall be
required to have the same qualifications as regular Commission members.
B. The term of the new appointments to alternate members of the Veterans Commission shall be staggered so that the term of the individual appointed as
the first alternate shall expire on June 30, 1995 and the term of the individual appointed as second alternate shall expire on July 30, 1996. All
subsequent appointments shall be for a term of two (2) years.
C. When a regular appointed member is absent for any reason from a meeting of the Veterans Commission, an alternate member shall have such powers
and may exercise such duties as a regularly appointed member.
D. When there is a vacancy of a regular member and a new appointment is to be made, the alternate member who has been designated first alternate
shall then be appointed as a regular member. When the first alternate member is appointed as a regular member, the second alternate member shall
become the first alternate member and the new appointment shall be the second alternate member. (1994 Code)
Chapter 5
BLOOD COMMISSION
2-5-1: COMMISSION CREATED:
There is hereby created the Streamwood blood commission which shall consist of a chairman and six (6) members appointed by the village president with
the consent of the village board. (1994 Code)
2-5-2: TERM:
The chairman and members of said blood commission shall serve for two (2) year staggered terms without compensation. (1994 Code; amd. Ord. 2015-7,
5-7-2015)
2-5-2-1: ALTERNATE MEMBERS:
A. The president with the advice and consent of the board of trustees may appoint two (2) alternate members of the blood commission. The president shall
designate a first alternate and second alternate member. Alternate members shall serve in the order of their designation. All appointments for alternate
members shall be for a period of two (2) years. (Ord. 2008-22, 9-4-2008; amd. Ord. 2015-7, 5-7-2015)
B. Alternate members must conform to the same requirements for residency as regular members of the blood commission.
C. When a regular appointed member is absent for any reason from a meeting of the blood commission, any alternate shall have such powers and may
exercise such duties as a regularly appointed member. (Ord. 2008-22, 9-4-2008)
2-5-3: DUTIES:
At such time as the village enters into a valid contract with an agency licensed and authorized to extract blood for medical purposes, the Streamwood
blood commission shall be authorized to perform the duties hereinafter set forth. Each such contract shall contain a provision indemnifying and holding the
village, its officers, agents and employees harmless from any and all liability which may result from the activity of said agency in extracting, storing,
processing, typing, selling or otherwise distributing whole blood or plasma received through any program of donations conducted within the corporate limits
of the village.
The duties of the Streamwood blood commission shall be as follows:
A. Encourage, through means of advertising and promotion, a blood donor program wherein citizens of the village are encouraged to give donations of
blood for medical purposes.
B. Secure and provide available space wherein blood donations can be accomplished by licensed and accredited agencies.
C. Provide clerical assistance needed to implement and carry out the program. (1994 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 43/498
2-5-4: LIMITATIONS:
The Streamwood blood commission shall be subject to the following limitations:
A. No expenditure of municipal funds shall be made by the blood commission unless said expenditures have been budgeted and approved by the village
finance director.
B. The blood commission shall not in any manner engage in the actual extraction of blood from donors. (1994 Code)
Chapter 6
BOARD OF FIRE AND POLICE COMMISSIONERS
2-6-1: BOARD CREATED:
There is hereby created a Streamwood Board of Fire and Police Commissioners, which Board shall consist of three (3) members to be appointed by the
Village President, with the consent of the Village Trustees. (1994 Code)
2-6-2: TERMS AND QUALIFICATIONS:
Members of the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners shall serve for a term of three (3) years, and of the three (3) members, one shall be a
representative citizen of the employee class, one shall be a representative citizen of the employer class and one shall be a representative citizen not
identified with either the employee or employer class. (1994 Code)
2-6-3: DUTIES:
It shall be the duty of the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners to make appointments to Police and Fire Departments of the Village where applicable,
and said Board shall conduct and hold all entrance and promotional examinations and exercise such other powers and duties as provided by law. (1994
Code)
2-6-4: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The Board of Fire and Police Commissioners shall publish a set of rules to be known as the Rules and Regulations of the Streamwood, Illinois Board of
Fire and Police Commissioners. Within those rules and regulations the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners may provide for a probationary period for
promoted positions in the Village Police Department under their jurisdiction. Said rules are hereby incorporated into and made a part of this Chapter by
reference. (1994 Code)
Chapter 7
BOARD OF TRUSTEES, POLICE PENSION FUND
2-7-1: BOARD CREATED:
There is hereby created and established a Board of Trustees of the Police Pension Fund of the Village. Such Board shall consist of five (5) members, two
(2) of said members to be appointed by the President with the concurrence of the Board of Trustees, and two (2) members of said Board shall be elected
from the Village police force by the active members of said police force, and the fifth member of said Board shall be elected from the beneficiaries of the
Police Pension Fund by such beneficiaries, according to law. (1994 Code)
2-7-2: TERM:
The members of the Board of Trustees of the Police Pension Fund shall serve for a term of two (2) years, as provided by law. (1994 Code)
2-7-3: DUTIES:
It shall be the duties of the Board of Trustees of the Police Pension Fund to manage, invest and control the Police Pension Fund and all monies pertaining
thereto, all as is set forth in detail in the applicable Illinois statutes. (1994 Code)
Chapter 8
BOARD OF TRUSTEES, FIREMEN'S PENSION FUND
2-8-1: BOARD CREATED:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 44/498
There is hereby created and established a board of trustees of the firemen's pension fund of the village. Beginning on the third Monday in April 2006, the
membership of the board shall consist of five (5) members. Two (2) members of the board shall be appointed by the village president. Two (2) members of
the board shall be active participants of the pension fund who are elected from the active participants of the fund. One member of the board shall be a
person who is retired under the firemen's pension fund act of 1919 or under 40 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/4-121 who is elected from persons retired
under said act or under 40 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/14-121. (Ord. 2006-18, 4-6-2006)
2-8-2: TERM:
The term of office of each member of a board established on or before the third Monday in April 2006 shall terminate on the third Monday in April 2006 but
all incumbent members shall continue to exercise all of the powers and be subject to all of the duties of a member of the board until all the new members
of the board take office. Each member of the board of trustees of the firemen's pension fund shall hold office for the terms provided by the state of Illinois
pension law, 40 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/14-121, as amended. (Ord. 2006-18, 4-6-2006)
2-8-3: DUTIES:
It shall be the duties of the board of trustees of the firemen's pension fund of the village of Streamwood to manage, invest, and control the firemen's
pension fund and all monies pertaining thereto, all as set forth in detail in the applicable Illinois statutes. (Ord. 2006-18, 4-6-2006)
Chapter 9
STREAMWOOD EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY
2-9-1: ESTABLISHMENT:
There is hereby created the Village of Streamwood Emergency Management Agency ("SEMA"), established to prevent, minimize, repair damage and
alleviate injury resulting from disaster caused by enemy attack, sabotage or other hostile actions or from natural or man-made disaster, all in accordance
with "The Illinois Emergency Management Agency Act", as amended. The SEMA shall consist of the Director, who shall be appointed by the Village
President, and serve as SEMA Director, and the Coordinator, as designated by the Director. The Coordinator shall be under the authority, command, and
control of the SEMA Director. (Ord. 2018-11, 4-19-2018)
2-9-2: DIRECTOR:
A. Duties: Under the supervision of the Village President, the Director shall have the responsibility for the management of Streamwood Emergency
Management Agency, including the Coordinator and support staff. (Ord. 2018-11, 4-19-2018)
2-9-2-1: VACANCY IN OFFICE:
In the event of the absence, temporary absence, resignation, death, or inability to serve as the Director of SEMA, the Village President or individual
designated by the Village President, shall be and act as Director until a new appointment is made as provided in this chapter or until the appointed Director
is able to resume the role of Director. (Ord. 2018-11, 4-19-2018)
2-9-2-2: COORDINATOR:
A. Duties: Under the supervision of the Director of SEMA, the Coordinator shall have direct responsibility for the planning, coordination, and operation of
emergency management activity in the Village. The Coordinator shall maintain liaison with the State and Federal authorities and the authorities of other
nearby political subdivisions to ensure the most effective operation of the emergency operations plan. The Coordinator's duties shall include, but not be
limited to, the following:
1. Volunteer Recruitment: Coordinating the recruitment of volunteer personnel and agencies to augment the personnel and facilities of the Village for
emergency management purposes.
2. Use Of Village Facilities: Development and coordination of plans for the immediate use of all Village facilities, equipment, manpower and other
resources for the purposes of minimizing or preventing damage to persons and property and protecting and restoring to usefulness governmental
services and public utilities necessary for the public health, safety and welfare.
3. Use Of Buildings: Negotiating and concluding agreements with owners or persons in control of buildings or other property for the use of such
buildings or other property for emergency management purposes, and designating suitable buildings as public shelters.
4. Public Practice Alerts: Conducting public practice alerts to ensure the efficient operation of emergency management regulations, procedures, and
operations.
5. Coordinating Public And Private Agencies: Coordinating the activity of all other public and private agencies engaged in any emergency management
activity.
6. Assuming Authority And Conducting Activities: Assuming such authority and conducting such activities as the Director may direct to promote and
execute the emergency operations plan.
7. Vacancy In Office: In the event of the absence, temporary absence, resignation, death, or inability to serve as the Coordinator, the Director or any
person designated by the Director, shall be and act as Coordinator or Temporary Coordinator in the case of an absence or temporary absence until a
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 45/498
new appointment is made as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 2018-11, 4-19-2018)
2-9-3: MEMBERSHIP WITH THE JOINT EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT SYSTEM:
The Village is a member of the joint emergency management system ("JEMS"), a regional agreement between neighboring municipalities for emergency
management support. The joint emergency management system is overseen by a governing board which is composed of its Chief Administrative Officer,
or its designee, and members from each of the member communities. The board is led by a Chairman and Vice-Chairman, who are elected by the board
members. As a member of JEMS, the Village of Streamwood shall coordinate its Emergency Management Program activities with the JEMS Coordinator
in order to establish regional standardization. (Ord. 2018-11, 4-19-2018)
2-9-4: JOINT EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT SYSTEM COORDINATOR:
A. Duties: In cooperation with the Director, the JEMS Coordinator will have the responsibility for planning, training and exercise coordination of the
emergency management activity in the Village. The JEMS Coordinator's duties shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
1. Maintain, coordinate, and recommend for adoption or amendment, an emergency operations plan (EOP).
2. Be on-call 24-hours a day, seven (7) days a week.
3. Monitor news and severe weather.
4. Maintain, update and monitor the subscriber community continuity of operations plan (COOP).
5. Serve as the liaison for subscribers to State emergency management agencies and emergency service and disaster agencies.
6. Act as the NIMS Compliance Officer under the national incident management system.
7. Ensure that the subscribers' emergency operations centers (EOCs) are maintained and ready.
8. Provide training on the use of EOC equipment and readiness including regional disaster exercises to measure the subscriber's preparedness to
respond to emergencies and to develop action plans to address any deficiencies identified during such exercises.
9. Oversee the maintenance and evaluation of the emergency warning systems including the outdoor warning sirens or additional warning systems in
place in each subscriber community.
10. Assist in the preparation and distribution of incident action plans for planned special events. (Ord. 2018-11, 4-19-2018)
2-9-5: FUNCTIONS:
SEMA shall perform such EMA functions within the Village as shall be prescribed in and by the State of Illinois EMA plan and program prepared by the
Governor, and, in addition, shall perform such duties outside the corporate limits of the Village as may be required pursuant to any mutual aid agreement
with any other political subdivision, municipality, or quasi-municipality entered into as provided in "The Illinois Emergency Management Agency Act", as
amended. (Ord. 2018-11, 4-19-2018)
2-9-6: SERVICE AS MOBILE SUPPORT TEAM:
All or any member of the SEMA organization may be designated as a member of a mobile support team created by the Director of the State of Illinois
Emergency Management Agency, as provided by law. The leader of the mobile support team shall be designated by the Director of SEMA. Any member of
a mobile support team, who is a Village employee or officer while serving on call to duty by the Governor, or the State Director, shall receive the
compensation and have the powers, duties, rights and immunities incident to such employment or office. Any such member who is not a paid officer or
employee of the Village, while so serving, shall receive from the State of Illinois, reasonable compensation as provided by law. (Ord. 2018-11, 4-19-2018)
2-9-7: AGREEMENT WITH OTHER POLITICAL SUBDIVISIONS:
The Director of SEMA may negotiate mutual aid agreements with other cities, villages or political subdivisions of the State of Illinois, but no such
agreement shall be effective until it has been approved by the President and Board of Trustees of the Village of Streamwood. (Ord. 2018-11, 4-19-2018)
2-9-8: EMERGENCY ACTION:
If the Governor proclaims that a disaster or state of emergency exists in the event of actual enemy attack upon the United States or the occurrence within
the State of Illinois of a major disaster resulting from enemy sabotage or other hostile action, or from man-made or natural disaster, it shall be the duty of
SEMA to cooperate fully with the State of Illinois EMA and with the Governor in the exercise of emergency powers as provided by law. (Ord. 2018-11, 4-
19-2018)
2-9-9: EMERGENCY POWERS AND DUTIES:
A. Village President Emergency Power: The Village President may exercise the emergency power and authority necessary to fulfill the general powers and
duties as defined by this chapter. The judgment of the Village President shall be the sole criteria necessary to invoke emergency powers provided by
this chapter and other appropriate authorities. The Village Board of Trustees may convene to perform its legislative and administrative powers as the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 46/498
situation demands and shall receive reports relative to emergency management activities. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as abridging or
curtailing the powers or restrictions of the Village Board of Trustees.
B. Regulations As Deemed Necessary: During any period when disaster threatens or when the Village has been struck by disaster, within the definition of
this chapter, the Village President or the Director of SEMA at the direction of the Village President, may promulgate such regulations as deemed
necessary to protect life and property and preserve critical resources. Such regulations may include, but shall not be limited to, the following:
1. Regulations prohibiting or restricting the movement of vehicles in order to facilitate the work of emergency management personnel or to facilitate the
mass movement of persons from critical areas within or without the Village.
2. Regulations pertaining to the movement of persons from areas deemed to be hazardous or vulnerable to disaster.
3. Such other regulations necessary to preserve public peace, health and safety.
4. Regulations promulgated in accordance with the authority above will be given widespread circulation by proclamations published and expressed by
newspaper, radio, televised media and social media.
C. Emergency Locations; Governmental Powers: Whenever, due to an emergency resulting from the effects of natural or manmade disaster or hostile act
or the anticipated effects thereof, it becomes imprudent, inexpedient or impossible to conduct the affairs of local government at the regular or usual
place or places, the Village Board may meet at any place within or without the Village limits in accordance with the Open Meetings Act1 and shall
proceed to establish and designate by ordinance, resolution, or other manner alternate or substitute sites or places as the emergency temporary
location or locations of government where all, or any part of, the public business may be transacted and conducted during the emergency situation.
D. Conducting Public Business At Temporary Location: During the period when the public business is being conducted at the emergency temporary
location or locations, the Governing Body and other officers of the Village shall have and possess and shall exercise, at such location or locations, all of
the executive, legislative, and judicial powers and functions conferred upon such body and officers by or under the laws of this State. Such powers and
functions may be exercised in the light of the exigencies of the emergency situation, and all acts of such body and officers shall be valid and binding.
E. Continuity In Office: In the event that the Village President is unavailable, the powers of the office shall be exercised and duties shall be discharged by
the designated emergency interim successors, as provided for in this Code and laws of this State, in the order specified. The emergency interim
successor shall exercise the powers and discharge the duties of the office to which designated until such time as a vacancy which may exist shall be
filled in accordance with the Constitution or statutes; or until the officer, or their deputy or a preceding emergency interim successor, again becomes
available to exercise the powers and discharge the duties of the office. Based on the authority of the Emergency Interim Executive Succession Act2,
the line of succession for the executive branch of government shall be: Village President, Chairperson of the Finance Committee and senior or second
most senior Trustee.
In the event that, at the time or as a consequence of any disaster or occurrence described in this chapter, the Village President and the three (3)
successors on file with the Village shall be absent, killed, or rendered incapable of performing the duties of such office, such office shall be filled until
such time as a successor can be selected in the manner prescribed by law, in the following line of succession: the remaining members of the Village
Board based on tenure, the Village Manager, the Chief of Police, the Fire Chief, the Finance Director and the Director of Public Works. In the event
that, at the time or as a consequence of any disaster or occurrence described in this chapter, the incumbent of any Municipal office or position shall be
absent, killed, or rendered incapable of performing the duties of such office or position, such office or position shall be filled, until such time as a
successor can be selected in the manner prescribed by law, by appointment by the Village President with the advice and consent of the Board of
Trustees. The Village President shall give due consideration to the list of three (3) successors on file with the Village but is not required to select from
said list. (Ord. 2018-11, 4-19-2018)
2-9-10: EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY AND EMERGENCY PLANS:
A. A comprehensive emergency operations plan shall be adopted and maintained by resolution of the Corporate Authorities upon the recommendations of
the Village President. In the preparation of the plan as it pertains to Village organization, it is the intent that the services, equipment, facilities and
personnel of all existing departments and agencies shall be utilized to the fullest extent. When approved, it shall be the duty of the Director of SEMA, all
departments, and all employees to perform the functions assigned by the plan and to maintain their portion of the plan in a current state of readiness at
all times. The emergency operations plan shall be considered supplementary to this chapter and have the effect of law whenever a disaster has been
proclaimed.
B. Each department head assigned responsibility in the emergency operations plan shall be responsible for carrying out all duties and functions assigned
therein. Duties will include the organization and training of assigned Village employees and volunteers.
C. The Village President shall prescribe in a continuity of operations and continuity of government plan those positions within the disaster organization, in
addition to their own, for which lines of succession are necessary. In each instance, the responsible person will designate and keep on file with the
Village a current list of three (3) persons as successors to the position. The list will be in order of succession and will as nearly as possible designate
persons best capable of carrying out all assigned duties and functions.
D. When a required competency or skill for a disaster function is not available within the Village government, the Village President or Acting Village
President is authorized to seek assistance from persons outside of government. The assignment of duties, when of a supervisory nature, shall also
grant authority for the persons so assigned to carry out such duties prior to, during, and after a disaster. The Village may accept such services from
persons outside of government on a volunteer basis. Such persons shall be enrolled as emergency management volunteers in cooperation with the
heads of departments affected.
E. Some of the duties ascribed to the Village President in this section will ordinarily be handled as a matter of routine by SEMA's Director or Coordinator,
but the responsibility and authority stem from and remain with the Village President. (Ord. 2018-11, 4-19-2018)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 47/498
2-9-11: COMPENSATION:
Members of SEMA who are paid employees or officers of the Village, if called for training by the State of Illinois Director of EMA, shall receive for the time
spent in such training, the same rate of pay as is attached to the position held; members who are not such Village employees or officers shall receive for
such training time, such compensation as may be established by the President and Village Board of Trustees. (Ord. 2018-11, 4-19-2018)
2-9-12: REIMBURSEMENT BY STATE:
The Finance Director of the Village may receive and allocate to the appropriate fund any reimbursement by the State of Illinois to the Village for expenses
incident to training members of SEMA as prescribed by the State Director of EMA, compensation for services and expenses of members of a mobile
support team while serving outside the Village in response to a call by the Governor or State Director of EMA, as provided by law, and any other
reimbursement made by the State incident to SEMA activities as provided by law. (Ord. 2018-11, 4-19-2018)
2-9-13: PURCHASES AND EXPENDITURES:
The Village Board of Trustees may, on recommendation of the Director of SEMA, authorize any purchase or contracts necessary to place the Village in a
position to combat effectively any enemy attack upon the United States or the occurrence within the State of Illinois of a major disaster resulting from
enemy sabotage or other hostile action, or from man-made or natural disasters and to protect the public health and safety, protect property, and provide
emergency assistance to victims in the case of such disaster.
In the event of enemy caused or other disaster, the Director of SEMA is authorized, on behalf of the Village, to procure such services, supplies, equipment
or material as may be necessary for such purposes, in view of the emergency without regard to the statutory procedures or formalities normally prescribed
by law pertaining to Village contracts or obligations, as authorized by the Illinois Emergency Management Agency Act3, as amended; provided, that if the
Village President is available at such time, the SEMA Director shall act subject to the direction and restrictions imposed by the Village President. (Ord.
2018-11, 4-19-2018)
2-9-14: OATH:
Every person appointed to serve in any capacity in the EMA organization shall, before entering upon his or her duties, subscribe to the following oath:
I (state your name) of the Emergency Management Agency of the Village of Streamwood do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support and defend
and bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of the state of Illinois, and the territory, institutions and
facilities thereof, both public and private, against all enemies, foreign and domestic; that I take this obligation freely, without any mental reservation or
purpose of evasion; and that I will well and faithfully discharge the duties upon which I am about to enter, and I do further swear (or affirm) that I do not
advocate, nor am I nor have I been a member of any political party or organization that advocates the overthrow of the government of the United States or
of this state by force or violence; and that during such time as I am affiliated with the Village of Streamwood EMA organization, I will not advocate nor
become a member of any political party or organization that advocates the overthrow of the government of the United States or of this state by force or
violence.
(Ord. 2018-11, 4-19-2018)
2-9-15: OFFICE:
The Village Manager is authorized to designate space in any Village building or elsewhere, as may be provided for by the Village President for the SEMA
organization as its office. (Ord. 2018-11, 4-19-2018)
2-9-16: LOCAL DISASTER EMERGENCIES:
A local disaster emergency may be proclaimed only by the Village President as provided by the Illinois Emergency Management Agency Act, as amended.
A local disaster emergency shall not be continued or renewed for a period in excess of seven (7) days except by or with the consent of the Village Board.
Any order or proclamation declaring, continuing or terminating a local disaster shall be given prompt and general publicity and shall be filed promptly with
the Village Clerk. It shall be the duty of SEMA to cooperate fully with the Village President in the exercise of emergency powers as provided by law during
the time of a local disaster emergency. (Ord. 2018-11, 4-19-2018)
Chapter 10
CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION
2-10-1: COMMISSION CREATED:
There is hereby created and established for the Village a Civil Service Commission, which shall operate in all respects as provided in "An Act to Regulate
the Civil Service of Cities", sections 1 to 41, approved March 20, 1895, as amended. (1994 Code)
2-10-2: MEMBERSHIP, TERMS:
The Village President, with the approval of the Board of Trustees, shall appoint three (3) persons who shall constitute and be known as the Civil Service
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 48/498
Commission: one for three (3) years; one for two (2) years; and one for one year from the time of appointment and until their respective successors are
appointed and qualify. In every year thereafter the Village President, with the approval of the Board of Trustees, shall in like manner appoint one person as
the successor of the Commissioner whose term shall expire in that year to serve as such Commissioner for three (3) years and until his successor is
appointed and qualified. Two (2) Commissioners shall constitute a quorum. All appointments to the Commission, both original and to fill vacancies, shall be
made so that not more than two (2) members shall at the time of appointment be members of the same political party. The Commissioners shall hold no
other lucrative office of employment under the United States, the State or any Municipal corporation or political division thereof. Each Commissioner,
before entering upon the duties of his office, shall take the oath prescribed by the Constitution of the State. (1994 Code)
2-10-3: REMOVAL FROM OFFICE; VACANCIES:
The Village President may, in his discretion, remove any Commissioner for incompetence, neglect of duties or malfeasance in office. The Village President
shall, within ten (10) days, report in writing any such removal to the Board of Trustees with the reasons therefor. Any vacancy in the office of Commissioner
shall be filled by appointment by the Village President with the approval of the Board of Trustees. (1994Code)
2-10-4: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The Civil Service Commission shall make rules to carry out the purpose of the Civil Service Act and for examinations, appointments and removals, in
accordance with its provisions, and the Commission may from time to time make changes in the original rules. All rules made as herein provided and all
changes therein shall forthwith be printed for distribution by the Commission. (1994 Code)
2-10-5: CHIEF EXAMINER:
The Civil Service Commission shall employ a chief examiner, whose duties it shall be, under the direction of the Commission, to superintend any
examinations held in the Village under the Civil Service Act and who shall perform such other duties as the Commission shall prescribe. The chief
examiner shall be ex officio secretary of the Commission under the direction of such Commission and as such secretary shall keep the minutes of its
proceedings, preserve all reports made to it, keep a record of all examinations held under its direction and perform such other duties as the Commission
shall prescribe. (1994 Code)
2-10-6: APPROPRIATION FOR EXPENSES, MEETING ROOM:
A sufficient sum of money shall be appropriated by the Board of Trustees each year to carry out the provisions of the Civil Service Act. The Village
President shall cause suitable rooms to be provided for the Civil Service Commission at the expense of the Village. (1994 Code)
Chapter 11
NATURAL RESOURCE CONSERVANCY COMMISSION
2-11-1: COMMISSION CREATED:
There is hereby created a commission which shall be known as the village of Streamwood "natural resource conservancy commission", hereinafter
referred to as "commission". (Ord. 2009-15, 6-18-2009)
2-11-2: INTENT AND PURPOSE:
It shall be the intent and purpose of the natural resource conservancy commission to be a recommending commission only to make recommendations to
the village board of trustees on programs and plans to conserve and protect natural resources, educate residents on ways to protect the environment and
conserve energy. (Ord. 2009-15, 6-18-2009)
2-11-3: COMMISSIONERS, APPOINTMENT, TERMS, VACANCY, QUORUM:
A. The natural resource conservancy commission shall consist of five (5) voting members, appointed by the village president with the advice and consent
of the board of trustees. The five (5) members of the commission shall be appointed to overlapping terms. Three (3) members shall be appointed for
three (3) years, two (2) members shall be appointed for two (2) years. Thereafter, their successors shall be appointed for two (2) year terms. (Ord.
2009-15, 6-18-2009)
B. The natural resource conservancy commission shall also include one ex officio nonvoting member who shall be the assistant village engineer. (Ord.
2009-15, 6-18-2009; amd. Ord. 2015-7, 5-7-2015)
C. Persons selected to serve on the natural resource conservancy commission shall possess training, interest or experience in such areas as ecology,
biology, environmental law, education, pollution control, engineering, science and public health.
D. If for any reason a commissioner is unable to serve, the president, with the advice and consent of the board of trustees, shall appoint a replacement to
fill the unexpired term.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 49/498
E. Any three (3) commissioners shall constitute a quorum. (Ord. 2009-15, 6-18-2009)
2-11-4: ALTERNATE MEMBERS:
A. The president, with the advice and consent of the board of trustees, may appoint two (2) alternate members of the commission. The president shall
designate a first alternate and second alternate. Alternate members shall serve in the order of their designation. All appointments for alternate
members shall be for a period of two (2) years.
B. When a regular appointed member is absent for any reason from a meeting of the commission, any alternate shall have such powers and may exercise
such duties as a regularly appointed member.
C. When there is a vacancy of a regular member and a new appointment is to be made, the alternate member who has been designated first alternate
shall then be appointed as a regular member. When the first alternate member is appointed as a regular member, the second alternate member shall
become the first alternate member and the new appointment shall be the second alternate member. (Ord. 2009-15, 6-18-2009)
2-11-5: ADVISORY MEMBERS:
The president, with the advice and consent of the board of trustees, may appoint nonvoting advisory members to the commission. Advisory members shall
possess training, interest or experience in such areas as ecology, biology, environmental law, education, pollution control, engineering, science and public
health. (Ord. 2009-15, 6-18-2009)
2-11-6: MEETINGS:
A. Regular Meetings: Regular meetings of the commission shall be held at the call of the chairman, but not less frequently than once per quarter. (Ord.
2009-15, 6-18-2009)
B. Special Meetings: The chairman or any three (3) commissioners may call special meetings of the commission by the filing of a written notice with the
secretary of the commission. This notice shall contain the time and place of the special meeting and a brief statement of the business to be submitted
for the consideration of the commission at such special meeting, and no other business shall be considered at such special meeting. Notice of special
meetings to commissioners shall be given orally or in writing at least forty eight (48) hours in advance of the meeting. (Ord. 2009-15, 6-18-2009; amd.
Ord. 2015-7, 5-7-2015)
2-11-7: DUTIES:
It shall be the duty of the commission to make recommendations to the village board of trustees on programs and plans to conserve and protect the
natural resources, educate residents on ways to protect the environment and conserve energy, including, but not limited to:
A. Conservation And Protection:
1. Conduct and maintain an inventory of the natural resources of the village.
2. Study, investigate, develop and update annually a written plan for the care, preservation, pruning, planting, replanting, removal or disposition of trees
and shrubs in or upon all village owned public property.
3. Review and comment on long term management plans, as such plans are developed by village staff with respect to areas of specific interest,
including, but not limited to, Poplar Creek, village tree conservancy areas, and village wetland detention facilities.
B. Education And Outreach:
1. Develop educational materials to help foster a better understanding of the balance required to sustain the environment in a built community,
including materials regarding the sustenance of water quality and natural habitats.
2. Conduct annual workshops with area schools, in conjunction with Earth Day/Arbor Day celebrations to promote sustainability.
3. Provide information and ideas for articles for the village newsletter to promote sound resource use, environmental protection and energy
conservation.
4. Facilitate an annual exposition or workshop for residents and businesses to improve energy use, consumption and preservation of natural resources.
5. Serve as a liaison between the village and other governmental, public and private agencies such as the Streamwood park district, school district U-
46, Chicago Metropolitan agency for planning, Poplar Creek watershed planning group, Chicago Wilderness, North Cook County soils, and others to
encourage development of programs and management of land that supports recognition and conservation of native species and natural ecological
communities, and the improvement and enhancement of the environment.
C. Energy Conservation Strategies:
1. Assess and recommend strategies to address deficiencies obtained from an annual energy audit of village owned property.
2. Devise methods of promoting energy efficiency and energy conservation for village government, residents and businesses.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 50/498
3. Investigate and recommend the best methods of maintaining an environment beneficial to the village and as free from pollution as is practical and is
reasonable.
4. Promote the use of alternatives to traditional energy consumption and resource management.
5. Devise methods to promote recycling and reduce waste in the village.
6. Advise village board regarding solid waste management related matters generally in the village. (Ord. 2009-15, 6-18-2009)
2-11-8: ADOPTION OF PROCEDURAL RULES:
The commission may adopt bylaws containing procedural rules and such substantive regulations as it deems necessary to accomplish the purposes of this
chapter. (Ord. 2009-15, 6-18-2009)
Chapter 12
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
(Rep. by Ord. 2015-7, 5-7-2015)
Chapter 13
FOREIGN FIRE INSURANCE BOARD1
2-13-1: BOARD CREATED:
In accordance with 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-10-1, there shall be established a board known as the foreign fire insurance board. (Ord. 2004-31, 5-
20-2004)
2-13-2: MEMBERS:
Members of the fire department shall elect from among the members of the fire department a president, vice president, secretary and treasurer, and
trustee as officers of the foreign fire insurance board. Initial elections to the board shall be held on June 3, 2004, with elections to be held annually
thereafter on the first Monday of April. (Ord. 2004-31, 5-20-2004)
2-13-3: FOREIGN FIRE INSURANCE TAX FUNDS:
The municipal treasurer shall pay upon receipt the sums received pursuant to 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 11-10-1 and 11-10-2 to the treasurer of the
foreign fire insurance board. (Ord. 2004-31, 5-20-2004)
2-13-4: POWERS AND DUTIES:
A. The board shall be empowered to adopt rules and regulations for the efficient and effective management of the money received by the treasurer.
B. The treasurer of the fund shall give a sufficient bond to the village of Streamwood. This bond shall be approved by the village president of Streamwood.
C. The treasurer of the foreign fire insurance board shall pay out the money upon the order of the fire insurance board for the maintenance, use and
benefit of the department.
D. The foreign fire insurance board shall adopt bylaws for the management and administration of the foreign fire insuranceboard; the expenditure of
foreign fire insurance tax funds delivered to the foreign fire insurance board; and, the audit of the books and accounts of the foreign fire insurance
board. The bylaws shall not be inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter, 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-10-1 et seq., (1989) and, other
relevant laws of the state of Illinois. (Ord. 2004-31, 5-20-2004)
Title 3
BUSINESS AND LICENSE REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
GENERAL LICENSE PROVISIONS
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 51/498
3-1-1: APPLICATIONS FOR LICENSES AND PERMITS:
Applications for all licenses and permits required by village ordinance shall be made in writing to the village clerk, in the absence of provisions to the
contrary, each application shall state the name of the applicant, the permit or license desired, the location to be used, if any, the time covered and the fee
to be paid; and each application shall contain such additional information as may be needed for the proper guidance of the village officials in the issuing of
the permit or license applied for. Each application for license shall be accompanied by a license fee as required by village ordinance. A separate license
shall be secured and a separate license fee paid for each separate site in the village in which the business, occupation or trade of such license applicant is
to be conducted. No license shall be issued until the license fee has been paid in full. (1994 Code)
3-1-2: PERSONS SUBJECT TO LICENSING:
Whenever in this code a license is required for the maintenance, operation or conduct of any business or establishment, or for doing business or engaging
in any activity or occupation, any person or corporation shall be subject to the requirement if by himself or through an agent, employee or partner, he holds
himself forth as being engaged in the business or occupation; or solicits patronage therefor, actively or passively; or performs or attempts to perform any
part of such business or occupation in the village. (1994 Code)
3-1-3: LICENSE YEAR:
The license year for the village shall begin on January 1 and end on December 31 of each year, unless otherwise noted. (1994 Code)
3-1-4: FORMS FOR LICENSES AND PERMITS:
Forms for all licenses and permits, and applications therefor, shall be prepared by the village clerk and may be kept on file. (1994 Code)
3-1-5: SIGNATURES OF VILLAGE OFFICIALS:
Each license or permit issued shall bear the signatures of the village president and the clerk, in the absence of any provisions to the contrary. (1994 Code)
3-1-6: INVESTIGATION OF APPLICANTS:
Upon the receipt of an application for a license or permit, where provisions of this code necessitate an inspection or investigation before the issuance of
such permit or license, the clerk shall refer such application to the proper officer for making such investigation within forty eight (48) hours of the time of
such receipt. The officer charged with the duty of making the investigation or inspection shall make a report thereon, favorable or otherwise, within ten (10)
days after receiving the application or a copy thereof. The building inspector shall make or cause to be made any such inspections relative to the
construction of buildings or other structures. All other investigations, except where otherwise provided, shall be made by the chief of police or by some
other officer designated by the village president and the board of trustees. (1994 Code)
3-1-7: LICENSE AND PERMIT FEES:
A. In the absence of provision to the contrary, all fees and charges for licenses and permits shall be paid in advance at the time application therefor is
made to the Clerk. When an applicant has not engaged in the business until after July 1, the license fee shall be prorated by half. Except as otherwise
provided, all license fees shall become a part of the Corporate Fund. Fees for business licenses not specifically specified in this Code shall be one
hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per year; provided however, said fees shall be subject to change by the President and Board of Trustees when a
designation for said business is established.
B. Any business in operation in the Village of Streamwood, on January 1, which has not properly renewed their business license by March 31, shall incur a
penalty equal to fifty percent (50%) of the original license fee detailed herein. (Ord. 2003-52, 11-20-2003)
3-1-8: TERMINATION OF LICENSE:
A. All annual licenses shall terminate on December 31, where no provision to the contrary is made. The Village Clerk shall mail to all licensees of the
Village a statement of the time of expiration of the license held by the licensee; if an annual license, three (3) weeks prior to the date of such expiration.
Provided, that a failure to send out such notice, or the failure of the licensee to receive such statement shall not excuse the licensee from failure to
obtain a new license, or a renewal thereof, nor shall it be a defense in an action for operation without a license.
B. No license shall be renewed if the licensee has failed to pay any judgment or fine due and owing to the Village or if the licensee is in arrears in the
payment of any penalty, tax or other indebtedness or charge due and owing to the Village. (Ord. 2018-3, 1-18-2018)
3-1-9: BUILDING AND PREMISES:
No license shall be issued for the conduct of any business, and no permit shall be issued for any thing or act, if the premises and the building to be used
for the purpose do not fully comply with the requirements of this Code relating thereto. No such license or permit shall be issued for the conduct of any
business or performance of any act which would involve a violation of the zoning ordinance of the Village. (1994 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 52/498
3-1-10: CHANGE OF LOCATION:
The location of any licensed business or occupation, or any permitted act, may be changed, provided ten (10) days' notice thereof is given to the Village
Clerk, in the absence of any provision to the contrary; provided, that the building and zoning requirements of this Code are complied with. (1994 Code)
3-1-11: NUISANCE PROHIBITED:
No business, licensed or not, shall be so conducted or operated as to amount to a nuisance in fact. (1994 Code)
3-1-12: INSPECTIONS; COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
A. Whenever inspections of the premises used for or in connection with the operation of a licensed business or occupation are provided for or required by
Village ordinance, or are reasonably necessary to secure compliance with any ordinance provisions or to detect violations thereof, it shall be the duty of
the licensee, or the person in charge of the premises to be inspected, to admit thereto for the purpose of making the inspection any officer or employee
of the Village who is authorized or directed to make such inspection at any reasonable time that admission is requested.
B. Whenever an analysis of any commodity or material is reasonably necessary to secure conformance with any Village ordinance provision or to detect
violations thereof, it shall be the duty of the licensee of the Village whose business is governed by such provision to give to any authorized officer or
employee of the Village requesting the same, sufficient samples of such material or commodity for such analysis, upon request.
C. In addition to any other penalty which may be provided, the Village President may revoke the license of any licensed proprietor of any licensed business
in the Village who refuses to permit any such officer or employee who is authorized to make such inspection or take such samples to make the
inspection, or take adequate samples of the same commodity, or who interferes with such officer or employee while in the performance of his duty in
making such inspection. Provided, that no license shall be revoked for such cause unless written demand is made upon the licensee or person in
charge of the premises, in the name of the Village, stating that such inspection or sample is desired at the time it is sought to make the inspection or
obtain the sample. (1994 Code)
3-1-13: POSTING LICENSE:
It shall be the duty of any person conducting a licensed business in the Village to keep his license posted at all times in a prominent place on the premises
used for such business. (1994 Code)
3-1-14: VEHICLE TAG:
Whenever the number of vehicles used is the basis of a license fee, the Village Clerk shall furnish each licensee with a tag or sticker for each vehicle
covered by the license, and such tag or sticker shall be posted in a conspicuous place on each such vehicle while it is in use. (1994 Code)
3-1-15: SUSPENSION, REVOCATION OF LICENSE OR PERMIT:
A. Suspension Of Business Operations:
1. When the conduct or operation of any commercial establishment or activity, whether licensed or unlicensed, shall constitute a nuisance in fact and a
clear and present danger to the public health, safety, or general welfare, the Village Manager shall be authorized to summarily order the cessation of
business and the closing of the premises for a period not to exceed ten (10) days.
2. Within eight (8) days after a license or permit is suspended, the Village Manager shall call a hearing as provided in subsection D of this section for
the purpose of determining whether or not the license or permit should be revoked or further suspended.
B. Revocation Of License:
1. Licenses issued by the Village may be suspended for up to thirty (30) days or revoked in addition to any fine imposed by the Village Manager after
notice and hearing as provided in subsection D of this section for any of the following causes:
a. Any fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement contained in the application for the license;
b. Failure by the applicant to comply with any provision of this Code or any Statutes of the State relating to the business, occupation, or activity of the
license;
c. Conviction of the applicant of any felony or of a misdemeanor where such conviction indicates their inability to operate a safe, honest, and
legitimate business operation within the Village; (Ord. 2004-40, 7-15-2004)
d. Failure of the licensee or permittee to pay, after notice, any judgment, fine, penalty, tax or other indebtedness or charge due and owing to the
Village; (Ord. 2018-3, 1-18-2018)
e. Any deceptive trade practices as defined by State or Federal law or regulation and shall comply with all applicable laws and regulations regarding
consumer protection and deceptive trade practices;
f. Failure to comply with all Village Zoning, Building, Fire and Health Codes, and ordinances, as well as all other applicable Village codes,
ordinances, rules, and regulations and failure to maintain the premises in good repair, free of litter and debris and in a safe condition for
employees, customers and other persons present therein or thereon;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 53/498
g. Any other violation of any Village ordinance, resolution or regulation; or
h. Refusal to permit an inspection or sampling or any interference with a duly authorized Village officer or employee while in the reasonable
performance of his duties in making such inspections.
C. Prosecution And Other Penalties: Such revocation, if ordered, shall not preclude prosecution and imposition of any other penalties provided for the
violation of other applicable provisions of this chapter or other ordinances of the Village. No person whose license has been revoked shall be eligible
for a new license during the period for which the original license was originally issued.
D. Hearing Procedures:
1. Notice:
a. Notice of a hearing shall set forth specifically the grounds of the complaint and the time and place of the hearing.
b. Such notice shall be served by certified mail (return receipt requested) to the licensee at his last known residence or business address, at least
five (5) days prior to the date set for the hearing or personally served on the licensee at least three (3) days prior to the date set for the hearing.
c. If the licensee shall request a continuance in the date of the hearing, any suspension in effect shall be continued until the continued hearing date.
d. All pleadings, motions, notices, and orders shall be filed with the village clerk.
2. Procedural Rules:
a. Prior to the beginning of any hearing, the village manager may adopt additional procedural rules as may be necessary for that hearing.
b. At the hearing, the licensee shall be permitted counsel and shall have the right to respond, present evidence, and cross examine witnesses.
c. All proceedings shall be stenographically or electronically recorded.
d. Irrelevant, immaterial, or unduly repetitious evidence shall be excluded. The rules of evidence as applied in civil cases in the circuit courts of the
state shall be followed. Evidence not admissible under those rules of evidence may be admitted, however, if it is of a type commonly relied upon by
reasonably prudent men in the conduct of their affairs. Objections to evidentiary offers may be made and shall be noted in the record.
e. No discovery procedure shall be used prior to a hearing except by leave of the village manager who shall supervise all or any part of any discovery
procedures.
f. The standard for proof for hearings shall be by the preponderance of the evidence.
g. The village manager shall preside and render the decision within a reasonable time after the conclusion of the hearing, but not later than thirty (30)
days after such conclusion. The decision shall be in writing and shall summarize the evidence and state the reasons for the decision.
3. Hearing Costs:
a. Any licensee whose license is suspended or revoked, or a business that operates without a license shall pay to the village the costs of the hearing
before the village manager. The village manager shall determine the costs incurred by the village for said hearing, including, but not limited to,
court reporter fees, the costs of transcripts or records, attorney fees, the cost of preparing the mailing notices and orders, and all other
miscellaneous expenses incurred by the village or such lesser sum as the village manager may allow.
b. The licensee shall pay said costs to the village within thirty (30) days of notification of the costs by the village manager. Failure to pay said costs
within thirty (30) days of notification is a violation of this section and may be cause for license suspension or revocation, or the levy of a fine. (Ord.
2004-40, 7-15-2004)
3-1-16: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined as set forth in section 1-4-1 of this code. A separate offense shall be deemed committed
on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (1994 Code)
3-1-17: ADDITIONAL STANDARDS FOR GRANTING ENTERTAINMENT PERMITS:
A. Permit Required: It shall be unlawful to use any land, building or structure to conduct, manage, stage, operate or exhibit any live show, theatrical
performance or other form of live entertainment other than entertainment provided at an adult entertainment cabaret or adult entertainment theater
open to the public or a segment of the public, and: 1) for admittance to which a fee is charged, directly or indirectly, or 2) which is conducted, managed,
staged, operated or exhibited as part of, incidental to or within the same building or structure as a business establishment without having first secured
an entertainment permit therefor; provided, that the provisions of this section shall not apply to those forms of live entertainment which are specifically
licensed by another section of the zoning ordinance (title 11 of this code) or another ordinance of the village. Live entertainment other than that which
is: 1) regulated under this section, 2) distinguished or characterized by its emphasis on matter depicting, describing or related to "specified sexual
activities" or "specified anatomical areas" regulated in sections of the zoning ordinance (title 11 of this code), or 3) specifically regulated by another
section of the zoning ordinance (title 11 of this code) or another ordinance of the village shall be permitted without having first secured an entertainment
permit.
B. Approval Procedure: An applicant for an entertainment permit shall comply with the requirements of this section in order to be granted an entertainment
permit.
C. Fees:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 54/498
1. All applications shall be accompanied by a filing fee of one hundred twenty five dollars ($125.00).
2. No application shall be processed until the applicant has first exhibited a receipt of the village clerk showing payment of the filing fee.
D. Contents Of Application: An application for an entertainment permit for any property shall be filed with the community development director and shall
contain the following information:
1. The name, address, and phone number of the applicant;
2. A complete disclosure of interests as provided under requirements for all applications in the administration section herein;
3. A description of the existing use of the property and of the proposed entertainment;
4. A description of the general category of the proposed type of live entertainment. Examples: concert, theatrical performance, stage show;
5. A statement certifying that the entertainment is not a type distinguished or characterized by its emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to
"specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" as those terms are defined in the zoning ordinance (section 11-2-2 of this code). No
applicant shall be required to disclose the content of the proposed live entertainment other than to disclose whether the proposed live entertainment
is subject to regulation as an adult regulated use or another use specifically regulated by ordinance of the village;
6. An estimate of the maximum number of persons expected to observe the live entertainment;
7. A site plan showing the location of all structures, parking and loading areas, open spaces, landscaping, yards, refuse and service areas, utilities,
signs and traffic accesses and circulation ways;
8. A narrative statement evaluating:
a. The environmental and economic effects that noise, glare, odor, vibration, traffic generation, or other characteristics of the proposed use will have
on nearby properties;
b. The general compatibility of the proposed use with nearby properties;
c. The compatibility of the proposed use with the village comprehensive development plan; (Ord. 1997-34, 8-21-1997)
d. Any other information the planning and zoning board reasonably may require to determine if the proposed use meets the requirements herein.
(Ord. 1997-34, 8-21-1997; amd. Ord. 2015-9, 5-7-2015)
E. Staff Review: The community development director may, together with other departments and officials of the village, prepare a written review of the
application, provided such review is completed and forwarded to the village board within ten (10) days of receipt of the application.
F. Village Board Action:
1. The village board shall not act upon any entertainment permit application until either it has received a staff report thereupon or ten (10) days have
elapsed from the filing of the application. The village board shall act upon an entertainment permit application at its next regularly scheduled meeting
in which a quorum is present held not sooner than forty eight (48) hours after the receipt of the staff report or the expiration of the ten (10) day period
for review of the application by the village staff. The village board shall not approve a permit application unless it finds that the proposed use meets
applicable entertainment permit criteria herein.
2. The board must base its approval of an entertainment permit only upon criteria set forth herein for entertainment permits.
3. The approval or denial of an entertainment permit by the village board shall be considered final action subject to judicial review.
G. Issuance Of Permit: The community development director shall issue an entertainment permit without delay after approval thereof by the village board.
H. Revocation Of Permit: An entertainment permit may be revoked by the village board:
1. If the applicant or any person making a representation on behalf of the applicant makes a misrepresentation of any fact in the application or in any
testimony before any board or commission of the village;
2. If any criteria on which the permit is approved is not complied with;
3. If after the criteria is initially complied with, compliance with such criteria is not maintained at any time;
4. If the entertainment use is not established, or a required building permit is not obtained and building started, within one year of the date the permit is
issued;
5. If the entertainment use shall cease for more than thirty (30) days;
6. If prior to the issuance of any required building permit, the entertainment use permittee transfers his interest in the property to another party.
However, no entertainment permit shall be revoked except after a public hearing by the village board after a three (3) day written notice to the
permittee affording the permittee an opportunity to appear and respond to the basis for the revocation contained in the notice. The three (3) day
notice provision shall commence on the day following delivery of the notice by certified mail, personal service or facsimile transmission.
I. Expansion Or Alteration: Any expansion, enlargement or structural alteration of a structure housing an entertainment use shall require an additional
entertainment permit.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 55/498
J. Entertainment Permit Criteria: In evaluating the suitability of a proposed entertainment permit, the village board shall examine the following
characteristics of the proposed use and its individual structures or components and shall issue the entertainment permit, provided the proposed use
meets the following criteria:
1. The land, building or structure on or in which the live entertainment is to be performed is located within the C-2, C-3, I-1 or I-2 zoning districts;
2. No loudspeakers or sound equipment shall be used for the amplification of sound to a level discernible by the public beyond the walls of the building
in which the permitted entertainment is conducted;
3. No residential structure or any other nonconforming structure shall be converted for use for live entertainment after enactment of the provisions of
this section;
4. The maximum audience expected exceeds twenty five (25) people, an on site security program, including required interior and exterior lighting plans,
shall be prepared and implemented. The security program shall include the following:
a. The presence of an on site manager during all business hours;
b. All off street parking areas and building entries serving the entertainment use shall be illuminated during all hours of operation with a lighting
system designed to provide a minimum maintained horizontal illumination of greater than one foot-candle of light on the parking surface and/or
walkway. In the event the entertainment use shares its parking with other businesses, this requirement shall only apply within a radius of one
hundred feet (100') from any entrance into the entertainment use;
c. All interior portions of the entertainment use shall be illuminated during all hours of operation with a lighting system designed to provide a minimum
maintained horizontal illumination of not less than two (2) foot-candles of light at the floor;
5. All exterior areas of entertainment use businesses, including building, landscaping and parking areas, shall be maintained in a clean and orderly
manner. Buildings and structures shall not be painted or surfaced with colors or textures or any design that would simulate a sign or advertising
message.
The village board shall deny the application for an entertainment use permit for any of the following reasons:
a. The application does not meet the standards set forth in this section;
b. An applicant or an applicant's spouse is overdue on his/her payment to the village of taxes, fees, fines, or penalties assessed against him/her or
imposed upon him/her in relation to an entertainment use;
c. An applicant has failed to provide information required on the application for the issuance of the entertainment use permit or has falsely answered
a question or request for information on the application form;
d. The premises to be used for the permitted entertainment has not been approved as being in compliance with health, fire and building codes by the
department or agency responsible under law for investigating said compliance;
e. The required application or permit fees have not been paid;
f. The proposed location is in violation of, or is not in compliance with, any of the provisions of this section.
K. Expiration: Any entertainment permit shall, by its own terms, expire one year after its issuance. (Ord. 1997-34, 8-21-1997)
L. Renewal:
1. An unrevoked entertainment permit issued pursuant to this section may be renewed upon written application to the planning and zoning board made
at least thirty (30) calendar days before the expiration date of a current, valid entertainment permit and payment of the then current nonrefundable
application fee. An entertainment permit shall remain valid pending the planning and zoning board's consideration and the village board's decision if
the permittee has timely filed the application for renewal with proper fee payment. For good cause, the planning and zoning board may extend the
time for filing a renewal application for up to ninety (90) days and may extend the prior entertainment permit pending decision on the renewal
application. (Ord. 1997-34, 8-21-1997; amd. Ord. 2015-9, 5-7-2015)
2. The application for renewal shall supply current information with respect to each category of information required in the initial application. Within
thirty (30) days from the date the renewal application for an entertainment permit is date stamped and received at the community development
department, the community development director shall determine if it is complete, and if incomplete, shall notify the applicant in writing of its specific
deficiencies. If a written determination is not provided to the applicant within thirty (30) days after it is submitted to the community development
department, the application shall be deemed complete. (Ord. 1997-34, 8-21-1997)
3. The planning and zoning board shall make its decision on an application for the renewal of an entertainment permit within three (3) months from the
date the application is deemed to be complete. The planning and zoning board may recommend to extend the entertainment permit without change
to the original conditions of approval, with amended or deleted conditions, or deny the extension.
4. All department or agency inspections, including, but not limited to, health, fire, and building inspections, which are required for the planning and
zoning board to consider the renewal of an entertainment permit, shall be completed within the time limits for planning and zoning board action
provided in this section.
5. The village board shall not act upon any entertainment permit application until either it has received a report thereupon from the planning and zoning
board or ninety (90) days have elapsed from the date the application is deemed complete. The village board shall act upon an entertainment permit
application at its next regularly scheduled meeting in which a quorum is present held not less than fourteen (14) days after: a) receipt of the planning
and zoning board's report, or b) the expiration of the ninety (90) day period from the date the application is deemed complete. The village board shall
not approve the permit renewal application unless it finds that the proposed use meets applicable entertainment permit criteria herein. The board
must base its approval of a renewal of an entertainment permit only upon criteria set forth herein for entertainment permits. The approval or denial of
a renewal of an entertainment permit by the village board shall be considered a final action subject to judicial review. (Ord. 1997-34, 8-21-1997; amd.
Ord. 2015-9, 5-7-2015)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 56/498
Chapter 2
BUSINESS LICENSES AND REGISTRATION
3-2-1: BUSINESS LICENSES REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in or carry on any business, occupation or trade for which a license is required by this code or by any village
ordinance, unless a business license has been previously obtained by said person in the manner herein set forth. (1994 Code)
3-2-2: LICENSE FEES ENUMERATED:
License fees under the terms of this chapter for the businesses, occupations, activities and uses set forth, shall be as provided herein. License fees shall
be paid annually unless otherwise provided.
Business, Occupation Or Trade License Fee
Ambulance service:
For each mobile intensive care unit or ambulance (EMTA for transport):
License fee $ 250.00
Inspection fee (per vehicle) 50.00
Amusements:
Amusement arcade 300.00
Athletic exhibitions (per day) 50.00
Automatic amusement devices (per unit) 75.00
Public places of amusement:
Automobile show (per day) 200.00
Balloon contest (per day) 150.00
Circus or sideshow 200.00
Commercial playground or amusement park 300.00
Concert, minstrel or musical entertainment given under canvas (per day) 250.00
Fireworks display (per day) 200.00
Golf driving range 300.00
Horse and dog show (per day) 150.00
Music devices/jukebox 50.00
Public dance hall 750.00
Public roller skating rink or public ice skating rink 400.00
Rodeo (per day) 300.00
Stock or poultry show (per day) 150.00
Teenage nightclub 750.00
Theater (motion picture or dramatic and cabaret):
Seating capacity 1 - 500 250.00
Seating capacity 501 - 1,000 300.00
Seating capacity over 1,000 350.00
Drive-in (outdoor) 2,000.00
Animal care and sale:
Animal kennels 250.00
Barbering and clipping 150.00
Dealers in small animals (pet shops) 150.00
Auctioneers:
Per day 75.00
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 57/498
Per year 250.00
Automotive repair establishments and/or body shops 250.00
Bakeries and bakery vehicles:
Wholesale or retail bakery 200.00
For each delivery vehicle 75.00
Banks - state and federal banks and savings and loan institutions, trust companies and other financial institutions or brokers 250.00
Barber/beauty shops 150.00
For each chair more than 3, add 20.00
Billiard and pool halls:
5 tables or less 600.00
For each table more than 5, add 75.00
For each table in other than billiard/pool hall 75.00
Bottling plants 250.00
Bowling alleys:
10 lanes or less 250.00
For each lane more than 10, add 20.00
Building contractors - all building trades 200.00
Car wash 200.00
Carnivals (per day) 100.00
Catering services or establishments 200.00
Confectionery stores 150.00
Driving schools:
3 vehicles or less 150.00
More than 3 vehicles 250.00
Dry cleaning establishments:
Dry cleaning pick up with plant on premises 200.00
Dry cleaning pick up stations 150.00
Explosive storage and handling 7,500.00
Exterminators (fumigation) 200.00
Filling stations: 200.00
Plus for each pump 50.00
Mechanical work 100.00
Tow trucks (2 or less) and/or towing 100.00
Fire extinguisher service and repair 150.00
Firewood sales 100.00
Fish markets 150.00
Flammable and hazardous chemicals (storage, sale or handling) 2,000.00
Florists, plant shops 150.00
Food delivery vehicles:
Ice cream delivery vehicles 150.00
Mobile food dispensers 250.00
Foundries 250.00
Fruit and vegetable stores 200.00
Garages (public) 250.00
Grocery stores and supermarkets:
3 or less employees 200.00
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 58/498
More than 3 employees 350.00
Hardware and paint stores (retail) 250.00
Home occupation 100.00
Hospitals:
Capacity of 50 beds or less 350.00
For each bed in excess of 50 20.00
Hotels and motels:
20 units or less 400.00
For each unit over 20 20.00
Ice machines/outdoor sales 60.00
Ice manufacturers and dealers:
For each manufacturing plant 250.00
For each station or depot for the sale or receipt of shipments 50.00
For each vehicle operated in the course of wholesale or retail business 100.00
Intoxicating liquor dealers (see section 3-4-8 of this title for license classification and fees)
Itinerant merchants and transient vendors (per day) 30.00
Junk dealers and junk peddlers:
Junk dealer (junkyard) 5,000.00
Junk peddler 500.00
For each vehicle 50.00
Laboratories 200.00
Laundries, laundry vehicles and laundromats 200.00
Livery stables 300.00
Lumberyards and lumber storehouses 400.00
Machine shops 200.00
Manufacturing (general) 200.00
Massage therapist 200.00
Meatpacking factories:
1 to 10 persons working 150.00
11 to 25 persons working 200.00
26 to 50 persons working 250.00
More than 51 persons working 300.00
Medical dispensaries 200.00
Milk and milk products:
Dealer 75.00
For each vehicle used in delivery or sale 75.00
Processing or bottling plant 250.00
Motor vehicle and truck rentals 200.00
Motor vehicle sales - new and used 250.00
Mulch sales 100.00
Nail salons 200.00
Nursery schools and daycare centers 150.00
Nursing homes and homes for the aged:
Up to and including 50 beds 200.00
For each bed in excess of 50 beds 20.00
Paint factories 250.00
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 59/498
Pawnbrokers 2,500.00
Peddlers and solicitors, for each 30 days 100.00
Propane sales 150.00
Restaurants and banquet halls (including carryout and drive-through):
Seating capacity not more than 25 persons 200.00
Seating capacity not more than 50 persons 250.00
Seating capacity not more than 100 persons 275.00
Seating capacity in excess of 100 persons 300.00
Seating capacity in excess of 200 persons 500.00
Seating capacity in excess of 400 persons 600.00
Seating capacity in excess of 600 persons 700.00
Retail and variety stores - general 150.00
Scavengers 250.00
Secondhand dealers/resale shop 200.00
Solid fuel and fuel oil dealers:
Sale of solid fuel:
Less than 10,000 tons sold during preceding fiscal year 100.00
More than 10,000 tons sold during preceding fiscal year 200.00
For each delivery vehicle used 75.00
Storage of solid fuel (not for resale) 200.00
Fuel oil dealer:
Storage capacity not exceeding 20,000 gallons 200.00
For each additional 1,000 gallons or fraction thereof 2.00
For each vehicle used 75.00
Fuel oil storer:
Storage capacity not exceeding 1,000 gallons 100.00
More than 1,000 gallons but not exceeding 5,000 gallons 150.00
More than 5,000 gallons 200.00
Storage facilities 250.00
Storage facilities with outdoor storage 500.00
Taxicabs and limousines:
For each vehicle, add 50.00
Tobacco/electronic cigarette dealers:
Retail dealers 200.00
Tobacco shop 200.00
Wholesale dealers 200.00
Towing services:
3 trucks or less 200.00
For each truck over 3 50.00
Trailer coach parks 500.00
Travel agent 150.00
Vending machines:
Food 30.00
Food/located outside 60.00
Nonfood 30.00
Nonfood/located outside 60.00
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 60/498
(Ord. 2003-52, 11-20-2003; amd. Ord. 2004-9, 3-4-2004; Ord. 2014-22, 9-4-2014)
3-2-3: REGISTRATION REQUIRED FOR ALL BUSINESSES AND PRACTICES NOT LICENSED UNDER OTHER PROVISIONS:
Every business or practice in the village shall be registered with the village clerk, unless such business or practice is required to obtain a business license
pursuant to other provisions of this title.
A. If registration procedures are specifically provided for a business or practice elsewhere in this code, those specific registration procedures shall apply.
B. If registration for a business or practice is not otherwise provided for in this code, the registration of a business or practice shall be made with the village
clerk, on an application form which includes the following:
1. The name under which the business or practice operates and the address and telephone number of each location at which the business or practice
operates;
2. The name, address and phone number of a current contact person for the business or practice; and
3. All businesses or practices for which the village is preempted from exercising licensing authority by operation of state statute shall nevertheless be
required to register with the village pursuant to this section.
C. Each business or practice shall receive a "certificate of registration", which must be renewed annually. Each registered business or practice must
provide the village with any modifications of the registration within ninety (90) days of its occurrence, including any change of address, contact person,
or type of business activity conducted. (Ord. 2003-52, 11-20-2003)
3-2-4: EXEMPTIONS:
No person engaged in carrying on any business, occupation or trade who is so engaged in exclusively religious, charitable or public or parochial school
activities shall be subject to the fees hereinabove set forth. Such person shall demonstrate his right to an exemption hereunder by a written statement of
exemption from federal income tax or by other suitable proof. This exemption shall apply only to the payment of fees and not to the securing of permits
where otherwise applicable. (1994 Code; amd. Ord. 1999-58, 11-18-1999)
3-2-5: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined as set forth in section 1-4-1 of this code for each offense. A separate offense shall be
deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 1998-4, 1-8-1998; amd. Ord. 1999-58, 11-18-1999)
Chapter 3
MUNICIPAL OCCUPATION TAXES
3-3-1: MUNICIPAL RETAILERS' OCCUPATION TAX:
A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of selling tangible personal property at retail in the village at the rate of one percent
(1%) of the gross receipts from such sales made in the course of such business while this section is in effect, in accordance with the provisions of 65
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-1.
Every such person engaged in such business in the village shall file on or before the last day of each calendar month the report to the state department of
revenue required by section three of "an act in relation to a tax upon persons engaged in the business of selling tangible personal property to purchasers
for use or consumption", approved June 29, 1933, as amended.
At the time such report is filed, there shall be paid to the state department of revenue the amount of tax hereby imposed on account of the receipts from
sales of tangible personal property during the preceding month. (1994 Code)
3-3-2: MUNICIPAL SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX:
A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the village in the business of making sales of service at the rate of one percent (1%) of the cost price
of all tangible personal property transferred by said serviceman either in the form of tangible personal property or in the form of real estate as an incident
to the sale of service in accordance with the provisions of 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-5.
Every supplier or serviceman required to account for municipal service occupation tax for the benefit of the village shall file on or before the last day of
each calendar month the report to the state department of revenue required by section nine of the "service occupation tax act", approved July 10, 1961, as
amended.
At the time such report is filed, there shall be paid to the state department of revenue the amount of tax hereby imposed. (1994 Code)
3-3-3: MUNICIPAL LEASING OCCUPATION TAX:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 61/498
A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of renting or leasing tangible personal property to users thereof at the rate of one-half
of one percent (1/2%) of the gross receipts from such renting or leasing made in the course of such business while this section is in effect, in accordance
with the provisions of 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-6.
Every person engaged in such business in the village shall file with the state department of revenue the return in the manner as required by section five of
the "leasing occupation tax act", as amended.
At the time such return is filed, there shall be paid to the state department of revenue the amount of tax hereby imposed on account of the receipts from
renting or leasing tangible personal property during the preceding month. (1994 Code)
3-3-4: MUNICIPAL UTILITY TAX:
A tax is imposed on all of the following acts or privileges:
A. Acts Or Privileges Taxed:
1. The act or privilege of originating in or of receiving in this village intrastate telecommunications by a person at a rate not to exceed four percent (4%)
of the gross charge for such telecommunications purchased at retail from a retailer by such person. (Ord. 1993-73, 12-16-1993, eff. 2-1-1994)
2. (Rep. by Ord. 2002-36, 9-19-2002, eff. 1-1-2003)
3. The act or privilege of distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling gas for use or consumption within the corporate limits of this village, and not for
resale, at a rate not to exceed four percent (4%) of the gross charge for such gas. (Ord. 1993-73, 12-16-1993, eff. 2-1-1994)
4. The act or privilege of distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling electricity for use or consumption within the corporate limits of this village and not
for resale, at a rate not to exceed four percent (4%) of the gross charge for such electricity.
Such tax shall be in addition to the payment of money, or value of products or services furnished to this village by the taxpayer as compensation for
the use of its streets, alleys or other public places, or installation and maintenance therein, thereon or thereunder of poles, wires, pipes or other
equipment used in the operation of the taxpayer's business. The tax imposed under this section shall not apply with respect to gross receipts to bills
for the distribution, supply, furnishing or sale of electricity where the use or consumption of electricity is subject to the tax imposed under section 3-3-
4.1 of this chapter. (Ord. 1998-43, 7-30-1998, eff. 8-1-1998)
B. Interstate Commerce Restriction: No tax is imposed by this section with respect to any act or privilege transacted in interstate commerce or otherwise to
the extent to which such act or privilege may not, under the constitution and statutes of the United States, be made subject to any political subdivision
thereof.
C. Retailers' Occupation Tax Restriction: No person engaged in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling gas or electricity, or engaged in
the business of transmitting messages, shall be subject to taxation under the provisions of this section for such transactions as are or may become
subject to taxation under the provisions of a retailers' occupation tax of this village adopted pursuant to the provisions of state statutes so authorizing
such tax; nor shall any tax authorized herein be imposed upon any persons engaged in any of the above defined businesses unless such tax is
imposed in like manner and at the same rate upon all persons engaged in business of the same class in the village whether privately or municipally
owned and operated.
D. Definitions: For the purpose of the taxes imposed by this section, the following definitions shall apply:
AMOUNT PAID: The amount charged to the taxpayer's service address in such municipality regardless of where such amount is billed or paid.
GROSS CHARGE: The amount paid for the act or privilege of originating or receiving telecommunications in the village or for distributing, supplying,
furnishing or selling gas or electricity for use or consumption and not for resale, as the case may be, and for all services rendered in connection
therewith valued in money, whether paid in money or otherwise, including cash, credit, services and property of every kind or nature, and material
and for all services rendered in connection therewith; and shall be determined without any deduction on account of the cost of transmitting such
messages and the cost of the gas or electricity service, product or commodity supplied, the cost of materials used, labor or service cost, or any other
expense whatsoever.
In case credit is extended, the amount thereof shall be included only as and when paid. However, "gross charge" shall not include:
1. Any amounts added to a purchaser's bill because of a charge made pursuant to:
a. The tax imposed by this section;
b. Additional charges added to a purchaser's bill pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/9-222 of the Illinois public utilities act;
c. The tax imposed by the Illinois telecommunications excise tax act; or
d. The tax imposed by section 4251 of the internal revenue code;
2. Charges for a sent collect telecommunication received outside of this Village;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 62/498
3. Charges for leased time on equipment or charges for the storage of data or information or subsequent retrieval or the processing of data or
information intended to change its form or content. Such equipment includes, but is not limited to, the use of calculators, computers, data
processing equipment, tabulating equipment or accounting equipment and also includes the usage of computers under a time-sharing
agreement;
4. Charges for customer equipment, including such equipment that is leased or rented by the customer from any source, wherein such charges are
disaggregated and separately identified from other charges;
5. Charges to business enterprises certified under 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/9.222.1 of the Illinois Public Utilities Act to the extent of such
exemption and during the period of time specified by the Department of Commerce and Community Affairs;
6. Charges for telecommunications and all services and equipment provided in connection therewith between a parent corporation and its wholly
owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries when the tax imposed under this Section has already been paid to a retailer and only
to the extent that the charges between the parent corporation and wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries represent
expense allocations between the corporation and not the generation of profit for the corporation rendering such services;
7. Bad debts ("bad debt" means any portion of a debt that is related to a sale at retail for which gross charges are not otherwise deductible or
excludable that has become worthless or uncollectible, as determined under applicable Federal income tax standards; if the portion of the debt
deemed to be bad is subsequently paid, the retailer shall report and pay the tax on that portion during the reporting period in which the payment
is made); or
8. Charges paid by inserting coins in coin-operated telecommunication devices.
INTERSTATE TELECOMMUNICATIONS: All telecommunications that either originate or terminate outside the State of Illinois.
INTRASTATE TELECOMMUNICATIONS: All telecommunications that originate and terminate within the State of Illinois.
PERSON: Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association, joint stock company, joint venture, corporation or a receiver, trustee,
guardian or other representative appointed by order of any court, the Federal and State governments, including State universities created by statute,
or any city, town, county or other political subdivision of the State of Illinois.
PURCHASE AT RETAIL: The acquisition, consumption or use of telecommunications, gas or electricity through a sale at retail.
RETAILER: Includes every person engaged in the business of making sales at retail as defined in this Section. This Village may, in its discretion,
upon application, authorize the collection of the tax hereby imposed by any retailer not maintaining a place of business within the State of Illinois
who, to the satisfaction of this Village, furnishes adequate security to ensure collection and payment of the tax. Such retailer shall be issued, without
charge, a permit to collect such tax. When so authorized, it shall be the duty of such retailer to collect the tax upon all of the gross charges for
telecommunications, gas or electricity in this Village in the same manner and subject to the same requirements as a retailer maintaining a place of
business within the Village.
RETAILER MAINTAINING A PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THE STATE OF ILLINOIS (Or Any Like Term): Includes any retailer having or maintaining
within said State, directly or by a subsidiary, an office, distribution facilities, sales office, warehouse or other place of business, or any agent or other
representative operating within said State under the authority of the retailer or its subsidiary, irrespective of whether such place of business or agent
or other representative is located there permanently or temporarily, or other such retailer or subsidiary is licensed to do business in the State of
Illinois.
SALE AT RETAIL: The transmitting, supplying or furnishing of telecommunications, gas and electricity and all services rendered in connection
therewith for a consideration, to persons other than the Federal and State governments, and State universities credited by statute and other than
between a parent corporation and its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, when the tax has already been paid to a
retailer and the gross charge made by one such corporation to another such corporation is not greater than the gross charge paid to the retailer for
their use or consumption and not for resale.
SERVICE ADDRESS: The location of telecommunications equipment from which telecommunications services are originated or at which
telecommunications services or gas or electricity services are received by a taxpayer. If this is not a defined location, as in the case of mobile
phones, paging systems, maritime systems, air-to-ground systems and the like, "service address" shall mean the location of a taxpayer's primary use
of the telecommunications equipment as defined by telephone number, authorization code or location in Illinois where bills are sent.
TAXPAYER: A person who individually or through his agents, employees or permittees engages in the act or privilege of originating in or of receiving
in this Village telecommunications, gas or electricity and who incurs a tax liability under this Section.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS: In addition to the usual and popular meaning, includes, but is not limited to, messages or information transmitted through
use of local, toll and wide area telephone services, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter services, computer exchange services,
cellular mobile telecommunication services, specialized mobile radio services, paging services, or any other form of mobile and portable one-way or
two-way communications, or any other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar means, between or among points by wire,
cable, fiber optics, lasers, microwave, radio, satellite or similar facilities. The definition of telecommunications shall not include value added services
in which computer processing applications are used to act on the form, content, code and protocol of the information for purposes other than
transmission. "Telecommunications" shall not include purchase of telecommunications by a telecommunications service provider for use as
component part of the service provided by him to the ultimate retail consumer who originates or terminates the taxable end-to-end communications.
Carrier access charges, right of access charges, charges for use of inter-company facilities, and all telecommunications resold in the subsequent
provision used as a component of, or integrated into, end-to-end telecommunications service shall be nontaxable as sales for resale.
E. Collection Of Tax:
1. The tax imposed by this Section shall be collected from the taxpayer by a retailer maintaining a place of business in the State and making or
effectuating the sale at retail and shall be remitted by such retailer to the Village. Any tax required to be collected by this Section and any such tax
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 63/498
collected by such retailer shall constitute a debt owed by the retailer to the Village. Retailers shall collect the tax from the taxpayer by adding the tax
to the gross charge for the act or privilege of originating or receiving telecommunications, or of selling or supplying gas and electricity when sold for
use, in the manner prescribed herein. Said tax shall constitute a debt of the purchaser to the retailer who provides such taxable services until paid
and, if unpaid, is recoverable at law in the same manner as the original charge for such taxable services. If the retailer fails to collect the tax from the
taxpayer, then the taxpayer shall be required to pay the tax directly to the Village Treasurer.
Whenever possible, the tax authorized by this Section shall, when collected, be stated as a distinct item separate and apart from the gross charge for
telecommunications, or for gas and electricity.
2. Each taxpayer shall make a return to the Village Treasurer within thirty (30) days following the receipt by the taxpayer of taxes actually paid for the
acts or privileges set forth herein. The return shall include the taxpayer's name and principal place of business, the gross charges during the
collection period upon which the tax is imposed, the amount of tax, and such other reasonable and related information as the Village may require.
The taxpayer making the return herein provided for shall, at the time of making such return, pay to the Village Treasurer the amount of tax herein
imposed; provided that in connection with any return the taxpayer may, if he so elects, report and pay an amount based upon his total billings of
gross charges subject to the tax during the period for which the return is made (exclusive of any amounts previously billed) with prompt adjustments
or later payments based upon any differences between such billings and the taxable gross charges.
3. If it shall appear that an amount of tax has been paid which was not due under the provisions of this Section, whether as the result of a mistake of
fact or an error of law, then such amount shall be credited against any tax due or to become due under this Section from the taxpayer who made the
erroneous payment; provided, that no amounts erroneously paid more than three (3) years prior to the filing of a claim therefor shall be so credited.
No action to recover any amount of tax due under the provisions of this Section shall be commenced more than three (3) years after the due date of
such amount. (Ord. 1993-73, 12-16-1993, eff. 2-1-1994)
4. Any taxpayer who fails to make a return, or who makes a fraudulent return, or who wilfully violates any other provision of this Section is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or more than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00), and in addition shall be liable in a civil action for the amount of tax due. (Ord. 1998-17, 3-19-1998)
F. Sales For Resale:
1. If a person who originates or receives telecommunications or gas or electricity in this Village claims to be a reseller of such telecommunications or
gas or electricity, such person shall apply to the Village for a resale number, and shall state facts which will show why such applicant is not liable for
any tax imposed by this Section on any of such purchases, and shall furnish such additional information as the Village may reasonably require.
Upon approval of the application, the Village shall assign a resale number to the applicant and shall certify such number to the applicant. The Village
may cancel any number which is obtained through misrepresentation, or which is used to send or receive such telecommunications or to sell or
supply gas or electricity tax-free when such actions in fact are not for resale, or which no longer applies because of the person's having discontinued
the making of resales.
Except as provided hereinabove, the act or privilege of sending or receiving telecommunications in the State or of selling or supplying gas or
electricity in this Village shall not be made tax-free on the grounds of being a sale for resale unless the person has an active resale number from the
Village and furnishes that number to the retailer in connection with certifying to the retailer that any sale to such person is nontaxable because of
being a sale for resale. (Ord. 1993-73, 12-16-1993, eff. 2-1-1994)
3-3-4.1: ELECTRICAL UTILITY TAX:
A. Definitions: As used in this Section, unless the context otherwise requires the following definitions shall apply:
PERSON: Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association, joint stock company, joint adventure, corporation, limited liability company,
municipal corporation, the State or any of its political subdivisions, any State university created by statute, or a receiver, trustee, conservator or other
representative appointed by order of any court.
PERSON MAINTAINING A PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THIS STATE: Any person having or maintaining within this State, directly or by a subsidiary or
other affiliate, an office, generation facility, distribution facility, transmission facility, sales office or other place of business, or any employee, agent, or
other representative operating within this State under the authority of the person or its subsidiary or other affiliate, irrespective of whether such place of
business or agent or other representative is located in this State permanently or temporarily, or whether such person, subsidiary or other affiliate is
licensed or qualified to do business in this State.
PURCHASE AT RETAIL: Any acquisition of electricity by a purchaser for purposes of use or consumption, and not for resale, but shall not include the
use of electricity by a public utility, as defined in section 8-11-2 of the Illinois Municipal Code1, directly in the generation, production, transmission,
delivery or sale of electricity.
PURCHASER: Any person who uses or consumes, within the corporate limits of the Village, electricity acquired in a purchase at retail.
TAX COLLECTOR: The person delivering electricity to the purchaser.
VILLAGE: The Village of Streamwood.
B. Tax Imposed:
1. Pursuant to section 8-11-2 of the Illinois Municipal Code2 and any and all other applicable authority, a tax is imposed upon the privilege of using or
consuming electricity acquired in the purchase at retail and used or consumed within the corporate limits of the Village at the following rates,
calculated on a monthly basis for each purchaser:
a. For the first 2,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month; 0.449 cents per kilowatt-hour;
b. For the next 48,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month; 0.295 cents per kilowatt-hour;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 64/498
c. For the next 50,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month; 0.265 cents per kilowatt-hour;
d. For the next 400,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month; 0.258 cents per kilowatt-hour;
e. For the next 500,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month; 0.250 cents per kilowatt-hour;
f. For the next 2,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month; 0.236 cents per kilowatt-hour;
g. For the next 2,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month; 0.232 cents per kilowatt-hour;
h. For the next 5,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month; 0.228 cents per kilowatt-hour;
i. For the next 10,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month; 0.225 cents per kilowatt-hour; and
j. For all electricity used or consumed in excess of 20,000,000 kilowatt-hours in a month; 0.221 cents per kilowatt-hour.
2. The tax is in addition to all taxes, fees and other revenue measures imposed by the Village, the State or any other political subdivision of the State.
3. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Section, the tax shall not be imposed if and to the extent that imposition or collection of the tax would
violate the Constitution or statutes of the United States or the constitution of the State.
4. The tax shall be imposed with respect to the use or consumption of electricity by residential customers beginning with the first bill issued on or after
September 1, 1998; and with respect to the use or consumption of electricity by nonresidential customers beginning with the first bill issued to such
customers for delivery services in accordance with section 16-104 of the Public Utilities Act3, or the first bill issued to such customers on or after
January 1, 2001, whichever issuance occurs sooner.
C. Collection Of Tax:
1. Subject to the provisions of subsection E of this Section regarding the delivery of electricity to resellers, the tax imposed under this Section shall be
collected from purchasers by the person maintaining a place of business in this State who delivers electricity to such purchasers. This tax shall
constitute a debt of the purchaser to the person who delivers the electricity to the purchaser and is recoverable at the same time and in the same
manner as the original charge for delivering the electricity.
2. Any tax required to be collected by this Section, and any tax in fact collected, shall constitute a debt owed to the Village by the person delivering the
electricity, provided, that the person delivering electricity shall be allowed credit for such tax related to deliveries of electricity the charges for which
are written off as uncollectible, and provided further, that if such charges are thereafter collected, the delivering supplier shall be obligated to remit
such tax.
3. Persons delivering electricity shall collect the tax from the purchaser by adding such tax to the gross charge for delivering the electricity. Persons
delivering electricity shall also be authorized to add to such gross charge an amount equal to three percent (3%) of the tax they collect to reimburse
them for their expenses incurred in keeping records, billing customers, preparing and filing returns, remitting the tax and supplying data to the Village
upon request. For purposes of this Section, any partial payment of a billed amount not specifically identified by the purchaser shall be deemed to be
for the delivery of electricity.
D. Tax Remittance And Return:
1. Every tax collector shall on a monthly basis file a return in a form prescribed by the Village Treasurer. The return and accompanying remittance shall
be due on or before the last day of the month following the month during which the tax is collected or is required to be collected under subsection C
of this Section.
2. If the person delivering electricity fails to collect the tax from the purchaser or is excused from collecting the tax under subsection E5b of this Section,
then the purchaser shall file a return in a form prescribed by the Village Treasurer and pay the tax directly to the Village Treasurer on or before the
last day of the month following the month during which the electricity is used or consumed.
E. Resales:
1. Electricity that is delivered to a person in this Village shall be considered to be for use and consumption by that person unless the person receiving
the electricity has an active resale number issued by the Village Treasurer and furnishes that number to the person who delivers the electricity, and
certifies to that person that the sale is either entirely or partially nontaxable as a sale for resale.
2. If a person who receives electricity in the Village claims to be an authorized reseller of electricity, that person shall apply to the Village Treasurer for a
resale number. The applicant shall state facts showing why it is not liable for the tax imposed by this Section on any purchases of electricity and shall
furnish such additional information as the Village Treasurer may reasonably require.
3. Upon approval of the application, the Village Treasurer shall assign a resale number to the applicant and shall certify the number to the applicant.
4. The Village Treasurer may cancel the resale number of any person if the person fails to pay any tax payable under this Section for electricity used or
consumed by the person, or if the number: a) was obtained through misrepresentation, or b) is no longer necessary because the person has
discontinued making resales.
5. a. If a reseller has acquired electricity partly for use or consumption and partly for resale, the reseller shall pay the tax imposed by this Section
directly to the Village Treasurer pursuant to subsection D2 of this Section on the amount of electricity that the reseller uses or consumes, and shall
collect the tax pursuant to subsection C of this section and remit the tax pursuant to subsection D1 of this section on the amount of electricity
delivered by the reseller to a purchaser.
b. Any person who delivers electricity to a reseller having an active resale number and complying with all other conditions of this section shall be
excused from collecting and remitting the tax on any portion of the electricity delivered to the reseller, provided that the person reports to the village
treasurer the total amount of electricity delivered to the reseller, and such other information that the village treasurer may reasonably require.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 65/498
F. Books And Records: Every tax collector, and every taxpayer required to pay the tax imposed by this section, shall keep accurate books and records of
its business or activity, including contemporaneous books and records denoting the transactions that gave rise, or may have given rise, to any tax
liability under this section. The books and records shall be subject to and available for inspection by the village during normal business hours.
G. Credits And Refunds: Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, in order to permit sound fiscal planning and budgeting by the village, no
person shall be entitled to a refund of, or credit for, a tax imposed under this section unless the person files a claim for refund or credit within one year
after the date on which the tax was paid or remitted to the village treasurer. (Ord. 1998-43, 7-30-1998, eff. 8-1-1998)
3-3-4.2: SIMPLIFIED MUNICIPAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS TAX:
3-3-4.2-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this section 3-3-4.2, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
AMOUNT PAID: The amount charged to the taxpayer's service address in such municipality regardless of where such amount is billed or paid.
DEPARTMENT: The Illinois department of revenue.
GROSS CHARGE: The amount paid for the act or privilege of originating or receiving telecommunications in such municipality and for all services and
equipment provided in connection therewith by a retailer, valued in money whether paid in money or otherwise, including cash, credits, services and
property of every kind or nature, and shall be determined without any deduction on account of the cost of such telecommunications, the cost of the
materials used, labor or service costs or any other expense whatsoever. In case credit is extended, the amount thereof shall be included only as and when
paid. "Gross charges" for private line service shall include charges imposed at each channel point within this state, charges for the channel mileage
between each channel point within this state, and charges for that portion of the interstate interoffice channel provided within Illinois. However, "gross
charge" shall not include:
A. Any amounts added to a purchaser's bill because of a charge made pursuant to: 1) the tax imposed by this section 3-3-4.2, 2) the tax imposed by
the telecommunications excise tax act, 3) the tax imposed by section 4251 of the internal revenue code, 4) 911 surcharges, or 5) charges added to
customers' bills pursuant to the provisions of section 9-221 or 9-222 of the public utilities act, as amended, or any similar charges added to
customers' bills by retailers who are not subject to rate regulation by the Illinois commerce commission for the purpose of recovering any of the tax
liabilities or other amounts specified in those provisions of the public utilities act;
B. Charges for a sent collect telecommunication received outside of such municipality;
C. Charges for leased time on equipment or charges for the storage of data or information for subsequent retrieval or the processing of data or
information intended to change its form or content. Such equipment includes, but is not limited to, the use of calculators, computers, data processing
equipment, tabulating equipment or accounting equipment and also includes the usage of computers under a time sharing agreement;
D. Charges for customer equipment, including such equipment that is leased or rented by the customer from any source, wherein such charges are
disaggregated and separately identified from other charges;
E. Charges to business enterprises certified as exempt under section 9-222.1 of the public utilities act to the extent of such exemption and during the
period of time specified by the department of commerce and community affairs;
F. Charges for telecommunications and all services and equipment provided in connection therewith between a parent corporation and its wholly owned
subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries when the tax imposed under this act has already been paid to a retailer and only to the extent that
the charges between the parent corporation and wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries represent expense allocation
between the corporations and not the generation of profit for the corporation rendering such service;
G. Bad debts ("bad debt" means any portion of a debt that is related to a sale at retail for which gross charges are not otherwise deductible or
excludable that has become worthless or uncollectible, as determined under applicable federal income tax standards; if the portion of the debt
deemed to be bad is subsequently paid, the retailer shall report and pay the tax on that portion during the reporting period in which the payment is
made);
H. Charges paid by inserting coins in coin operated telecommunication devices; or
I. Amounts paid by telecommunications retailers under the telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee act.
INTERSTATE TELECOMMUNICATIONS: All telecommunications that either originate or terminate outside this state.
INTRASTATE TELECOMMUNICATIONS: All telecommunications that originate and terminate within this state.
PERSON: Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association, joint stock company, joint venture, corporation, limited liability company, or a
receiver, trustee, guardian, or other representative appointed by order of any court, the federal and state governments, including state universities created
by statute, or any city, town, county, or other political subdivision of this state.
PURCHASE AT RETAIL: The acquisition, consumption or use of telecommunications through a sale at retail.
RETAILER: Means and includes every person engaged in the business of making sales at retail as defined in this section. The department may, in its
discretion, upon application, authorize the collection of the tax hereby imposed by any retailer not maintaining a place of business within this state, who, to
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 66/498
the satisfaction of the department, furnishes adequate security to ensure collection and payment of the tax. Such retailer shall be issued, without charge, a
permit to collect such tax. When so authorized, it shall be the duty of such retailer to collect the tax upon all of the gross charges for telecommunications in
this state in the same manner and subject to the same requirements as a retailer maintaining a place of business within this state. The permit may be
revoked by the department at its discretion.
RETAILER MAINTAINING A PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THIS STATE (Or Any Like Term): Means and includes any retailer having or maintaining within this
state, directly or by a subsidiary, an office, distribution facilities, transmission facilities, sales office, warehouse or other place of business, or any agent or
other representative operating within this state under the authority of the retailer or its subsidiary, irrespective of whether such place of business or agent
or other representative is located here permanently or temporarily, or whether such retailer or subsidiary is licensed to do business in this state.
SALE AT RETAIL: The transmitting, supplying or furnishing of telecommunications and all services and equipment provided in connection therewith for a
consideration, to persons other than the federal and state governments, and state universities created by statute and other than between a parent
corporation and its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries for their use or consumption and not for resale.
SERVICE ADDRESS: The location of telecommunications equipment from which telecommunications services are originated or at which
telecommunications services are received by a taxpayer. In the event this may not be a defined location, as in the case of mobile phones, paging systems,
and maritime systems, service address means the customer's place of primary use as defined in the mobile telecommunications sourcing conformity act.
For air to ground systems and the like, "service address" shall mean the location of a taxpayer's primary use of the telecommunications equipment as
defined by telephone number, authorization code, or location in Illinois where bills are sent.
TAXPAYER: A person who individually or through his or her agents, employees, or permittees engages in the act or privilege of originating or receiving
telecommunications in a municipality and who incurs a tax liability as authorized by this section 3-3-4.2.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS: In addition to the meaning ordinarily and popularly ascribed to it, includes, without limitation, messages or information
transmitted through use of local, toll, and wide area telephone service, private line services, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter, computer
exchange services, cellular mobile telecommunications service, specialized mobile radio, stationary two-way radio, paging service, or any other form of
mobile and portable one-way or two-way communications, or any other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar means, between
or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite, or similar facilities. As used in this section 3-3-4.2, "private line" means a
dedicated nontraffic sensitive service for a single customer, that entitles the customer to exclusive or priority use of a communications channel or group of
channels, from one or more specified locations to one or more other specified locations. The definition of "telecommunications" shall not include value
added services in which computer processing applications are used to act on the form, content, code, and protocol of the information for purposes other
than transmission. "Telecommunications" shall not include purchases of telecommunications by a telecommunications service provider for use as a
component part of the service provided by such provider to the ultimate retail consumer who originates or terminates the taxable end to end
communications. Carrier access charges, right of access charges, charges for use of intercompany facilities, and all telecommunications resold in the
subsequent provision of, used as a component of, or integrated into, end to end telecommunications service shall be nontaxable as sales for resale.
Prepaid telephone calling arrangements shall not be considered "telecommunications" subject to the tax imposed under this act. For purposes of this
section 3-3-4.2, "prepaid telephone calling arrangements" means that term as defined in section 2-27 of the retailers' occupations tax act. (Ord. 2002-36,
9-19-2002, eff. 1-1-2003)
3-3-4.2-2: TAX IMPOSED:
A tax is hereby imposed upon any and all the following acts or privileges:
A. The act or privilege of originating in the municipality or receiving in the municipality intrastate telecommunications by a person at a rate of five percent
(5%) of the gross charge for such telecommunications purchased at retail from a retailer.
B. The act or privilege of originating in the municipality or receiving in the municipality interstate telecommunications by a person at a rate of five percent
(5%) of the gross charge for such telecommunications purchased at retail from a retailer. To prevent actual multistate taxation of the act or privilege that
is subject to taxation under this subsection, any taxpayer, upon proof that the taxpayer has paid a tax in another state on such event, shall be allowed a
credit against any tax enacted pursuant to or authorized by this section to the extent of the amount of such tax properly due and paid in such other
state which was not previously allowed as a credit against any other state or local tax in this state.
C. The tax imposed by this section 3-3-4.2 is not imposed on such act or privilege to the extent such act or privilege may not, under the constitution and
statutes of the United States, be made the subject of taxation by the municipality. (Ord. 2002-36, 9-19-2002, eff. 1-1-2003)
3-3-4.2-3: COLLECTION OF TAX BY RETAILERS:
A. The tax authorized by this section 3-3-4.2 shall be collected from the taxpayer by a retailer maintaining a place of business in this state and shall be
remitted by such retailer to the department. Any tax required to be collected pursuant to or as authorized by this section 3-3-4.2 and any such tax
collected by such retailer and required to be remitted to the department shall constitute a debt owed by the retailer to the state. Retailers shall collect
the tax from the taxpayer by adding the tax to the gross charge for the act or privilege of originating or receiving telecommunications when sold for use,
in the manner prescribed by the department. The tax authorized by this section 3-3-4.2 shall constitute a debt of the taxpayer to the retailer until paid,
and, if unpaid, is recoverable at law in the same manner as the original charge for such sale at retail. If the retailer fails to collect the tax from the
taxpayer, then the taxpayer shall be required to pay the tax directly to the department in the manner provided by the department.
B. Whenever possible, the tax authorized by this section 3-3-4.2 shall, when collected, be stated as a distinct item separate and apart from the gross
charge for telecommunications. (Ord. 2002-36, 9-19-2002, eff. 1-1-2003)
3-3-4.2-4: RETURNS TO DEPARTMENT:
Commencing on February 1, 2003, the tax imposed under this section 3-3-4.2 on telecommunication retailers shall be returned with appropriate forms and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 67/498
information as required by the department pursuant to the Illinois simplified municipal telecommunications tax act (public act 92-526, section 5-50) and any
accompanying rules and regulations created by the department to implement this act. (Ord. 2002-36, 9-19-2002, eff. 1-1-2003)
3-3-4.2-5: RESELLERS:
A. If a person who originates or receives telecommunications claims to be a reseller of such telecommunications, such person shall apply to the
department for a resale number. Such applicant shall state facts which will show the department why such applicant is not liable for the tax authorized
by this section 3-3-4.2 on any of such purchases and shall furnish such additional information as the department may reasonably require.
B. Upon approval of the application, the department shall assign a resale number to the applicant and shall certify such number to the applicant. The
department may cancel any number which is obtained through misrepresentation, or which is used to send or receive such telecommunication tax free
when such actions in fact are not for resale, or which no longer applies because of the person's having discontinued the making of resales.
C. Except as provided hereinabove in this section, the act or privilege of originating or receiving telecommunications in this state shall not be made tax free
on the grounds of being a sale for resale unless the person has an active resale number from the department and furnishes that number to the retailer
in connection with certifying to the retailer that any sale to such person is nontaxable because of being a sale for resale. (Ord. 2002-36, 9-19-2002, eff.
1-1-2003)
3-3-4.2-6: SEVERABILITY:
If any provision of this section 3-3-4.2, or the application of any provision of this section 3-3-4.2, is held unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, such
occurrence shall not affect other provisions of this section 3-3-4.2, or their application, that can be given effect without the unconstitutional or invalid
provision or its application. Each unconstitutional or invalid provision, or application of such provision, is severable, unless otherwise provided by this
section 3-3-4.2. (Ord. 2002-36, 9-19-2002, eff. 1-1-2003)
3-3-4.2-7: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This section 3-3-4.2 shall take effect on January 1, 2003. Copies of this section 3-3-4.2 shall be certified and sent to the Illinois department of revenue
prior to October 1, 2002. (Ord. 2002-36, 9-19-2002, eff. 1-1-2003)
3-3-4.2-8: REPEALER:
If public act 92-0526, entitled the simplified municipal telecommunications tax act, is repealed or becomes ineffective for any reason, or if this section 3-3-
4.2 is repealed or becomes ineffective for any reason, then ordinance 1993-73, passed December 16, 1993, as it pertains to this tax, and ordinance 1997-
41A, passed October 2, 1997, shall be deemed in full force and effect as of the date public act 92-0526 or this section 3-3-4.2 is repealed or becomes
ineffective. (Ord. 2002-36, 9-19-2002, eff. 1-1-2003)
3-3-4.3: MUNICIPAL GAS USE TAX:
A. Short Title: The tax imposed by this section shall be known as the MUNICIPAL GAS USE TAX and is imposed in addition to all other taxes imposed by
the village of Streamwood, the state of Illinois, or any other municipal corporation or political subdivision thereof.
B. Definitions: For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply:
PERSON: Any individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association, joint stock company, joint venture, corporation, limited liability company, municipal
corporation or political subdivision of this state, or a receiver, trustee, conservator or other representative appointed by order of any court.
PUBLIC UTILITIES ACT: The public utilities act4 as amended.
PUBLIC UTILITY: A public utility as defined in section 3-105 of the public utilities act.
RETAIL PURCHASER: Any person who purchases gas in a sale at retail.
SALE AT RETAIL: Any sale of gas by a retailer to a person for use or consumption, and not for resale. For this purpose, the term "retailer" means any
person engaged in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling gas.
C. Tax:
1. Except as otherwise provided by this section, a tax is imposed on the privilege of using or consuming gas in the village that is purchased in a sale at
retail at the rate of three and one-fourth cents ($0.0325) per therm.
2. The ultimate incidence of and liability for payment of the tax is on the retail purchaser, and nothing in this section shall be construed to impose a tax
on the occupation of distributing, supplying, furnishing, selling or transporting gas.
3. The retail purchaser shall pay the tax, measured by therms of gas delivered to the retail purchaser's premises, to the public utility designated to
collect the tax pursuant to subsection D of this section on or before the payment due date of the public utility's bill first reflecting the tax, or directly to
the village treasurer on or before the fifteenth day of the second month following the month in which the gas is delivered to the retail purchaser if no
public utility has been designated to collect the tax pursuant to subsection D of this section or if the gas is delivered by a person other than a public
utility so designated.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 68/498
4. Nothing in this section shall be construed to impose a tax upon any person, business or activity which, under the constitutions of the United States or
state of Illinois, may not be made the subject of taxation by the village.
5. A person who purchases gas for resale and therefore does not pay the tax imposed by this section with respect to the use or consumption of the
gas, but who later uses or consumes part or all of the gas, shall pay the tax directly to the village treasurer on or before the fifteenth day of the
second month following the month in which the gas is used or consumed.
6. The tax shall apply to gas for which the delivery to the retail purchaser is billed by a public utility on or after January 1, 2012.
7. If it shall appear that an amount of tax has been paid which was not due under the provisions of this section, whether as a result of mistake of fact or
an error of law, then such amount shall be: a) credited against any tax due, or to become due, under this section from the taxpayer who made the
erroneous payment or b) subject to a refund if no such tax is due or to become due; provided that no amounts erroneously paid more than three (3)
years prior to the filing of a claim therefor shall be so credited or refunded.
8. No action to recover any amount of tax due under the provisions of this section shall be commenced more than three (3) years after the due date of
such amount.
9. To prevent multiple taxation, the use of gas in the village by a retail purchaser shall be exempt from the tax imposed by this section if the gross
receipts from the sale at retail of such gas to the retail purchaser are properly subject to a tax imposed upon the seller of such gas pursuant to the
village's municipal utility tax, imposed pursuant to subsection 3-3-4A3 of this chapter, as amended from time to time, as authorized pursuant to
section 8-11-2 of the Illinois municipal code5.
D. Collection Of Tax By Public Utility: The president, village treasurer, village manager, and village finance director are each authorized to enter into a
contract for collection of the tax imposed by this section with any public utility providing gas service in the village. The contract shall include and
substantially conform with the following provisions:
1. The public utility will collect the tax from retail purchasers as an independent contractor;
2. The public utility will remit collected taxes to the village treasurer no more often than once each month;
3. The public utility will be entitled to withhold from tax collections a service fee equal to three percent (3%) of the amounts collected and timely
remitted to the village treasurer;
4. The public utility shall not be responsible to the village for any tax not actually collected from a retail purchaser; and
5. Such additional terms as the parties may agree upon.
E. Books And Records: Every taxpayer shall keep accurate books and records, including original source documents and books of entry, denoting the
activities or transactions that gave rise, or may have given rise to any tax liability or exemption under this section. All such books and records shall, at
all times during business hours, be subject to and available for inspection by the village. (Ord. 2011-34, 11-17-2011)
3-3-5: FOREIGN FIRE INSURANCE COMPANIES TAX6:
A. Compliance With Provisions: It shall be unlawful for any corporation or association, not incorporated under the laws of the state, to engage in the village
in effecting fire insurance, or to transact any business of fire insurance in the village, while in default by not fully complying with any of the requirements
of this section, and until such requirements shall have been fully complied with; but this provision shall not relieve any company, corporation or
association from the payment of any risk that may be undertaken in violation of this section.
B. Tax Imposed: Any such corporation, company or association not incorporated under the laws of the state, which is engaged in the village in effecting fire
insurance, shall pay the village treasurer, for the maintenance, use and benefit of the fire department of the village a sum of money equal in amount to
two percent (2%) per annum of the gross receipts received as premiums upon fire insurance policies by any and all agents of such corporation,
company or association, during the year ending on July 1 in each year, for any insurance effected, or agreed to be effected, on property located in the
village, by or with such corporation, company or association during such year.
C. Report And Payment Of Tax: Every person acting in the village as agent for or on behalf of any such corporation, company or association shall, on or
before July 15 of each and every year, render the village clerk a full, true and just account verified by his oath, of all premiums upon fire insurance
policies which, during the year ending July 1 preceding such report, shall have been received by him, or by some other person for him, in his behalf of
any such corporation, company or association on property located in the village. Such agent shall also at the time of rendering the aforesaid report, pay
to the village treasurer the sum of money for which the company, corporation or association represented by him is chargeable, by virtue of the
provisions of this section.
No insurance agent in the village shall have any insurance business or dealings with any company, association or corporation not incorporated under
the laws of this state, which shall be in default for not reporting or making payments as hereinbefore provided, until it shall have complied with all the
requirements of this section.
D. Action To Recover Tax: The sum of money for which such company, corporation or association is so chargeable may be recovered of it, or its agents or
agent, by an action in the name of and for the use of the village as for money had and received. Nothing in this section shall be held to exempt any
person, corporation, company or association from indictment and conviction under the provisions of an act entitled "an act to enable cities, towns and
villages, organized under any general or special law, to levy and collect a tax or license fee from foreign insurance companies for the benefit of
organized fire departments", in force July 1, 1895. (1994 Code)
E. Penalty: Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be fined as set forth in section 1-4-1 of this code for each offense. (Ord. 1998-4,
1-8-1998)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 69/498
F. Collection And Distribution Of Fire Department Tax:
1. The Illinois municipal league is hereby authorized by the corporate authorities of the village to receive and examine the reports and payments of the
two percent (2%) fire department taxes tendered the village by foreign fire insurance companies writing such business on property located within the
corporate limits of the village.
2. The league shall establish a permanent fire insurance tax bureau in which there shall be kept a permanent, accurate and complete record of all such
tax payments received from foreign fire insurance companies and the distribution of such payments to the municipalities. All such records shall be
open to the inspection of any village official during reasonable office hours.
3. The village hereby agrees to pay to the Illinois municipal league for the cost of maintaining the services of the aforementioned fire insurance bureau
a fee of seven percent (7%), based upon the amount of the two percent (2%) fire department taxes actually collected by the league, not later than
thirty (30) days after the receipt of tax payments by the village. The Illinois municipal league is hereby further authorized to carry on necessary
correspondence with the foreign fire insurance companies owing taxes to the village, in behalf of the village, for the purpose of increasing the tax
payments of the insurance company to the village. (1994 Code)
3-3-6: HOME RULE MUNICIPAL RETAILERS' OCCUPATION AND SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX:
A. A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of selling tangible personal property, other than an item of tangible personal property
titled or registered with an agency of this state's government, at retail within the corporate boundaries of the village at the rate of one percent (1%) of
the gross receipts from such sales made in the course of such business while this section is in effect; and a tax is hereby imposed upon all persons
engaged within the corporate boundaries of the village in the business of making sales of service, at a rate of one percent (1%) of the selling price of all
tangible personal property transferred by such serviceman as an incident to a sale of service. Such "home rule municipal retailers' occupation tax" and
"home rule municipal service occupation tax" shall not be applicable on the sale of food for human consumption which is to be consumed off the
premises where it is sold (other than alcoholic beverages, soft drinks and food which has been prepared for immediate consumption) and prescription
and nonprescription medicines, drugs, medical appliances and insulin, urine testing materials, syringes and needles used by diabetics. (1994 Code;
amd. Ord. 2003-44, 9-4-2003, eff. 1-1-2004)
B. The taxes hereby imposed, and all civil penalties that may be assessed as an incident thereto, shall be collected and enforced by the department of
revenue of the state of Illinois. The department of revenue shall have full power to administer and enforce the provisions of this section. (1994 Code)
3-3-7: FOOD AND BEVERAGE TAX:
3-3-7.1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this section 3-3-7, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR: Any alcohol, spirits, wine, beer, ale or other liquid containing more than one-half of one percent of alcohol by volume, which is
intended for internal consumption by humans.
PREPARED FOOD: Includes any solid, liquid including both alcoholic liquor and nonalcoholic liquids, except "soft drinks" as hereinafter defined, powder or
item used or intended to be used for human internal consumption, whether simple, compound, or mixed, and which has been prepared for immediate
consumption. Prepared food may be purchased for consumption within or upon the premises where it is sold, or it may be purchased for consumption off
the premises. However, with respect to food purchased for consumption off the premises where it is sold, the term "prepared food" does not include any
food which is taxed pursuant to 35 Illinois Compiled Statutes 120/2-10 or is sold in a closed or sealed bottle, can, carton or container of the manufacturer
or wholesaler or which has not been prepared for immediate consumption. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section 3-3-7, "prepared food"
does not include any food or drink sold through a vending machine regardless of the location of the vending machine.
PREPARED FOOD FACILITY: Any person, business, or establishment which sells at retail prepared food that has been prepared for immediate
consumption with seating provided for consumption of the prepared food, whether or not such prepared food facility use is conducted along with any other
use in a common establishment commonly described as an inn, restaurant, eating place, drive-in restaurant, buffet, bakery, cafeteria, cafe, lunch counter,
grocery store, convenience store, fast food outlet, catering service, coffee shop, diner, sandwich shop, soda fountain, bar, cocktail lounge, soft drink parlor,
ice cream parlor, tearoom, delicatessen, hotel, motel, or club, or any other establishment which sells at retail food which has been prepared for immediate
consumption. The term "prepared food facility" does not include churches, public or private schools, boarding houses, daycare centers, nursing homes,
retirement centers or similar residential care facilities, or programs for the central preparation of meals to be delivered and consumed at private residences
of the elderly or disabled, or other facilities of not for profit associations or corporations.
PURCHASE AT RETAIL: To obtain for use or consumption and not for resale, in exchange for consideration, whether in the form of money, credits, barter
or any other nature.
RETAIL LIQUOR FACILITY: Any premises required to obtain a retail liquor license pursuant to chapter 4 of this title.
RETAILER: A person or entity who/which sells or offers for sale for use or consumption and not for resale.
SOFT DRINKS: Any complete, finished, ready to use, nonalcoholic drink, whether carbonated or not, including, but not limited to, soda water, cola, fruit
juice, vegetable juice, carbonated water, and all other preparations commonly known as soft drinks of whatever kind or description that are contained in
any closed or sealed bottle, can, carton, or container, regardless of size. "Soft drink" does not include coffee, tea, noncarbonated water, infant formula,
milk or milk products as defined in the grade A pasteurized milk and milk products act, or drinks containing fifty percent (50%) or more natural fruit or
vegetable juice.
VILLAGE: Streamwood, Cook County, Illinois. (Ord. 2011-32, 11-17-2011, eff. 12-31-2011)
3-3-7.2: IMPOSITION OF TAX:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 70/498
Effective January 1, 2012, a tax, in addition to any and all other taxes imposed, is hereby levied and imposed upon the retail purchase of alcoholic liquor
and prepared foods at any prepared food facility or retail liquor facility, within the village, at the rate of two percent (2.0%) of the purchase price of such
alcoholic liquor and prepared foods, excluding other taxes imposed thereon, the ultimate incidence of and the liability for payment of which shall be borne
by the purchaser. (Ord. 2011-32, 11-17-2011, eff. 12-31-2011)
3-3-7.3: COLLECTION OF TAX:
The retailer of each prepared food facility and each retail liquor facility shall have the duty to collect and account for the tax imposed on each purchaser at
the time the consideration is paid by the purchaser. (Ord. 2011-32, 11-17-2011, eff. 12-31-2011)
3-3-7.4: BOOKS AND RECORDS:
The retailer of each prepared food facility and each retail liquor facility shall have the duty to maintain complete and accurate books, records and accounts,
showing the gross receipts for sale of prepared foods and alcoholic liquor and the tax collected each business day, which shall be made available to the
village for examination and for audit by the village upon reasonable notice and during customary business hours. (Ord. 2011-32, 11-17-2011, eff. 12-31-
2011)
3-3-7.5: TRANSMISSION OF TAX COLLECTION:
The retailer of each prepared food facility and each retail liquor facility shall have the duty to cause to be filed, a sworn prepared food and beverage tax
return with the director of finance of the village for each prepared food facility and retail liquor facility located within the village. The return shall be prepared
and submitted on forms prescribed by the village and filed with the village by the filing date and at the same time intervals or frequencies as the sale and
use tax return, form ST-1, is due to be filed with the Illinois department of revenue. The return shall also be accompanied by payment to the village of all
taxes imposed by this section 3-3-7 which are due and owing for the time period covered by the return. The return shall also be accompanied by a copy of
the sale and use tax return, form ST-1, filed with the Illinois department of revenue for sales within the village during the same time period. All taxes
collected by the village pursuant to this section 3-3-7 are general revenues of the village and may be used by the village for any lawful corporate purpose.
(Ord. 2011-32, 11-17-2011, eff. 12-31-2011)
3-3-7.6: LATE PAYMENT PENALTY:
If any tax imposed by this section 3-3-7 is not paid when due, a late payment penalty equal to five percent (5.0%) of the unpaid tax shall be added for each
month, or any portion thereof, that the tax remains unpaid and the late payment penalty shall be paid along with the tax imposed. (Ord. 2011-32, 11-17-
2011, eff. 12-31-2011)
3-3-7.7: TRANSMITTAL OF EXCESS TAX COLLECTIONS:
If any retailer collects an amount upon a sale not subject to the tax imposed hereby, but which amount is purported to be the collection of the tax, or if a
retailer collects an amount upon a sale greater than the amount of the tax imposed herein and does not for any reason return it to the purchaser who paid
it before filing the return for the period in which it occurred, that person shall account for and pay over those amounts to the village along with the tax
properly collected. (Ord. 2011-32, 11-17-2011, eff. 12-31-2011)
3-3-7.8: ENFORCEMENT, LICENSE SUSPENSION, REVOCATION:
Payment and collection of the tax and any late payment penalty may be enforced by action in any administrative hearing or any court of competent
jurisdiction and failure to collect, account for and pay over the tax and any late payment penalty shall be cause for suspension or revocation of any village
license issued for the prepared food facility or retail liquor facility, if any, and all in addition to any other penalties provided for by this code. (Ord. 2011-32,
11-17-2011, eff. 12-31-2011)
3-3-7.9: PENALTY:
Any retailer operating a prepared food facility or retail liquor facility within the village who fails or omits to collect, account for, pay over to the village the tax
and any late payment penalty, if any, imposed by this section 3-3-7, or fails to maintain or allow examination of the books and records required in section
3-3-7.4 of this chapter shall be guilty of a business offense and shall be fined not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) nor more than one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00) for each offense. Each day a violation of this section 3-3-7 continues shall be considered a separate violation. (Ord. 2011-32, 11-17-
2011, eff. 12-31-2011)
Chapter 4
ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR DEALERS
3-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context otherwise requires, the following terms as used in this chapter shall be construed according to the definitions given below:
ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR: Includes alcohol, spirits, wine and beer, and every liquid or solid, patented or not, containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 71/498
capable of being consumed as a beverage by a human being.
BANQUET HALL: Every building or public place kept, used, maintained and held out to the public to be a place where banquets, weddings and other
single day events and parties are catered to and where no other portion of the premises is used for any other purpose defined herein.
BOTTLE SERVICE: The sale or delivery of spirits by the bottle for consumption on the licensed premises.
CLUB: A corporation under the laws of this state, and not for pecuniary profit, solely for the promotion of some common object other than the sale or
consumption of alcoholic liquor, which conforms to the definition of a club in 235 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-3.24.
HOTEL: Every building or other structure kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public to be a place where meals are actually and
regularly served and consumed and where sleeping accommodations are offered for pay to travelers and guests, whether transient, permanent or
residential, in which twenty five (25) or more rooms are used for the sleeping accommodations for such guests and having one or more public dining
rooms where meals are served to such guests, such sleeping accommodations and dining rooms being conducted in the same building or buildings, in
connection therewith, and such building or buildings or structure or structures being provided with adequate and sanitary dining room and kitchen
equipment and capacity.
LICENSEE: Any person, firm, corporation, partnership, club or park district holding a license under the provisions of this chapter.
ORIGINAL PACKAGE: Any bottle, flask, jug, can, cask, barrel, keg, hogshead or other receptacle or container whatsoever used, corked or capped, sealed
and labeled by the manufacturer of alcoholic liquor to contain and to convey any alcoholic liquor.
RESTAURANT: Any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public to be a place where meals are served, and where meals are
actually and regularly served, without sleeping accommodations, such space being provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room
equipment and capacity and having employed therein a sufficient number and kind of employees to prepare, cook and serve suitable food for its guests.
Provided further, that no restaurant licensed to do business as such shall sell alcoholic liquor except with meals unless such restaurant seats one hundred
fifty (150) persons at any one time.
RETAIL SALE: The sale for use or consumption and not for resale. (1994 Code; amd. Ord. 1996-17, 4-18-1996; Ord. 2015-26, 10-15-2015)
3-4-2: LOCAL LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSIONER:
The village president is hereby authorized to be the local liquor control commissioner and shall be charged with the administration of the dram shop act,
235 Illinois Compiled Statutes and of such village ordinances and resolutions relating to alcoholic liquor as may be needed. The village president may
appoint a person or persons to assist him in the exercise of the powers and performance of the duties provided for such liquor control commissioner. Such
person or persons to assist said local liquor control commissioner, as provided for herein, shall not exceed five (5) in number, which number shall not
include any more than two (2) village trustees, and it shall not be necessary that any village trustee be such assistants. Such assistants shall possess the
same qualifications as an individual must have to be elected a village trustee, and the term of office of each such assistant shall be one year. The
appointment of such assistant by the village president shall have the concurrence of the board of trustees and any such assistant appointed may be
removed for cause by said liquor control commissioner only, however, with the consent of the board of trustees. No such assistant appointed shall be
interested in any way, either directly or indirectly, in the manufacture, sale or distribution of alcoholic liquors. (1994 Code)
3-4-3: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale in the village any alcoholic liquor without having a license, or in violation of the terms of such license. (1994
Code)
3-4-4: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Applications for such licenses shall be made to the local liquor control commissioner. Such applications shall be made in writing, and shall be signed by
the applicant, if an individual, or by a duly authorized agent thereof, if a club or corporation, verified by oath or affidavit.
All said applications shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee in the amount of three hundred dollars ($300.00) to cover the costs of necessary
investigations. Said fee shall apply only to first time applications and not to renewals. Fees for investigation as a result of a change of manager, etc., shall
be administratively set by the village clerk.
An application for license by a park district shall be executed by a duly authorized agent thereof and shall contain such of the following information as is
pertinent. The three hundred dollar ($300.00) nonrefundable fee for investigation shall not apply to a park district license application.
Such applications shall contain the following information and statements:
A. The name, age and address of the applicant in the case of an individual; in the case of a copartnership, the persons entitled to share in the profits
thereof; and in the case of a corporation for profit or a club, the date of incorporation, the objects for which it was organized, the names and addresses
of the officers and directors, and if five percent (5%) of the stock of such corporation, in interest, is owned by one person or his nominee, the name and
address of such person or persons.
B. The citizenship of the applicant, his place of birth and if a naturalized citizen, the time and place of his naturalization.
C. The character of business of the applicant; and in the case of a corporation, the objects for which it was formed.
D. The length of time that said applicant has been in business of that character, or in the case of a corporation, the date on which its charter was issued.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 72/498
E. The amount of goods, wares and merchandise on hand at the time application is made.
F. The location and description of the premises or place of business which is to be operated under such license.
G. A statement as to whether applicant has made similar application for a similar license or premises other than described in this application, and the
disposition of such application.
H. A statement that the applicant has never been convicted of a felony and is not disqualified to receive a license by reason of any matter or thing
contained in this chapter, laws of the state, or ordinances of the village.
I. Whether a previous license by any state or subdivision thereof, or by the federal government has been revoked and the reasons therefor.
J. A statement that the applicant will not violate any of the laws of the state or the United States in the conduct of his place of business. (1994 Code)
K. A statement that the applicant will apply for and obtain approval for a special use permit from the village board for the sale of alcoholic liquor. (Ord.
1999-55, 11-4-1999)
3-4-5: RESTRICTIONS ON GRANTING LICENSES:
No such licenses shall be issued to:
A. A person who is not a resident of the village.
B. A person who is not of good character and reputation in the community in which he resides.
C. A person who is not a citizen of the United States.
D. A person who has been convicted of a felony under any federal or state law.
E. A person who has been convicted of being the keeper of or is the keeper of a house of ill fame. (1994 Code)
F. A person who has been convicted of pandering or any other crime or misdemeanor in violation of decency and morality. (Ord. 1998-24, 4-2-1998)
G. A person whose license issued under this chapter has been revoked for cause.
H. A person who, at the time of application for renewal of any license issued hereunder, would not be eligible for such license under a first application.
I. A copartnership, unless all the members of such copartnership shall be qualified to receive a license.
J. A corporation, if any officer, manager or director thereof, or any stockholder or stockholders owning in the aggregate more than five percent (5%) of the
stock of such corporation, would not be eligible to receive a license hereunder for any reason other than citizenship and residence within the village.
K. A person whose place of business is conducted by a manager or agent unless said manager or agent possesses the same qualifications required of the
licensee.
L. A person who does not own the premises for which a license is sought, or does not have a lease thereon for the full period for which the license is to be
issued, provided that the said premises are properly zoned permitting the sale of alcoholic liquor.
M. Any law enforcing public official, president, any member of the board of trustees, and no such official shall be interested in any way, either directly or
indirectly, in the manufacture, sale or distribution of alcoholic liquor.
N. Any person, association or corporation not eligible for a state retail liquor dealer's license. (1994 Code)
O. Any applicant without dramshop insurance. Applicants shall furnish evidence satisfactory to the local liquor control commissioner that such applicant is
covered by a policy of dramshop insurance issued by a responsible insurance company authorized and licensed to do business in the state insuring
such applicant against liability which applicant may incur under the provisions of section 5/6-21 of the Liquor Control Act1.
The provisions of this subsection shall be liberally construed and each applicant and license holder shall have the burden of providing the Local Liquor
Control Commissioner with satisfactory evidence that said insurance is in full force and effect at any particular time during the term of any such license.
Failure to do so after the issuance of any local liquor license shall render said license void ab initio. (Ord. 1998-24, 4-2-1998)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 73/498
P. A person who has not applied for and obtained a special use permit for the sale of alcoholic liquor from the Village Board. (Ord. 1999-55, 11-4-1999)
Q. Any person, association, corporation or applicant that has failed to pay, after notice, any judgment or fine due and owing the Village or is in arrears in
the payment of any penalty, tax or other indebtedness or charge due and owing to the Village. (Ord. 2018-3, 1-18-2018)
3-4-6: EXAMINATION OF APPLICANT FOR LOCAL LICENSE:
The Local Liquor Control Commissioner shall have the right to examine, or cause to be examined, under oath, any application for a local license or for a
renewal thereof, or any licensee upon whom notice of revocation or suspension has been served as provided by statute, and to examine or cause to be
examined the books and records of any such applicant or licensee, to hear testimony and take proofs for his information in the performance of his duties,
and for such purpose to issue subpoenas which shall be effective in any part of this State. For the purpose of obtaining any of the information desired by
the Local Liquor Control Commissioner under this section, he may authorize his agent to act on his behalf, as provided by statute. (1994 Code)
3-4-7: DANCING AND LIVE ENTERTAINMENT:
(Rep. by Ord. 1999-47, 10-7-1999)
3-4-8: LICENSE CLASSIFICATIONS, FEES, NUMBER ISSUED:
There shall be fifteen (15) retail liquor license classifications. At no time shall the maximum number of licenses in each class exceed the actual number of
licenses issued except as amended from time to time by action of the Village Board. The Village Board shall be required to take action to expand the
number of licenses. (Ord. 1998-24, 4-2-1998; amd. Ord. 2015-26, 10-15-2015)
The classes are designated and defined as follows:
A. Class A license:
1. Description: Authorizes the retail sale of alcoholic liquors for consumption on the licensed premises only.
2. License fee: One thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) annually. (1994 Code)
3. Maximum number allowed: Eight (8). (Ord. 2018-2, 1-4-2018)
B. Class A-1 license:
1. Description: Authorizes the retail sale of alcoholic liquors for consumption on, or off of, the licensed premises.
2. License fee: One thousand seven hundred dollars ($1,700.00) annually. (1994 Code)
3. Maximum number allowed: Zero (0). (Ord. 2019-3, 1-3-2019)
C. Class B license:
1. Description: Authorizes the retail sale of alcoholic liquors but not for consumption on the licensed premises.
2. License fee: One thousand three hundred dollars ($1,300.00) annually. (1994 Code)
3. Maximum number allowed: Twelve (12). (Ord. 2019-6, 2-7-2019)
D. Class C license:
1. Description: Authorizes the sale of alcoholic liquors for a period not to exceed twelve (12) hours, and only on the premises described in said license.
2. License fee: Twenty four dollars ($24.00) per twelve (12) hour period.
3. Maximum number allowed: No limit. (1994 Code)
E. Class D license:
1. Description: Authorizes the sale of alcoholic liquors for consumption on the licensed premises only, this class of license being granted only to clubs
or fraternal organizations incorporated under a General Not For Profit Corporation Act, organized for at least three (3) years prior to the making of the
license application and having at least twenty five (25) regular dues paying members who are residents of the Village.
2. License fee: Eight hundred dollars ($800.00) annually.
3. Maximum number allowed: One. (Ord. 2009-23, 9-3-2009)
F. Class F license:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 74/498
1. Description: Authorizes the retail sale of alcoholic beverages defined as beer and wine, only with alcoholic content not to exceed thirty percent (30%)
for consumption on the licensed premises.
2. License fee: Eight hundred dollars ($800.00) annually. (1994 Code)
3. Maximum number allowed: Seventeen (17). (Ord. 2018-26, 10-18-2018)
G. Class G license:
1. Description: Authorizes the free tasting of liquors on the premises. This class of license may only be issued to holders of Class B licenses. Tasting
under this license shall be limited to not more than two (2) days in any month.
2. License fee: Ten dollars ($10.00) per day.
H. Class H license:
1. Description: Authorizes the sale of alcoholic liquors for consumption on the premises only in hotels.
2. License fee: Two thousand four hundred dollars ($2,400.00) annually. (1994 Code)
3. Maximum number allowed: Zero (0). (Ord. 2019-3, 1-3-2019)
I. Class I license:
1. Description: Authorizes the retail sale of alcoholic liquors for consumption on the premises only in restaurants, expressly providing, however, that
such licenses shall be issued only to establishments having a regular capacity, in accordance with existing Village and State public health and fire
prevention ordinances and statutes, to serve meals to at least one hundred fifty (150) persons at any one time. (Ord. 2000-6, 2-3-2000)
2. License fee: One thousand six hundred dollars ($1,600.00) annually. (1994 Code)
3. Maximum number allowed: Two (2). (Ord. 2019-3, 1-3-2019)
J. Class J license:
1. Description: Authorizes the retail sale of alcoholic liquors for consumption on the premises only in banquet halls.
2. License fee: Two thousand four hundred dollars ($2,400.00) annually. (Ord. 2018-25, 10-4-2018)
3. Maximum number allowed: One. (Ord. 2019-3, 1-3-2019)
K. Class K license:
1. Description: Authorizes the sale or delivery of alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises only in Park District buildings where authorized by the
Streamwood Park District Board. In such cases where the sale of alcoholic liquors in Park District buildings is conducted for a single event by a
person, club or corporation other than the Streamwood Park District, such person, club or corporation shall secure a Class C license for such event.
2. License fee: None.
3. Maximum number allowed: Only one such license allowed which may only be issued to the Park District.
L. Class L license:
1. Description: Authorizes the retail sale of alcoholic beverages defined as beer and wine, only with alcoholic content not to exceed thirty percent (30%)
but not for consumption on the licensed premises.
2. License fee: One thousand dollars ($1,000.00) annually. (1994 Code)
3. Maximum number allowed: One. (Ord. 2018-25, 10-4-2018)
M. Class M license:
1. Description: Authorizes the retail sale of alcoholic beverages defined as beer and wine, only with an alcoholic content not to exceed thirty percent
(30%) of content not for the consumption or use on the licensed premises where delivery is by mail or common carrier.
2. License fee: Eight hundred dollars ($800.00) annually. (Ord. 1994-18, 4-21-1994)
3. Maximum number allowed: None. (Ord. 1998-34, 5-21-1998)
N. Class N license:
1. Description: Authorizes the retail sale of alcoholic liquor in its original package but not for consumption on the licensed premises of a convenience or
similar store where the display of alcoholic liquor shall not occupy an area greater than ten percent (10%) of the total sales floor area of the
premises. Alcoholic liquor with an alcohol content exceeding thirty percent (30%) must be displayed behind the sales counter and not accessible by
customers. Alcoholic liquor with an alcohol content exceeding thirty percent (30%) shall not be sold in containers of less than eight (8) ounces
(236.5 mL).
2. License fee: One thousand three hundred dollars ($1,300.00) annually. (Ord. 2014-35, 12-4-2014, eff. 1-1-2015)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 75/498
3. Maximum number allowed: One. (Ord. 2019-6, 2-7-2019)
O. Class O license:
1. Description: Authorizes the retail sale of alcoholic beverages defined as beer for consumption on or off the premises of a grocery store/restaurant.
2. License fee: One thousand dollars ($1,000.00) annually. (Ord. 2015-26, 10-15-2015)
3. Maximum number allowed: Zero (0). (Ord. 2016-7, 4-7-2016)
3-4-9: LICENSE TERM:
Licenses shall be issued for the period beginning January 1 and shall be valid to and including December 31, both in the same year, to be known as the
license period. (1994 Code)
3-4-10: DISPOSITION OF FEES:
All such license fees shall be paid to the Village at the time application for license is made. In the event the license applied for is denied, the fee shall be
returned to the applicant. If the license is granted, then the fee shall be deposited in the General Corporate Fund or in such fund as shall have been
designated by the Village President and the Board of Trustees by proper action. (1994 Code)
3-4-11: TRANSFER OF LICENSE:
A license shall be a purely personal privilege, good for not to exceed one year after issuance unless sooner revoked as is in this chapter provided, and
shall not constitute property, nor shall it be subject to being encumbered or hypothecated. Such licenses shall not descend by the laws of testate or
intestate devolution, but shall cease upon the death of the licensee; provided, that executor or administrators of the estate of any deceased licensee, and
the trustee of any insolvent or bankrupt licensee when such estate consists in part of alcoholic liquor, may continue the business of the sale or
manufacture of alcoholic liquor under the order of the appropriate court, and may exercise the privileges of the deceased or insolvent or bankrupt licensee
after the death of such decedent or such insolvency or bankruptcy until the expiration of such license, but no longer than six (6) months, after the death,
bankruptcy or insolvency of such licensee. A refund shall be made of that portion of the license fee paid for any period in which the licensee shall be
prevented from operating under such license in accordance with the provisions of this section. (1994 Code)
3-4-12: CHANGE OF LOCATION:
A liquor dealer's license shall permit the sale of alcoholic liquor only in the premises described in the application and license. Such location may be
changed only upon the written permit to make such change issued by the Village President. No change of location shall be permitted unless the proposed
new location is a proper one for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor under the Statutes of the State and the provisions of this Code. (1994 Code)
3-4-13: RENEWAL OF LICENSE:
Any licensee may renew his license at the expiration thereof; provided, that he is then qualified to receive a license and the premises for which such
renewal license is sought are suitable for the purpose; provided further, that the renewal privilege herein provided for shall not be construed as a vested
right which shall in any case prevent the Board of Trustees from decreasing the number of licenses to be issued within the Village. No license shall be
renewed if the licensee has failed to pay, after notice, any judgment or fine due and owing to the Village or if the licensee is in arrears in the payment of
any penalty, tax or other indebtedness or charge due and owing to the Village. (Ord. 2018-3, 1-18-2018)
3-4-14: LOCATION RESTRICTIONS:
A. Proximity To Church, School Or Hospital: No license shall be issued for the sale at retail of any alcoholic liquors within one hundred feet (100') of any
church, school, hospital or home for the aged or indigent persons. However, in the event a church, school, hospital or home for the aged or indigent
persons obtains a temporary license to sell alcoholic liquors for charitable purposes, this restriction shall not apply.
B. Restrictions In Residential Areas: It is hereby determined that the following described portions of the Village are predominantly residential in character:
All that territory restricted to single residence use and multi-family building use under the zoning ordinance of the Village. No license shall be issued for
a location falling within the above listed areas; provided however, the aggregate number of hours of all such licenses issued for the same location shall
not exceed thirty (30) hours in any period of one hundred sixty eight (168) hours. Such number of hours shall be counted from the first hour for which
any such license is granted.
C. Park District Excepted: The above restrictions shall not apply to premises owned by a Park District. (1994 Code)
D. Village Hall: The delivery of alcoholic beverages is approved for the premises commonly known as the Streamwood Village Hall, 301 East Irving Park
Road, only for civic and charitable events. (Ord. 1993-78, 12-16-1993)
3-4-15: CLOSING HOURS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 76/498
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale, serve or retail any alcoholic liquor in the Village:
A. Before the hour of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. on any day except Sunday and before nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. on Sunday; (1994 Code)
B. After the hour of twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight for Class B, Class L and Class N liquor license holders and for that portion of a Class A-1 liquor license
holder which provides for the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption off of the licensed premises. (Ord. 2016-7, 4-7-2016)
C. After the hour of one o'clock (1:00) A.M. on Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday and Friday; after two o'clock (2:00) A.M. Saturday, Sunday and
New Year's Day for all license holders other than those provided for in subsection B of this section. (1994 Code)
3-4-16: PREMISES AND BUILDING REGULATIONS:
A. Sanitary Conditions: All premises used for the sale of alcoholic liquor, or for the storage of such liquor for sale, shall be kept in a clean and sanitary
condition, and shall be kept in full compliance with the Village ordinances regulating the condition of premises used for the storage or sale of food for
human consumption.
B. View From Street: In premises in which the sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises is licensed, other than in restaurants, hotels or
clubs, no screen, blind, curtain, partition, article or thing shall be permitted in the windows or upon the doors of such licensed premises nor inside such
premises, which shall prevent a clear view into the interior of such licensed premises from the street, road or sidewalk at all times, and no booth,
screen, partition or other obstruction nor any arrangement of lights or lighting shall be permitted in or about the interior of such premises which shall
prevent a full view of the entire interior of such premises, and the entire space used by the public must be so located that there shall be a full view of
the same from the street, road or sidewalk. All rooms where alcoholic liquor is sold for consumption on the premises shall be continually lighted at all
hours by natural or artificial white lights so that all parts of the interior of the premises shall be clearly visible. In case the view into any such licensed
premises required by the foregoing provisions shall be wilfully obscured by the licensee or by another person authorized by him, such license may be
revoked in the manner herein provided. In order to enforce the provisions of this subsection, the Local Liquor Commissioner shall have the right to
require the filing with him of plans, drawings and photographs showing the clearance of the view as above required. (1994 Code)
3-4-17: EMPLOYEE REQUIREMENTS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to employ in any premises used for the sale of alcoholic liquor any person who is afflicted with, or who is a carrier of, any
contagious, infectious or venereal disease, and it shall be unlawful for any person afflicted with or who is a carrier of any such disease to work in or about
any such premises or to engage in the handling, preparation or distribution of such liquor. (1994 Code)
3-4-18: STORES SELLING SCHOOL SUPPLIES, LUNCHES:
No license shall be issued to any person for the sale at retail of any alcoholic liquor at any store or other place of business where the majority of the
customers are minors or school age or where the principal business transacted consists of schoolbooks, school supplies, food, lunches or drinks for such
minors. (1994 Code)
3-4-19: RESTRICTIONS CONCERNING MINORS:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of twenty one (21) years to purchase or obtain any alcoholic liquor in any tavern or other place in the
Village where alcoholic liquor is sold.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of twenty one (21) years to misrepresent his or her age for the purpose of purchasing or obtaining
alcoholic liquor in any tavern or other place in the Village where alcoholic liquor is sold. (1994 Code)
C. In every tavern or other place in the Village where alcoholic liquor is sold there shall be displayed at all times in a prominent place:
WARNING TO MINORS
You are subject to a fine up to $750.00 under the provisions of the Streamwood Village Code if you purchase alcoholic liquor or misrepresent your
age for the purpose of purchasing or obtaining alcoholic liquor.
(1994 Code; amd. Ord. 2010-9, 5-6-2010)
D. It shall be unlawful for any holder of a retail liquor dealer's license or his agent or employee to suffer or permit any person under the age of twenty one
(21) years to remain in any room or compartment adjoining or adjacent to or situated in the room or place where such licensed premises are located;
provided, that this subsection shall not apply to any person under the age of twenty one (21) years who is accompanied by his parent or guardian, or to
any licensed premises which derives its principal business from the sale or services of other commodities than alcoholic liquor.
The president may revoke or suspend the retail liquor dealer's license for any violation of this section.
E. It shall be unlawful for any parent or guardian to permit any minor child of which he may be the parent or guardian to violate any of the provisions of this
section.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 77/498
F. No person under the age of twenty one (21) years may draw, pour, sell, mix or tend bar of any alcoholic liquors as an employee of any retail licensee.
(1994 Code)
3-4-20: GAMBLING AND/OR GAMES OF CHANCE:
A. Games Of Chance: It shall be unlawful for any games of chance to be located in or on the licensed premises where alcoholic liquor is to be sold.
B. Slot And Pinball Machines: It shall also be unlawful for any slot machine or for any pinball machine which returns to the player money or other valuable
property to be located in or on the licensed premises where alcoholic liquor is to be sold.
C. Coin In The Slot Mechanical Devices: Coin in the slot operated mechanical devices played for amusement which can reward the player with free
games, which devices are so constructed or devised as to make such result of the operation thereof depend in part upon the skill of the player and
which return to the player thereof no money, property or right to receive money or property are permitted in or on the licensed premises where alcoholic
liquor is to be sold. (1994 Code)
D. Simulated Video Or Mechanical Gaming Devices: It shall be unlawful for any simulated video or mechanical gaming devices to be located in or on the
licensed premises where alcoholic liquor is to be sold. (Ord. 2004-8, 3-4-2004, eff. 1-1-2005)
E. Video Gaming Devices/Terminals: The provisions of this section notwithstanding, video gaming devices/terminals shall be permitted on those premises
holding a valid on premises consumption liquor license as may be authorized by section 3-4-21 of this chapter and as licensed pursuant to the
provisions of the Illinois video gaming act2. (Ord. 2013-20, 6-20-2013)
3-4-21: VIDEO GAMING:
A. Definitions: As used in this section, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
APPLICANT: Any person or entity applying for a video gaming license under this section.
CODE: The village code of ordinances of the village of Streamwood, Cook County, Illinois.
FRATERNAL ORGANIZATION: An organization or institution organized and conducted on a not for profit basis with no personal profit inuring to anyone
as a result of the operation and that is exempt from federal income taxation under section 501(c)(8) or (c)(10) of the internal revenue code.
GAMING LICENSEE: The person, firm or entity to whom a license has been granted by the village and state permitting it to engage in the defined
activities of video gaming.
ILLINOIS GAMING BOARD: The board created by the Illinois legislature to regulate video gaming by the state of Illinois.
LICENSED FRATERNAL ESTABLISHMENT: The location where a qualified fraternal organization that derives its charter from a national fraternal
organization regularly meets.
LICENSED VETERANS' ESTABLISHMENT: The location where a qualified veterans' organization that derives its charter from a national veterans'
organization regularly meets.
LICENSED VIDEO GAMING LOCATION: A "liquor licensed establishment", "licensed fraternal establishment" or a "licensed veterans' establishment",
all as defined in section 5 of the video gaming act and this section that holds a valid video gaming license granted by the village and state permitting
the licensee to locate one or more, but not more than five (5) video gaming terminals at the establishment.
LIQUOR COMMISSION: The liquor commission of the village.
LIQUOR LICENSE: A retail local license issued by the village authorizing the holder to sell and offer for sale at retail alcoholic liquor for use or
consumption on the premises.
LIQUOR LICENSED ESTABLISHMENT: Any retail liquor licensed establishment in the village where alcoholic liquor is drawn, poured, mixed, or
otherwise served for consumption on the premises.
STATE: The state of Illinois.
STATE LICENSE: Authorization granted by the Illinois gaming board permitting a licensee to engage in the defined activities of video gaming.
VETERANS' ORGANIZATION: An organization or institution organized and conducted on a not for profit basis with no personal profit inuring to anyone
as a result of the operation and that is exempt from federal income taxation under section 501(c)(19) of the internal revenue code (26 USC 501(c)(19)).
VIDEO GAMING ACT: The Illinois video gaming act3.
VIDEO GAMING LICENSE: Authorization granted by the village permitting a gaming licensee to locate a video gaming terminal at a permitted location
in the village.
VIDEO GAMING TERMINAL: Any electronic video game machine that, upon insertion of cash, is available to play or simulate the play of a video game,
including, but not limited to, video poker, line up, and blackjack, as authorized by the Illinois gaming board utilizing a video display and microprocessors
in which the player may receive free games or credits that can be redeemed for cash. The term does not include a machine that directly dispenses
coins, cash, or tokens or is for amusement purposes only.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 78/498
VILLAGE: The village of Streamwood, Cook County, Illinois.
B. Premises Authorized: Premises licensed to sell alcoholic liquor for consumption on the licensed premises only, licensed fraternal organizations and
licensed veterans' organizations, shall be authorized to operate and maintain up to five (5) video gaming terminals when so licensed by the Illinois
gaming board and the village of Streamwood.
C. License Fee: Every licensed establishment that is licensed to operate a video gaming terminal(s) by the Illinois gaming board pursuant to the provisions
of the Illinois video gaming act, 230 Illinois Compiled Statutes 40/1 et seq., shall pay an annual license fee of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) to the
village for each video gaming terminal located at the licensed establishment. Such license fee shall be in addition to any license fee imposed by the
Illinois gaming board.
1. The annual license fee shall be for a period ending on December 31 of each year.
2. Upon payment of the video gaming terminal license fee, the village clerk shall issue a video gaming license sticker which shall be affixed to each
video gaming terminal in a conspicuous place, readily identifiable upon public inspection. Video gaming terminal licenses shall not be transferable.
D. License Required: It shall be unlawful to operate a video gaming terminal in the village without having first paid the annual video gaming terminal
license fee.
E. Location: Video gaming terminals shall be located in an area that is restricted to persons over twenty one (21) years of age.
F. Hours: Video gaming terminals may not be operated or played during the hours alcoholic liquor sales are prohibited.
G. Compliance With State And Local Law: Every licensed video gaming location shall comply with all provisions of the Illinois video gaming act, 230 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 40/1 et seq., and all rules, regulations and restrictions imposed by the Illinois gaming board and all ordinances of the village. (Ord.
2013-20, 6-20-2013)
3-4-22: PEDDLING PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful to peddle alcoholic liquor in the village. (1994 Code)
3-4-23: OFFENSES BY LICENSEE:
No licensee under the provisions of this chapter shall, either individually or through his agents or employees, do any of the following:
A. Canceled Revenue Stamps: Sell or possess for sale any package containing alcoholic liquor unless the same shall have affixed thereto all canceled
revenue stamps which may be required by law.
B. Serving Alcohol To Be Consumed Off Premises: Knowingly serve any alcoholic beverage to any person for consumption other than on the licensed
premises unless in its original package for consumption off the premises.
C. Permitting Alcohol Consumption On Premises: Permit any person to consume any alcoholic liquor on the premises described in the license unless such
alcoholic liquor has been purchased on the premises.
D. Exhibiting Intimate Apparel: Sell, offer for sale or exhibit any items of intimate apparel, including lingerie, undergarments, sleepwear or swimsuits on the
premises. (1994 Code)
E. Supplying Alcohol To Minors: Sell, give or deliver any alcoholic liquor to any person under the age of twenty one (21) years, or to any intoxicated
person, or to any person known to him to be a habitual drunkard, insane, mentally ill, mentally deficient or in need of mental treatment. (Ord. 1999-47,
10-7-1999)
F. Bottle Service: Sell or offer for sale bottle service on the licensed premises.
G. Responsibility Of Licensee For Employee Actions: Every act or omission of whatsoever nature constituting a violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter by an officer, director, manager or other agent or employee of any licensee, if such act is committed or omission is made within the scope of
such agency or employment or with the authorization, knowledge or approval of the licensee, shall be deemed and held to be the act of such employer
or licensee and such employer and licensee shall be punishable in the same manner as if such act or omission had been done or omitted by the
licensee personally. (Ord. 2015-26, 10-15-2015)
3-4-24: RESPONSIBLE ALCOHOL SERVICE SERVER TRAINING:
A. All alcohol servers shall obtain and complete training in basic responsible alcohol service as provided in 77 Illinois administrative code 3500, by July 1,
2015, or within one hundred twenty (120) days after the alcohol server begins his or her employment, whichever is later.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 79/498
B. The renewal application for a class A, A-1, B, D, F, H, I, J, L, M, N and O license shall be accompanied with proof of completion of a state certified
alcohol education and training program.
C. A photocopy of the certificate of completion of a state certified alcohol education and training program for each server must be filed with the village clerk
and maintained in the manager's office of the licensed premises. (Ord. 2015-26, 10-15-2015)
3-4-25: ENTRY POWERS:
The local liquor commissioner is hereby given the power to enter or to authorize any law enforcing officer to enter at any time upon the premises licensed
hereunder to determine whether any of the provisions of the dramshop act, 235 Illinois Compiled Statutes, or any rules or regulations adopted by him or by
the state liquor commission have been or are being violated and at such time to examine the premises of said licensee in connection therewith. (1994
Code)
3-4-26: SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION OF LICENSE; FINES:
A. Fines; Notice: The local liquor control commission may, in accordance with the Illinois liquor control act4, revoke or suspend any license issued under
the provisions of this chapter, if it determines that the licensee has violated any of the provisions of the Illinois liquor control act, this chapter or any
other ordinance or resolution enacted by the corporate authorities of the village, or any applicable rules or regulations established by the local liquor
commission or the Illinois liquor control commission, or any state and/or federal statute which is not inconsistent with the law. In addition to a
suspension or revocation, the local liquor control commission may levy a fine on the licensee for such violations. The fine imposed shall not exceed one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for a first violation within a twelve (12) month period, one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) for a second violation
within a twelve (12) month period, and two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for a third or subsequent violation within a twelve (12) month
period. Each day in which a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. Not more than fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00) in fines under
this section may be imposed against any licensee during the one year license period. However, no such license shall be revoked or suspended nor
shall any licensee be fined except after a public hearing by the local liquor control commission after a three (3) day written notice to the licensee
affording the licensee an opportunity to appear and defend the charges contained in such notice. The three (3) day notice provision shall begin the day
following delivery of a notice of hearing to the licensee, by certified or registered mail or by personal service. Any fine imposed against a licensee
pursuant to this chapter shall constitute a debt due and owing the village of Streamwood and shall be paid to the village within thirty (30) days after
issuance of a written order levying a fine. Failure on the part of a licensee to pay any fine within thirty (30) days may subject the licensee to further
sanctions as herein provided.
B. Premises Threatens Welfare Of Community: If the local liquor control commission has reason to believe that any continued operation of a particular
licensed premises will immediately threaten the welfare of the community it may, upon the issuance of a written order stating the reason(s) for such
conclusion and without notice or hearing order the licensed premises closed for not more than seven (7) days giving the licensee an opportunity to be
heard during that period except that if the licensee is also engaged in another business on the licensed premises such order shall not be applicable to
such other business. Notice of said hearing shall be in the manner herein provided.
C. Written Order: The local liquor control commission shall within five (5) days after such hearing, if it determines after such hearing that the license should
be revoked or suspended, and/or that the licensee should be fined, state the reason for such determination in a written order of revocation, suspension
and/or imposition of fine(s) and serve a copy of such order within five (5) days upon the licensee.
D. Review Of Decisions: Review of decisions of the local liquor control commission shall be limited to a review of the official record of the proceedings of
the local liquor control commission, as provided for in paragraph 7-9 of the Illinois liquor control act.
E. Use Of Premises After Revocation: When any license shall have been revoked for any cause, no license shall be granted to any person or entity for the
period of one year thereafter for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor in the premises described in the revoked license unless the revocation order has been
vacated or unless the revocation order was entered as to the revoked licensee only. (Ord. 2015-26, 10-15-2015)
3-4-27: DISPLAYING LICENSE:
Every licensee shall cause his/her licenses to be framed and hung in plain view in a conspicuous place of the licensed premises. (1994 Code)
Chapter 5
AMUSEMENTS
ARTICLE 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS
3-5.1-1: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
The provisions of this Article, except as to licensing and fees, shall apply to all public shows, theatricals, circuses and other amusements in the Village,
whether specifically licensed in another article in this Chapter or not. (1994 Code)
3-5.1-2: LICENSES REQUIRED, APPLICATION AND FEES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 80/498
It shall be unlawful to conduct or operate any amusement which is open to the public and for admittance to which a fee is charged, without having first
obtained a license therefor; provided, that the provisions of this Section shall not be held to apply to those amusements which are specifically licensed by
any other ordinance of the Village, and where applicable all applications for licenses relating to amusements shall be accompanied by a certificate of
insurance showing the amount of liability insurance coverage by the applicant. Applications for such licenses shall be made to the Village Clerk, and shall
comply with all of the general provisions of this Code relating to such applications. See Section 3-2-2 of this Title for fees. (1994 Code)
3-5.1-3: ORDER, CROWDING:
The audience of any amusement, show or theatrical must be orderly and quiet at all times, and it shall be unlawful for any person attending such
amusement, show or theatrical to create a disturbance in the audience.
It shall be unlawful to permit or gather such a crowd to witness any amusement or show as to create a dangerous condition because of fire or other risks.
(1994 Code)
3-5.1-4: STREET SHOWS:
No permit shall be granted or given for any carnival, exhibition, show or other amusement to be given on any public street or sidewalk or in such place that
the only main accommodation for the public or the audience will be in a public place, except on order of the President and Board of Trustees. (1994 Code)
3-5.1-5: ATHLETIC EXHIBITIONS:
It shall be unlawful to conduct, operate or exhibit any race between persons, animals or vehicles, or any baseball game, boxing or wrestling matches or
any other athletic contest or exhibition for admission to which a fee is charged without having first procured a license therefor.
The proprietor of such exhibition shall submit to the Village Clerk a statement verified under oath of the gross receipts of such game, contest or race,
within one week after such exhibition. At the same time, the proprietor or person exhibiting or operating such exhibition shall pay to the Clerk a sum equal
to three percent (3%) of the gross receipts, after deducting the license fee paid. (1994 Code)
3-5.1-6: PROHIBITED ACTS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to:
A. Indecent Shows: Present, exhibit, conduct or take part in any indecent show, theatrical, play, motion picture, exhibition or other form of public
amusement or show.
B. Riots: Present any public amusement or show of any kind which tends to or is calculated to cause or promote any riot or disturbance. (1994 Code)
3-5.1-7: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this Article shall be fined as set forth in Section 1-4-1 of this Code; and a separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continue. (1994 Code)
ARTICLE 2. COIN OPERATED AMUSEMENT AND MUSIC DEVICES
3-5.2-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this article, the following words and phrases shall have the indicated meanings unless from the context a different meaning clearly appears:
ADULT ATTENDANT: Adult attendant shall mean that a person not less than twenty one (21) years of age and an employee of the licensee shall be
present on the licensed premises at all times that the licensed premises are open for business.
AMUSEMENT ARCADE: An establishment open to the public which is used for the operation and maintenance of automatic amusement devices, as
hereinafter defined, and utilizing not less than eleven (11) nor more than fifty (50) automatic amusement devices.
AUTOMATIC AMUSEMENT MACHINE: Any mechanical or video machine, fortune telling machine, palm reading machine, and machines and devices for
games of skill and science which returns to the player thereof no money or property or no right to receive money or property or other thing of value and
which is governed or controlled by the insertion of a coin, token, slug, currency or similar object.
GAME AREA: An establishment open to the public which is used for a purpose other than the operation and maintenance of automatic amusement
devices, but which operates and maintains more than five (5) but less than eleven (11) such automatic devices.
GAME AREA, LIQUOR ESTABLISHMENT: A game area conducted in a place of business licensed to sell liquor under a class A or class A-1 license of the
village. Such game areas shall be permitted to have five (5) or less automatic amusement devices.
GROSS PUBLIC FLOOR AREA: That portion of the licensed premises accessible to the public, excluding bathroom facilities.
SIMULATED VIDEO OR MECHANICAL GAMING DEVICES: Any video poker machine, video or mechanical slot machine (excluding inoperable antique
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 81/498
slot machines, as defined by section 28-1(b)(7) of the Illinois criminal code1), video or mechanical bingo machine or other device which involves any game
of chance or amusement based upon poker, blackjack, dog racing or horseracing, craps, and any card or dice game, or any similar device operated by
means of the insertion of a coin, token, slug, currency or similar object. (1994 Code; amd. Ord. 2004-8, 3-4-2004, eff. 1-1-2005)
3-5.2-2: RESTRICTIONS ON OPERATIONS:
A. No person shall keep, conduct or operate for profit any amusement arcade, game area or amusement device without first being licensed to do so as
hereinafter provided.
B. No amusement arcade or game area shall be kept, conducted or operated so as to constitute a public nuisance.
C. It shall be the responsibility of the licensee to maintain order on the licensed premises at all times.
D. Amusement arcade licenses shall provide not less than one parking space for each one hundred (100) square feet of gross public floor area and not
less than one slot in a bicycle rack for each two (2) automatic amusement devices being utilized. The maximum number of amusement arcade licenses
is five (5).
E. Game areas are prohibited from utilizing more than ten percent (10%) of their gross public floor area for automatic amusement devices. The maximum
number of game area licenses is six (6).
F. Game area, liquor establishments are prohibited from utilizing more than ten percent (10%) of their gross public floor area for automatic amusement
devices. The maximum number of game area, liquor establishment licenses is unlimited by this subsection but is limited by the number of authorized
retail liquor dealer licenses within the village, from time to time, authorizing sale of liquor by the drink only.
G. The licensee shall provide a full time, responsible adult attendant from the licensed premises during business hours.
H. All amusement arcades shall be special zoning uses.
I. All licenses required and described herein shall be purely grants of personal privileges and shall not constitute property; they shall not be transferable in
any manner. (1994 Code)
3-5.2-3: LICENSES:
Any person desiring to operate, keep, conduct or maintain an amusement arcade or game area or other amusement establishment wherein automatic
amusement machines or devices are operated or maintained for amusement of members of the public, shall adhere to the following procedures before any
license may be granted by the village:
A. Make written application to the village clerk, setting forth therein the information generally required by this code for business licenses and, in addition,
specifying the following:
1. Name: The applicant's full name (if a corporation, firm, partnership or association, all principals thereof must be listed with their addresses);
2. Residence Address: The applicant's residence address;
3. Business Address: The applicant's business address;
4. Proposed Address Of Arcade Or Game Area: The address of the proposed amusement arcade or game area;
5. Addresses Of Interested Persons: The name and address of every person who has any interest in the amusement arcade or game area and the
nature of that interest;
6. Felony Conviction: Whether or not the applicant has been convicted of any felony, or of pandering, gambling, operation of a gambling device,
operation of a gaming house or being a keeper of a house of ill fame, any offense associated with cannabis, alcohol or controlled substances or any
other misdemeanor;
7. Employee Interest: Whether or not the applicant, or his or her spouse, or any relative of the applicant is an employee or representative of the village,
and whether or not any employee or representative of the village is interested in any way, either directly or indirectly, in the license applied for, the
devices or the operation of the same; (1994 Code)
8. Description: A full description of the automatic amusement machine or machines, which description shall contain the manufacturer's name, the make
and the factory and serial numbers thereof for each machine license applied for. No license shall be issued for any simulated video or mechanical
gaming device. (Ord. 2004-8, 3-4-2004, eff. 1-1-2005)
9. Application Fee: All applications shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) to defray the costs of investigation
and licensing. This application fee is not applicable for credit to the licensing fees hereunder.
B. The chief of police shall conduct an investigation of each person named in the application and submit a written report of his findings to the clerk and the
president and board of trustees of the village. (1994 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 82/498
C. Make written application to the planning and zoning board for a special use permit when applying for a game arcade in accordance with customary,
standard procedure. The planning and zoning board shall, in connection with its hearing on the application for a special use permit, consider the
following in addition to those matters customarily considered: (1994 Code; amd. Ord. 2015-9, 5-7-2015)
1. Information contained in the license application.
2. Proposed plans of the applicant to assure the health and safety of children.
3. The space to be allotted by the applicant for installation of the amusement devices. The recommendation standard shall be twenty five (25) square
feet per amusement device and no amusement device shall occupy a space less than four feet (4') wide. The recommended standard shall also
apply to game areas within the corporate limits of the village. (1994 Code)
D. The planning and zoning board shall, after proper hearing of the game arcade application, submit its recommendations concerning the grant of a
special use permit, and any reasonable conditions which should be attached thereto, to the village board. (1994 Code; amd. Ord. 2015-9, 5-7-2015)
E. In the event the village board grants a special use permit for a game arcade, the applicant shall within ten (10) days thereafter remit necessary license
fees to the license clerk and thereupon the applicant shall be issued the appropriate business license and unit licenses. Any conditions of special use
as may be specified by the village board shall be listed on the business license, including the maximum number of machines which are authorized
under the license.
F. Every business license shall at all times during the life thereof be posted in a conspicuous place in the licensed establishment so that the same may be
easily read and seen.
G. Every unit (or device) license issued thereunder shall be issued for the number of machines requested under the business license for the establishment
and such license shall be conspicuously displayed in the licensed establishment. Individual units are not required to bear license stickers and the
licensee may interchange the machines on the licensed premises, provided that the number of units (or devices) shall not exceed at any time the total
number of machines authorized under the business license for the establishment. (1994 Code)
3-5.2-4: AUTOMATIC AMUSEMENT AND GAMING DEVICES PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person or firm or corporation to keep, locate, maintain or operate any simulated video or mechanical gaming device in any area
open to the public within the village. (Ord. 2004-8, 3-4-2004, eff. 1-1-2005)
3-5.2-5: AUTOMATIC MUSIC DEVICES:
A. Definition: The term "automatic music device" means any phonograph, player piano, music box, jukebox or other instrument or device capable of
producing or reproducing vocal or instrumental sounds, other than a motion picture sound machine, which is governed or controlled by the deposit of a
coin or token.
B. License Required: No person shall keep or permit to be kept for gain or profit from operation within the village, any automatic musical instrument without
first having obtained a license as herein provided.
C. Application For License: An application for said license shall be made to the village clerk, in conformity with chapter 1 of this title, except as otherwise
herein provided. In addition, the applicant shall set forth the description of the automatic musical instrument or instruments intended to be kept or used
on his premises.
D. Transfer Of License: No license issued to any person shall be transferable.
E. Regulations: No license issued hereunder shall permit the operation of any automatic instrument at any place or in any manner which will disturb the
peace and quiet of persons outside the licensed premises. No immoral or indecent selections shall be played on any such instrument. (1994 Code)
3-5.2-6: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this article shall be fined as set forth in section 1-4-1 of this code; and a separate offense shall be deemed committed
on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (1994 Code)
ARTICLE 3. BILLIARD AND POOL HALLS
3-5.3-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall operate, maintain or conduct a billiard, pool, bagatelle or pigeonhole table open to the public without having first obtained a license
therefor as is herein required. All applications for such a license shall state thereon the intended location of the place of business and the number of tables
to be used therein. (1994 Code)
3-5.3-2: HOURS OF OPERATION:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 83/498
No hall licensed hereunder shall be used between the hours of one o'clock (1:00) A.M. and nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. on a weekday or between the hours of
one o'clock (1:00) A.M. and twelve o'clock (12:00) noon on a Sunday, except however, a billiard or pool hall which has been granted a liquor license shall
be allowed to stay open during the liquor hours allowed under said license. (1994 Code)
3-5.3-3: MINORS RESTRICTED:
Minors under the age of eighteen (18) years shall not, under any circumstances, frequent, loiter, stay or remain in any hall licensed hereunder at any time
unless it be upon some lawful errand and under the direction and the consent of and knowledge of the parent, guardian or other persons having the lawful
custody of such minor; and it shall be unlawful for the proprietor of any hall so licensed to allow or permit any such minor to frequent, loiter or remain within
the hall in violation of this Section. (1994 Code)
3-5.3-4: SALE OF ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR:
It shall be unlawful for any person owning, operating or conducting a billiard or pool table which is accessible to the general public to sell or permit the sale
of alcoholic liquor therein, except whenever said billiard or pool table is operated as part and parcel of a bowling alley and saidbowling alley has a permit
for the sale of alcoholic liquor therein. (Ord. 1995-5, 1-19-1995)
3-5.3-5: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this Article shall be fined as set forth in Section 1-4-1 of this Code. (1994 Code)
ARTICLE 4. BOWLING ALLEYS
3-5.4-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall operate or maintain a bowling alley open to the public without having first obtained a license therefor; application for such license shall be
made in writing and shall state thereon the intended location of the place of business and the number of alleys to be used. (1994 Code)
3-5.4-2: HOURS OF OPERATION:
No person shall keep open, operate or use any such alley between the hours of one o'clock (1:00) A.M. and nine o'clock (9:00) A.M., except, if said
bowling alley has a valid liquor license, the hours of said bowling alley shall be allowed to correspond to the hours of the liquor license. (1994 Code)
3-5.4-3: GAMBLING PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to gamble, bet or permit any form of gambling or betting in any premises used for a bowling alley, pin or ball alley. (1994
Code)
3-5.4-4: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this Article shall be fined as set forth in Section 1-4-1 of this Code; and a separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (1994 Code)
ARTICLE 5. MOTION PICTURES, THEATRICALS
3-5.5-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful to give, present or conduct any motion picture or theatrical for admission to which a fee is charged, excepting performances given
solely for the benefit of and under the supervision of a religious, educational or charitable organization, without having first secured a license therefor as is
herein provided. (1994 Code)
3-5.5-2: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Applications for such licenses shall be made in conformance with the general provisions relating to such applications, and shall state in addition to the
other information required the place of the intended performance and the seating capacity thereof. (1994 Code)
3-5.5-3: OUTDOOR THEATERS:
Outdoor theaters where the audience is not housed in a building shall be conducted in full compliance with all applicable provisions of this Article. (1994
Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 84/498
3-5.5-4: CROWDING, ORDER:
It shall be unlawful to permit any person, excepting ushers or other theater employees, to remain standing in a hall or room in which a motion picture is
presented during the time of such performance; and it shall be unlawful to admit to any such hall more persons than can be accommodated by the seating
arrangements for the premises. (1994 Code)
3-5.5-5: PROHIBITED PICTURES:
It shall be unlawful to permit any person to offer or presentany motion picture which has a tendency to cause a riot or public disturbance of the peace, or
any immoral, indecent or blasphemous picture or performance. (1994 Code)
3-5.5-6: OBSTRUCTING EXITS:
It shall be unlawful to obstruct or permit the obstruction of any aisles, corridors or exits leading from the room or enclosures in which a motion picture
performance or theatrical is being given or in which an audience for such a performance is gathered. (1994 Code)
3-5.5-7: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this Article shall be fined as set forth in Section 1-4-1 of this Code; and a separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (1994 Code)
ARTICLE 6. PUBLIC DANCES
3-5.6-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful to operate or conduct a public dance in the Village without having first obtained a license therefor as is herein required. (1994 Code)
3-5.6-2: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Application for such licenses shall be made in conformance with the provisions of Chapter 1 of this Title relating to licenses, and shall specify the location
of the proposed dances and the person or organization sponsoring the dance.
No such license shall be issued to a person who is not a person of good moral character, nor to a corporation or organization which is not represented by a
person of good moral character. (1994 Code)
3-5.6-3: INVESTIGATION OF APPLICANT:
It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to make or cause to be made an investigation into the character of each applicant and report the results of such
investigation to the Board of Trustees. (1994 Code)
3-5.6-4: CONDUCT AT DANCES:
It shall be unlawful to indulge in or to permit any improper or any immoral conduct at any public dance. (1994 Code)
3-5.6-5: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this Article shall be fined as set forth in Section 1-4-1 of this Code; and a separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (1994 Code)
ARTICLE 7. SKATING RINKS
3-5.7-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful to operate or maintain a public skating rink in the Village without first having obtained a license therefor as is herein provided. (1994
Code)
3-5.7-2: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; INVESTIGATION:
Application for such licenses shall be made in conformance with the provisions of Chapter 1 of this Title relating to licenses and shall specify the location of
the proposed skating rink and the person or organization sponsoring the same.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 85/498
No such license shall be issued to a person who is not of good moral character nor to a corporation or organization which is not represented in the Village
by a person of good moral character. (1994 Code)
3-5.7-3: OPERATION RESTRICTIONS:
A. It shall be unlawful to indulge in any improper conduct or to permit any improper conduct at any public skating rink.
B. It shall be unlawful to permit music at any public skating rink after the hour of twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight. (1994 Code)
3-5.7-4: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this Article shall be fined as set forth in Section 1-4-1 of this Code; and a separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (1994 Code)
ARTICLE 8. TEENAGE NIGHTCLUBS
3-5.8-1: LICENSE REQUIRED; FEE:
It shall be unlawful to operate a teenage nightclub in the village without first having obtained a license as herein provided and paying a fee as set forth in
section 3-2-2 of this title per year for said license. (1994 Code; amd. Ord. 2003-52, 11-20-2003)
3-5.8-2: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; INVESTIGATION; USE PERMIT:
Any person desiring to operate, keep, conduct or maintain a teenage nightclub shall adhere to the following procedures before any license may be granted
by the village:
A. Application For License; Fee: Make written application to the village clerk, setting forth therein the information generally required by this code for
business licenses and, in addition, specifying the following:
1. The applicant's full name (if a corporation, firm, partnership or association, all principals thereof must be listed with their addresses);
2. The applicant's residence address;
3. The applicant's business address;
4. The address of the proposed teenage nightclub;
5. The name and address of every person who has any interest in the teenage nightclub and the nature of that interest;
6. Whether or not the applicant has been convicted of any felony, or of pandering, gambling, operation of a gambling device, operation of a gaming
house or being a keeper of a house of ill fame, any offense associated with cannabis, alcohol or controlled substances or any other misdemeanor;
7. All applications shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) to defray the costs of investigation. This application
fee is not applicable for credit to the licensing fees hereunder.
B. Investigation: The chief of police shall conduct an investigation of each person named in the application and submit a written report of his findings to the
clerk and the president and board of trustees of the village. (1994 Code)
C. Special Use Permit: Make written application to the planning and zoning board for a special use permit when applying for a teenage nightclub in
accordance with customary, standard procedure. The planning and zoning board shall, in connection with its hearing on the application for a special
use permit, consider the following in addition to those matters customarily considered: (1994 Code; amd. Ord. 2015-9, 5-7-2015)
1. Information contained in the license application;
2. Proposed plans of the applicant to assure the health and safety of children. (1994 Code)
D. Hearing: The planning and zoning board shall, after proper hearing of the teenage nightclub application, submit its recommendations concerning the
grant of a special use permit, and any reasonable conditions which should be attached thereto, to the village board. (1994 Code; amd. Ord. 2015-9, 5-
7-2015)
E. Issuance Of License; Conditions: In the event the village board grants a special use permit for a teenage nightclub, the applicant shall within ten (10)
days thereafter remit the necessary license fees to the license clerk and thereupon the applicant shall be issued the appropriate business license. Any
conditions of special use as may be specified by the village board shall be listed on the business license. Application for such license shall be made in
conformance with the provisions of chapter 1 of this title relating to licenses and shall specify location of the proposed teenage nightclub and the
person or organization sponsoring same. No such license shall be issued to a person who is not of good moral character, nor to a corporation or
organization which is not represented in the village by a person of good moral character. (1994 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 86/498
3-5.8-3: ADULT SUPERVISION:
It shall be unlawful to conduct a teenage nightclub on any premises at any time without adult supervision. An adult must be present at all times during
business hours. An adult attendant shall mean a person, not less than twenty one (21) years of age and an employee of the licensee. (1994 Code)
3-5.8-4: HOURS OF OPERATION:
No teenage nightclub shall operate prior to nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. nor stay open after legal curfew. (1994 Code)
3-5.8-5: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES:
No alcoholic beverages shall be allowed on the premises or sold on the premises. (1994 Code)
3-5.8-6: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this article shall be fined as set forth in section 1-4-1 of this code for each offense. A separate offense shall be
deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. In addition thereto, the president and board of trustees shall have the
right to rescind the business license of any teenage nightclub found to be causing a public nuisance or causing chronic complaints. (Ord. 1998-4, 1-8-
1998)
Chapter 6
FOOD DEALERS
ARTICLE 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS
3-6.1-1: DEFINITIONS:
The term "food dealer" as used in this chapter shall be construed to mean and include every person, firm or corporation engaged in the sale of food or
beverage (other than intoxicating liquor) intended for human consumption.
The sale of any food or beverage by means of a coin operated vending machine shall be construed as conducting the business of a food dealer.
The term "food" as used in this chapter shall be construed to include beverages. (1994 Code)
3-6.1-2: LICENSE REQUIRED, APPLICATION:
It shall be unlawful for any food dealer to engage in or do business in the village without first having secured a license therefor. Applications for such
licenses shall be made in compliance with the general provisions of this title relating thereto, and shall state the kind of food intended to be sold or
handled. (1994 Code)
3-6.1-3: RULES AND REGULATIONS ADOPTED:
A. The 1998 edition of the state of Illinois department of public health food service sanitation rules and regulations, three (3) copies of which are on file in
the office of the village clerk, and any amendments thereto, are hereby adopted and incorporated by reference into this code, subject to the additions,
amendments and deletions hereinafter set forth: (1994 Code; amd. Ord. 2001-53, 12-6-2001)
Amend section 750.1200 to read: take out "sealed concrete."
Add section:
750.101 - No food business will be allowed to operate any food or beverage storage or preparation out of a residential home or attached garage or
detached garage.
Sec. 750.1110 of said rules and regulations is hereby amended by adding thereto paragraphs e) and f) which paragraphs shall read as follows:
e) Every food service establishment which provides for the consumption of food or beverages on the premises including drive-in establishments, shall
provide adequate, conveniently located, public toilet facilities which comply with the Illinois State Plumbing Code. Toilet rooms shall not open directly
into any room which food, drink or utensils are handled or stored.
f) Hand washing signs shall be posted in all toilet facilities utilized by employees.
The words "Local Enforcement Authority" in said rules and regulations shall be understood to refer to the village of Streamwood. (1994 Code)
B. The 1992 edition of the Illinois department of public health retail food store sanitation rules and regulations, three (3) copies of which are on file in the
office of the village clerk, and any amendments or changes thereto, are hereby adopted and incorporated by reference into this code as the regulations
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 87/498
of the village for retail food stores. (1994 Code; amd. Ord. 2001-53, 12-6-2001)
C. The 1978 edition of the U.S. department of health, education and welfare "The Vending of Food and Beverages", three (3) copies of which are on file in
the office of the village clerk, and any amendments or changes thereto, are adopted and incorporated by reference into this code, subject to the
additions, amendments and/or deletions hereinafter set forth:
Sections 6-601 and 6-602 of said regulations are herewith deleted.
(1994 Code)
3-6.1-4: ENFORCEMENT PROVISIONS:
A. Temporary Suspension Of Licenses: Licenses may be suspended temporarily by the health authority for failure of the holder to comply with the
requirements of this article.
Whenever a license holder or operator has failed to comply with any notice issued under the provisions of this article, the license holder or operator
shall be notified in writing that the license is, upon service of the notice, immediately suspended and that a request for a hearing must be filed with the
health authority by the license holder. The suspension order shall be stayed pending any such hearing.
Notwithstanding the other provisions of this article, whenever the health authority finds unsanitary or other conditions in the operation of a food service
establishment or retail food store establishment which, in his judgment, constitute a substantial hazard to the public health, he may, without warning or
notice of hearing, issue a written notice to the license holder or operator citing such condition, specifying the corrective action to be taken, and
specifying the time period within which such action shall be taken; and, if deemed necessary, such order shall state that the license is immediately
suspended, and all food service operations are to be immediately discontinued. Any person to whom such an order is issued shall comply immediately
therewith, but upon written petition to the health authority, shall be afforded a hearing as soon as possible.
B. Reinstatement Of Suspended Licenses: Any person whose license has been suspended may, at any time, make application for a reinspection for the
purpose of reinstatement of the license. Within two (2) days following receipt of a written request, including a statement signed by the applicant that in
his opinion the conditions causing suspension of the license have been corrected, the health authority shall make a reinspection. If the applicant is
complying with the requirements of this article, the permit shall be reinstated.
C. Revocation Of Licenses: For serious or repeated violations of any of the requirements of this article, or for interference with the health authority in the
performance of his duties, the license may be permanently revoked after an opportunity for a hearing has been provided by the health authority. Prior to
such action, the health authority shall notify the license holder in writing, stating the reasons for which the license is subject to revocation and advising
that the license shall be permanently revoked at the end of five (5) days following service of such notice, unless a request for a hearing is filed with the
health authority, by the license holder, within such five (5) day period. A license may be suspended for cause pending its revocation or a hearing
thereto.
D. Hearings: The hearings provided for in this section shall be conducted by the village manager at a time and place designated by him or her. Based upon
the record of such hearing, the village manager shall make a finding to sustain, modify or rescind any official notice or order considered in the hearing.
All hearings for a license revocation or permanent closure of a food establishment or retail food store establishment shall likewise be before the village
manager. Based upon the record of such hearing, the village manager shall make a recommendation to the president and board of trustees whether to
permanently revoke such establishment. A written report of the hearing decision by the president and board of trustees shall be furnished to the license
holder by the health authority within five (5) days from the date said matter is decided by the president and board of trustees. (1994 Code)
3-6.1-5: INSPECTIONS:
A. Inspection Frequency: An inspection of a food service establishment or retail food store establishment shall be performed at least once every six (6)
months. All schools shall be inspected at least once a year. Additional inspections shall be performed as often as are deemed necessary for the
enforcement of this article. (Ord. 2001-53, 12-6-2001)
B. Access: Representatives of the regulatory authority, after proper identification, shall be permitted to enter any food service establishment or retail food
store establishment at any reasonable time for the purpose of making inspections to determine compliance with this article. The representative shall be
permitted to examine the records of the establishment to obtain information pertaining to food and supplies purchased, received or used.
C. Report Of Inspections: Whenever an inspection of a food service establishment or retail food store establishment is made, the finding shall be
recollected on an inspection report form. The inspection report form shall summarize the requirements of this article and shall set forth a weighted point
value for each requirement. Inspectional remarks shall be written to reference, by section number, the section violated and shall state the correction to
be made. The rating score of the establishment shall be the total of weighted point values for all violations, subtracted from one hundred (100). A copy
of the completed inspection report form shall be furnished to the person in charge of the establishment at the conclusion of the inspection. The
completed inspection report form is a public document that shall be made available for public disclosure to any person who requests it according to law.
D. Correction Of Violations:
1. The completed inspection report form shall specify a reasonable period of time for the correction of the violation found; and correction of the
violations shall be accomplished within the period specified, in accordance with the following provisions:
a. If any imminent health hazard exists, such as complete lack of refrigeration or sewage backup into the establishment, the establishment shall
immediately cease food service operations. Operations shall not be resumed until authorized by the regulatory authority.
b. All violations of 4 - or 5 - point weighted items shall be corrected as soon as possible, but in any event, within ten (10) days following inspection.
Within fifteen (15) days after the inspection, the holder of the permit, license or certificate shall submit a written report to the regulatory authority,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 88/498
stating that the 4 - or 5 - point weighted violations have been corrected. A follow up inspection shall be conducted to confirm correction at the
discretion of the Cook County health department.
c. All 1 - or 2 - point weighted items shall be corrected as soon as possible, but in any event, by the time of the next routine inspection. (1994 Code)
d. When the rating score of the establishment is less than eighty (80), the establishment shall receive an additional inspection for compliance within
ninety (90) days of the previous inspection to assure compliance.
e. When the rating score of the establishment is less than sixty (60), the establishment shall initiate corrective action on all identified violations within
forty eight (48) hours. A minimum of one or more reinspections will be conducted at reasonable time intervals to assure correction.
f. In the case of temporary food service establishments, or retail food store establishments, all violations shall be corrected within twenty four (24)
hours. If violations are not corrected within twenty four (24) hours, the establishment shall immediately cease food service operations until
authorized to resume by the regulatory authority. (Ord. 2001-53, 12-6-2001)
2. The inspection report shall state that failure to comply with any time limits for corrections may result in cessation of food service operations. An
opportunity for hearing on the inspection findings or the time limitations or both will be provided if a written request is filed with the regulatory
authority within ten (10) days following cessation of operations. If a request for hearings is received, a hearing shall be held within twenty (20) days of
receipt of the request.
3. Whenever a food service establishment or retail food store establishment is required under the provisions of this subsection D to cease operations, it
shall not resume operations until it is shown on reinspection that conditions responsible for the order to cease operations no longer exist. Opportunity
for reinspection shall be offered within a reasonable time. (1994 Code)
E. Posting Of Health Scores: All food service and retail food store establishments are required to post notice of a passing or failing health score at the front
entrance to the establishment. The form and placement of the notice shall be at the discretion of the community development director, or his designee.
For the purpose of this section, a passing score shall be considered to be a score of eighty (80) or above. (Ord. 2001-53, 12-6-2001)
3-6.1-6: PREMISES AND EQUIPMENT REQUIREMENTS:
From and after the effective date of this article, no existing food service establishment or retail food store establishment shall continue to operate within the
village unless it conforms with the requirements of this article; provided, however that equipment and facilities, installed in a food service establishment or
retail food store establishment prior to the effective date of this article, which do not fully meet all of the design and construction requirements of this
article, shall be deemed acceptable in that establishment if they are in good repair, capable of being maintained in a sanitary condition, and the food
contact surfaces are nontoxic.
A. New Food Service Establishments Or Retail Food Establishments: All food service establishments or retail food store establishments which are
hereafter constructed, reconstructed or extensively altered shall conform in such construction to the requirements of this article. New and replacement
equipment shall meet the requirements of this article as to construction and installation.
B. Plan Review, New Construction: Properly prepared plans, including equipment specifications and installation layouts, shall be submitted to the health
authority for review and approval before work is begun on the construction of new food service establishments or retail food store establishments or the
reconstruction or extensive alteration of existing ones. (1994 Code)
3-6.1-7: SALE OF FOOD FROM OUTSIDE VILLAGE JURISDICTION:
Food from food store establishments or retail food store establishments outside the jurisdiction of the village may be sold within the village if such food
service establishments or retail food store establishments conform to the provisions of this article or to substantially equivalent provisions. To determine
the extent of compliance with such provisions, the health authority may accept reports from the responsible authority or other jurisdictions where such food
service establishments or retail food store establishments are located. (1994 Code)
3-6.1-8: PROCEDURE WHEN INFECTION SUSPECTED:
When the health authority has reasonable cause to suspect possibility of disease transmission from any food service establishment or retail food store
establishment or employee, he shall make such investigation as may be indicated, including the morbidity history of suspected employees and take
appropriate action. The health authority may require any or all of the following measures:
A. The immediate closure of the food service establishment or retail food store establishment concerned until, in the opinion of the health authority, no
further danger of disease outbreak exists. Upon such closure the establishment may open only upon written notice from the health authority.
B. The immediate exclusion of the employee from food service establishments or retail food store establishment.
C. Restriction of the employee's services to some area of the establishment where there would be no danger of transmitting disease.
D. Adequate medical and laboratory examinations of the employee and, if deemed necessary, other employees. (1994 Code)
3-6.1-9: EXAMINATION AND CONDEMNATION:
Samples of food and other substances may be determined or sampled by the health authority as often as may be necessary to determine freedom from
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 89/498
adulteration and misbranding and determine bacteriological contact. The health authority may request the condemnation of or request the removal,
destruction or denaturing of any food which is unwholesome, adulterated or misbranded. The health authority may, upon written notice to the owner or
person in charge, place a tag or hold order on any food which he determines, or has probable cause to believe to be unwholesome. Under a hold order,
food shall be permitted to be suitably stored. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove or alter a hold order, notice or tag placed on food by the health
authority, and neither such food nor the containers thereof shall be relabeled, repacked, reprocessed, altered, disposed of, or destroyed without
permission of the health authority, except on order by a court of competent jurisdiction. The health authority may vacate the hold order, or may by written
order direct the owner or person in charge of the food, which was placed under the hold order, to denature or destroy such food or to bring it into
compliance with provisions of this article; provided, that such order shall be stayed if the order is appealed to a court of competent jurisdiction within three
(3) days. (1994 Code)
3-6.1-10: PENALTIES:
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall be fined as set forth in section 1-4-1 of this code for each occasion. A separate
occasion shall be deemed existing on each day on which a violation continues or occurs. In addition thereto, such persons may be enjoined from
continuing such violations. (Ord. 1998-4, 1-8-1998)
3-6.1-11: FEES:
The cost of any and all inspections required under this article shall be borne by the licensee. The fee for each inspection is set at one hundred ten dollars
($110.00). (1994 Code; amd. Ord. 2001-53, 12-6-2001; Ord. 2014-30, 11-6-2014, eff. 12-1-2014)
ARTICLE 2. FOOD DELIVERY VEHICLES
3-6.2-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful to use any vehicle for the delivery or sale of food intended for human consumption in the Village at retail without having first secured a
license therefor. The term "food" as used in this Article shall include nonalcoholic beverages and milk. (1994 Code)
3-6.2-2: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Application for such license shall comply with the general provisions of Chapter 1 of this Title relating to applications for licenses. (1994 Code)
3-6.2-3: EXEMPTION:
No license fee shall be required for any vehicle used to deliver foodstuffs from any establishment which is licensed and inspected as a food dealing
establishment in the Village; but all provisions of this Article, other than that providing for the payment of a fee, shall be complied with in connection with
such vehicles. (1994 Code)
3-6.2-4: VEHICLE REGULATIONS:
All such vehicles shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be thoroughly cleaned each day they are so used. It shall be unlawful to permit
stale food, decaying matter or any other waste material or product to accumulate in or on any such vehicle while it is so used.
If unwrapped foodstuffs are transported in any such vehicle, such goods shall be carried in a portion or compartment of the vehicle which is screened and
protected against dust and insects. (1994 Code)
3-6.2-5: INSPECTIONS:
It shall be the duty of the President and Board of Trustees to make or cause to be made such inspections as may be necessary to ensure compliance with
the provisions of this Article. (1994 Code)
3-6.2-6: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
Any license issued under the provisions of this Article may be revoked by the President and Board of Trustees for any violation of any provision or
regulation hereof, and such revocation shall be in addition to any fine imposed by virtue of this Article. (1994 Code)
3-6.2-7: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this Article shall be fined as set forth in Section 1-4-1 of this Code; and a separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (1994 Code)
ARTICLE 3. ICE CREAM VENDING VEHICLES
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 90/498
3-6.3-1: DEFINITIONS:
ICE CREAM VENDING VEHICLE: A vehicle from which the retail sale by ice cream or similar confections of beverages for human consumption is
conducted from a roadway.
OWNER: The title holder of an ice cream or similar confections or beverage vending vehicle.
RETAIL SALE: The sale of ice cream or similar confections or beverage to the consumer thereof.
ROADWAY: Any public or private street, highway or road used by vehicles.
VEHICLE: Every motor vehicle which is mechanically propelled and designed to transport one or more persons.
VENDING: The act of selling, or offering to sell, any ice cream or similar confections or beverage for human consumption from an ice cream vending
vehicle on a roadway.
VENDOR: Any person who physically operates an ice cream vending vehicle or any person who physically conducts vending from such a vehicle. (1994
Code)
3-6.3-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, give away, offer for sale or expose for sale any ice cream or similar confection or beverage of any kind from a
truck or other self-propelled motor vehicle, whether or not the same remains in one place in the Village, without first having obtained a license for such
purpose according to Chapter 1 of this Title. (1994 Code)
3-6.3-3: LICENSE LIMITATIONS:
One license shall be required for each such truck or self-propelled motor vehicle being used and not more than four (4) licenses shall be issued or be in
effect at the same time. (1994 Code)
3-6.3-4: INSPECTION OF VEHICLE:
Prior to the issuance of said license, and after the issuance of said license, the licensee shall present to the Public Health Director each truck or other selfpropelled
motor vehicle for inspection as to the cleanliness and sanitation, no less often than every thirty (30) days. (1994 Code)
3-6.3-5: REQUIRED VEHICLE EQUIPMENT:
In addition to having a current State registration, complying with the provisions of this Article and other applicable provisions of this Code, vehicles used for
the vending of ice cream or similar confections or beverages shall be equipped with the following, which shall be in good working order:
A. A sign on the front and back of the vehicle which shall consist of reflective letters no less than three inches (3") in height and shall state "Caution -
Children Crossing".
B. A foldout, diamond-shaped sign on the left side of the vehicle which shall consist of black on yellow reflective letters no less than five inches (5") in
height and shall state "Slow". This sign shall be located at a height of between five feet (5') and eight feet (8') above ground level and shall be
displayed at a ninety degree (90°) angle to the left side of the vehicle whenever it is stopped for the purpose of vending.
C. Two (2) amber lights, each five inches (5") in diameter, mounted on the left and right front, and two (2) amber lights each five inches (5") in diameter,
mounted on the left and right rear of the vehicle, all at the top of the vehicle.
Each left light shall flash alternately from the opposing right light, and have sufficient lumens so that the flashing will be visible at a distance of five
hundred feet (500') whenever the vehicle is stopped for the purpose of vending.
D. A litter or trash container, visible and available to customers of the vending vehicle.
E. Equipment which will keep all perishable ice cream or similar confections at a temperature of zero degrees (0°) to minus ten degrees Fahrenheit
(-10°F). Beverages or other type confections on the vehicle shall be maintained at a temperature of below fifty degrees Fahrenheit (50°F). (1994 Code)
3-6.3-6: PROHIBITIONS ON CONDUCTING BUSINESS:
The following shall not be performed from a vending vehicle:
A. Vending from the left, or driver's side, of the vehicle. (1994 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 91/498
B. The emission of any amplified or electronic noise intended to advertise the presence of the vehicle. Manually operated bells may be utilized while the
vehicle is in motion. The emission of any noise to advertise the presence of the vehicle while the vehicle is stopped is prohibited. (Ord. 2002-20, 5-16-
2002)
C. Vending if the vehicle is not parked with the right side thereof to the curb or right side of the roadway.
D. Vending within a distance of one hundred feet (100') from the nearest intersecting roadway.
E. Vending before ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. any day, or after eight o'clock (8:00) P.M. any day.
F. Vending on any of the following roadways:
Barrington Road.
Irving Park Road (Route 19).
Lake Street (Route 20).
G. Conducting a sale to any customer who is standing on a roadway. (1994 Code)
3-6.3-7: OPERATORS' RESTRICTIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person who is afflicted with or is the carrier of any infectious or contagious disease to conduct vending. (1994 Code)
3-6.3-8: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be fined as set forth in section 1-4-1 of this code for each offense, and each violation shall be
deemed a separate offense. (Ord. 1998-4, 1-8-1998)
Chapter 7
MERCHANTS
ARTICLE 1. BARBER AND BEAUTY COSMETOLOGY SHOPS
3-7.1-1: COMPLIANCE WITH STATE LAW; RULES AND REGULATIONS:
3-7.1-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
BARBER SHOPS AND THE PRACTICE OF BARBERING: As defined in 225 Illinois Compiled Statutes 410/2 et seq., inclusive.
BEAUTY SHOPS AND THE PRACTICE OF BEAUTY COSMETOLOGY: As defined in 225 Illinois Compiled Statutes 410/3 et seq., inclusive. (1994 Code)
3-7.1-1-2: COMPLIANCE WITH STATE LAW:
No person shall operate a barber shop or beauty cosmetology shop except in full compliance with the State statute provisions as set forth in 225 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 410 et seq. (1994 Code)
3-7.1-1-3: INSPECTIONS:
The Superintendent of the Health Department, Health Officer or any other duly appointed assistant shall inspect barber and beauty cosmetology shops as
often as is necessary to ensure compliance with this Section 3-7.1-1. They shall be permitted entry to the premises for the purpose of making inspections.
(1994 Code)
3-7.1-1-4: PENALTY:
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this Section 3-7.1-1 shall be fined, upon conviction, as set forthin Section 1-4-1 of this Code. A
separate offense shall be deemed committed for each day that a violation exists. (Ord. 1998-17, 3-19-1998)
3-7.1-2: VILLAGE LICENSING REGULATIONS, BARBERS, COSMETOLOGY:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 92/498
3-7.1-2-1: DEFINITION:
The word "barber" shall mean every person who shaves or trims the beard; cuts the hair; gives facial or scalp treatments with oils or creams or other
preparations made for that purpose, either by hand or by mechanical appliances; singes or shampoos the hair; applies hair tonic to, or dyes the hair of any
person; or who supervises or manages any persons who do the foregoing.
The word "cosmetologist" shall mean a person who performs any one or any combination of the following practices when done for cosmetic or beautifying
purposes and not for the treatment of disease or of muscular or nervous disorder: arranging, dressing, cutting, trimming, curling, waving, chemical
restructuring, shaping, singeing, bleaching, coloring or similar work, upon the hair of any person; any practice of manicuring, pedicuring, decorating nails,
applying sculptured nails or otherwise artificial nails by hand or with mechanical or electrical apparatus or appliances, or in any way caring for the nails of
another person for other than therapeutic purposes; any practice of epilation or depilation of any person; any practice for the purpose of cleansing,
massaging or toning the skin of the scalp; beautifying, massaging, cleansing or stimulating the skin of the human body by the use of cosmetic
preparations, antiseptics, tonics, lotions or creams or any device, electrical or otherwise, for the care of the skin; applying make-up or eyelashes to any
person, tinting eyelashes and eyebrows and lightening hair on the body and removing superfluous hair from the body of any person by the use of
depilatories, waxing or tweezers. Nothing in this Section 3-7.1-2 shall be construed to prohibit the shampooing of hair by persons employed for that
purpose and who perform that task under the direct supervision of a licensed cosmetologist. (1994 Code)
3-7.1-2-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of a barber without first having obtained a Village license therefor, as hereinafter provided.
(1994 Code)
3-7.1-2-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
The Village Clerk shall issue such license where such barber has furnished the Clerk with the following information:
A. His/her name and residence address;
B. The name and address of his/her employer, if any as such barber in the Village;
C. The address of the location of his/her barbering/cosmetology activities in the Village; and
D. Adequate evidence of his/her having been licensed as such barber or cosmetology under the laws of this State, including his State license number or
photocopy of same. (1994 Code)
3-7.1-2-4: TRANSFERABILITY OF LICENSE, POSTING:
No license issued hereunder shall be transferable to any other person, but can be used at another location in the Village by the same person, after such
licensee has given notice of his change of location to the Village Clerk. Every license issued hereunder shall be prominently displayed in the place of
business of each barber. (1994 Code)
3-7.1-2-5: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this Section 3-7.1-2 shall be fined as set forth in Section 1-4-1 of this Code; and a separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (1994 Code)
ARTICLE 2. CIGARETTE, ELECTRONIC CIGARETTE AND TOBACCO DEALERS
3-7.2-1: DEFINITIONS:
A. As used in this article, the following words shall have the following meanings:
ELECTRONIC CIGARETTE OR E-CIGARETTE: An electronic device usually composed of a mouthpiece, a heating element or atomizer, a battery,
and electronic circuits that provide a gas derived from liquid nicotine and/or other substances which is inhaled by a user simulating smoking. The
term includes such devices, regardless of the details of the product appearance or marketed name, generally manufactured to resemble cigarettes,
cigars, pipes, or other smoking devices.
LIQUID NICOTINE: Any liquid product composed either in whole or part of nicotine, propylene glycol and/or other similar substances and
manufactured for use with an electronic cigarette to be converted into gas for inhaling.
TOBACCO PRODUCTS: Any substance containing tobacco leaf, including, but not limited to, cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, snuff, chewing
tobacco or dipping tobacco. (Ord. 2014-22, 9-4-2014)
3-7.2-2: LICENSE REQUIRED, APPLICATION:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 93/498
It shall be unlawful to engage in the sale of electronic cigarettes, cigarettes, cigars, tobacco products or liquid nicotine in any form at retail without having
first obtained a license therefor. Applications for such licenses shall be made to the village clerk and no such license shall be issued to any person who is
not a person of good character or to any corporation, partnership or other entity that is not represented in the village by a person of good character. (Ord.
2014-22, 9-4-2014)
3-7.2-3: CIGARETTE VENDING MACHINES:
A. Compliance With Article Required: It shall be unlawful to operate or maintain any cigarette or tobacco product vending machine without complying with
the provisions of this article.
B. Locking Device Required On Vending Machine: It shall be unlawful for any licensee to sell or offer for sale, give away, deliver, or to keep with the
intention of selling, giving away or delivering, tobacco products by the use of a vending machine unless such vending machine is equipped with a
manual, electric or electronic locking device controlled by the licensee so as to prevent its operation by persons under the age of eighteen (18).
C. Exemption: Any premises where access by persons under the age of eighteen (18) years is prohibited by law or premises where the public is generally
not permitted and where vending machines are strictly for the use of the employees of a business located at such premises shall be exempt from the
requirements of subsection A of this section. (Ord. 2014-22, 9-4-2014)
3-7.2-4: PROHIBITED SALES, DELIVERY, SIGNS:
A. Minors: It shall be unlawful to sell, give or deliver cigarettes, cigars, tobacco products, electronic cigarettes or liquid nicotine in any form to a person
under the age of eighteen (18) years. In every location where electronic cigarettes, liquid nicotine, tobacco products, cigars or cigarettes are sold, there
shall be displayed at all times in a prominent place, at or near the point of sale, the following warning:
WARNING TO MINORS
YOU ARE SUBJECT TO A FINE OF UP TO $750.00 UNDER THE PROVISIONS OF THE STREAMWOOD VILLAGE CODE IF YOU PURCHASE
ELECTRONIC CIGARETTES, LIQUID NICOTINE, CIGARETTES, CIGARS OR TOBACCO PRODUCTS IN ANY FORM OR MISREPRESENT
YOUR AGE FOR THE PURPOSE OF PURCHASING OR OBTAINING ELECTRONIC CIGARETTES, LIQUID NICOTINE, CIGARETTES, CIGARS
OR TOBACCO PRODUCTS IN ANY FORM.
B. Display Of Products: It shall be unlawful to sell, offer for sale, give away, or display electronic cigarettes, liquid nicotine, cigarettes, cigars or tobacco
products, in any form, for sale at any location where the consumer can acquire those products through self-service. All electronic cigarettes, liquid
nicotine, cigarettes, cigars and tobacco products shall be displayed from behind a sales/service counter so that no consumer can access such items
without assistance by an employee of the licensee. This restriction shall not apply to consumer self-service from vending machines as described in
subsection 3-7.2-3B of this article. (Ord. 2014-22, 9-4-2014)
3-7.2-5: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this article shall be fined as set forth in section 1-4-1 of this code; and a separate offense shall be deemed committed
on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. A second or subsequent offense of this article within a twelve (12) month period shall
subject a license holder to a suspension or revocation of the retail license issued pursuant to this article. (Ord. 2014-22, 9-4-2014)
ARTICLE 3. PEDDLERS
3-7.3-1: DEFINITION:
The word "peddler" is hereby defined to mean any individual who, going from place to place, shall sell, offer for sale, sell and deliver, barter or exchange
any goods, wares, merchandise or country produce from a vehicle or otherwise. (1994 Code)
3-7.3-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of peddler without a license so to do. (1994 Code)
3-7.3-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Every individual who desires a license as a peddler shall make application therefor to the village clerk in writing upon the form prescribed by the chief of
police and approved by the village board. The nature of the acts or things permitted by the license shall be in accord with the application. Any applicant for
a license hereunder shall submit to being fingerprinted and photographed by the village police department, which department shall, prior to the issuance of
any license, complete its verifying of such information as such applicant may furnish in connection with such application for license. (1994 Code)
3-7.3-4: LICENSE NONTRANSFERABLE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 94/498
Such peddler's license shall not be transferable and shall be a license only for the individual named therein. (1994 Code)
3-7.3-5: LICENSE TERM:
The term and fee for such license shall be as set forth in section 3-2-2 of this title, under peddlers and solicitors. (Ord. 2004-10, 3-4-2004)
3-7.3-6: TIME LIMIT ON PEDDLING:
No peddler shall act as a peddler within the village on Sunday or national holidays or between the hours of nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. and nine o'clock (9:00)
A.M., inclusive. (1994 Code)
3-7.3-7: FRAUD, IMPOSITION AND MISREPRESENTATION:
Any peddler who shall be guilty of fraud, misrepresentation or imposition on any citizen within the village shall be in violation of this article and shall be
fined in accordance with the penalties hereof. (1994 Code)
3-7.3-8: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this article shall be fined as set forth in section 1-4-1 of this code. (1994 Code)
ARTICLE 4. SOLICITORS
3-7.4-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this Article, the following words as used herein shall be construed to have the meanings herein ascribed thereto:
HIGHWAY: The entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for
purposes of vehicular travel.
PERSON: Every natural person, firm, copartnership, association or corporation.
REGISTERED SOLICITOR: Any person who has obtained a valid badge of registration as hereinafter provided and which badge of registration is
prominently displayed on his or her person while engaged in soliciting.
RESIDENCE: Every separate living unit occupied for residential purposes by one or more persons, contained within any type of building or structure.
SOLICITING: Any one or more of the following activities seeking to obtain orders for the purchase of goods, wares, merchandise, foodstuffs, services of
any kind, character or description whatever, for any kind of consideration whatever; or
seeking to obtain subscriptions to books, magazines, periodicals, newspapers and every other type or kind of publication; or
seeking to obtain gifts or contributions of money, clothing or any other valuable thing for the support or benefit of any charitable ornonprofit association,
organization, corporation or project. (1994 Code)
3-7.4-2: BADGE OF REGISTRATION REQUIRED, EXCEPTION:
No person shall engage in soliciting as herein defined from persons in residences within the Village without being registered under the provisions
contained in this Article and being issued a badge of registration containing the solicitor's picture. The badge of registration is to be conspicuously
displayed on the person of each solicitor. The issuance of a solicitor's badge shall be a critical step in the registration procedure, and the revocation or
denial of such solicitor's badge shall constitute a failure to register under the provisions contained in this Article.
Badges of registration shall not be necessary for distributors of local and area newspapers. (1994 Code)
3-7.4-3: APPLICATION FOR BADGE OF REGISTRATION:
A. Application for a badge of registration shall be made upon a form provided by the Village Clerk and filed with such Chief. The applicant shall truthfully
state in full the following information requested on the application:
1. Name and address of present place of residence and length of residence at such address; also business address if other than residence address;
also social security number;
2. Address of place of residence;
3. Age of applicant;
4. Physical description of the applicant;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 95/498
5. Name and address of the person, firm or corporation or association whom the applicant is employed by or represents;
6. Description sufficient for identification of the subject matter of the soliciting which the applicant will engage in;
7. Period of time for which the badge is applied for;
8. Has a badge of registration issued to the applicant under this article ever been revoked;
9. Has the applicant ever been convicted of the commission of a felony under the laws of the state of Illinois or any other state or federal law of the
United States.
B. All statements made by the applicant upon the application or in connection therewith shall be under oath.
C. The chief of police shall cause to be kept in his office an accurate record of every application received and acted upon, together with all other
information and data pertaining thereto and all badges of registration issued under the provisions of this article, and of the denial of applications.
Applications for badges shall be numbered in consecutive order as filed, and every badge issued, and any renewal thereof, shall be identified with the
duplicate number of the application upon which it was issued. (1994 Code)
3-7.4-4: LICENSE FEES AND DURATION:
The term and fee for such license shall be as set forth in section 3-2-2 of this title under peddlers and solicitors. There shall be no fees charged for not for
profit organizations or groups other than the actual cost of the badge. However, not for profit organizations or groups shall make application for badges of
registration by the use of only one application which contains, in addition to the information required in section 3-7.4-3 of this article, for the person making
the application, the names and addresses of all of the solicitors for that organization. The fee shall not apply to those services exempted by Illinois law.
Badges of registration shall be returned to the village clerk within five (5) days of its expiration. (Ord. 2004-10, 3-4-2004)
3-7.4-5: ISSUANCE AND REVOCATION OF BADGES:
No badge of registration shall be issued to any person who has been convicted of the commission of a felony under the laws of the state or any other state
or federal law of the United States, within five (5) years of the date of the application; not to any person who has been convicted of a violation of any of the
provisions of this article, nor to any person whose badge of registration issued hereunder has previously been revoked as herein provided, nor to any
person who has made a false material statement on the application provided for herein.
Any badge of registration issued hereunder shall be revoked by the chief of police if the holder of the badge is convicted of a violation of any of the
provisions of this article, or has made a false material statement in the application, or otherwise becomes disqualified for the issuance of a badge of
registration under the terms of this article. Immediately upon such revocation, written notice thereof shall be given by the chief of police to the holder of the
badge in person or by certified U.S. mail addressed to his residence address set forth in the application. (1994 Code)
3-7.4-6: TIME LIMIT OF SOLICITATION:
It is hereby declared to be unlawful and shall constitute anuisance for any reason, whether registered under this article or not, to go upon any premises
and ring the doorbell upon or near any door of a residence located thereon, or rap or knock upon any door; or create any sound in any other manner
calculated to attract the attention of the occupant of such residence, for the purpose of securing an audience with the occupant thereof to engage in
"soliciting" as herein defined, prior to nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. or after nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. of any weekday, prior to nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. or after five
o'clock (5:00) P.M. on Saturday, or at any time on a Sunday or a state or national holiday. (1994 Code)
3-7.4-7: FAILURE TO LEAVE PREMISES UPON REQUEST:
It shall be unlawful for any person engaged in solicitation on the premises of any residence or dwelling unit to remain thereon after having been asked by
the owner or occupant thereof to leave such premises. (1994 Code)
3-7.4-8: SOLICITATION AT PRINCIPAL ENTRANCE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person engaged in solicitation to seek entry at any entrance to a residence or dwelling unit other than the principal entrance.
(1994 Code)
3-7.4-9: "NO SOLICITING" DECAL:
The Chief of Police shall cause to be printed a decal which shall read "No Soliciting by Order of Police Department" and shall make said decals available
to citizens of the Village who shall reimburse the Village for the cost of printing the decal. It is hereby declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a
nuisance for any person, whether registered under this Article or not, to go upon any premises and ring the doorbell upon or near any door of a residence
located thereon, or rap or knock upon any door, or create any sound in any other manner calculated to attract the attention of the occupant of such
residence, for the purpose of securing an audience with the occupant thereof and engaging in soliciting as herein defined, where such residence has the
above mentioned decal posted in a conspicuous place at its principal entrance. (1994 Code)
3-7.4-10: SOLICITATION ON HIGHWAYS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 96/498
No person shall stand on a highway for the purpose of soliciting contributions from the occupant of any vehicle except as expressly provided for herein.
Solicitation on highways within the Village shall be allowed only at intersections where all traffic is required to come to a full stop. In addition to otherwise
complying with all other provisions of this Article, the soliciting agency shall:
A. Be registered with the Illinois Attorney General as a charitable organization as provided by "An Act to regulate solicitation and collection of funds for
charitable purposes, providing for violations thereof, and making an appropriation therefor," approved July 26, 1963, as amended;
B. Be engaged in a Statewide fund raising activity; and
C. Be liable for any injuries to any person or property during the solicitation which is casually related to an act of ordinary negligence of the soliciting agent.
Any person engaged in the act of solicitation on a highway shall be sixteen (16) years of age or more and shall be wearing a high visibility vest. (1994
Code)
3-7.4-11: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this Article shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine as set forth in Section 1-4-1 of this Code for
each offense. (Ord. 1998-4, 1-8-1998)
ARTICLE 5. TAXICABS/LIMOUSINES
3-7.5-1: DEFINITION:
A "taxicab" is herein defined to be any motor vehicle carrying not more than eight (8) fare paying passengers for hire and for which public patronage is
solicited and not being operated over fixed routes or of fixed time schedules including limousine service. (1994 Code)
3-7.5-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate any taxicab or engage in the business of operating taxicabs in the village, including the operation of
one or more such vehicles, without obtaining a taxicab vehicle license for each such taxicab operated, as provided in this article and otherwise conforming
to the requirements of this code and applicable provisions of other ordinances of the village. (1994 Code)
3-7.5-3: NUMBER OF PASSENGERS:
No driver or operator of a taxicab shall carry more than eight (8) persons at any one time, nor shall he carry any other person than the person first
employing the taxicab, without the consent of the first passenger. Neither shall any person, other than the driver and the passenger being conveyed,
occupy any taxicab while the taxicab is carrying passengers. It shall be the duty and responsibility of the driver to notify the initial passenger of the rate of
fare and/or any changes thereof. (1994 Code)
3-7.5-4: INSPECTION:
No vehicle shall be licensed as a taxicab under the provisions of this article, until it has been inspected by the Illinois department of transportation (safety
lane) as designated by the village manager or his designee. Said inspections shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions set forth in this article
and said approval shall be made by the village manager or his designee. The cost of said inspection is to be borne by the owners of the respective cab
companies. Such inspection shall be made prior to the issuance of a license or renewal of said license, according to the provisions of this article. The
village manager or his designee may cause a subsequent inspection of said vehicle to be made periodically, by any individual the village manager or his
designee shall designate and such inspection shall include the following: condition of tires, including spare tire, cleanliness, general appearance, facilities
for transportation of passengers in rear compartment, and condition and accuracy of taximeter, except there shall be no requirement to test a taximeter in
a limousine. (1994 Code)
3-7.5-5: APPLICATION RENEWAL:
Each license issued thereunder shall be valid for the calendar year in which it is issued and shall be renewed only upon application by the holder thereof.
(1994 Code)
3-7.5-6: APPLICATION AND FEE:
Application for taxicab licenses shall be made in writing to the village clerk and signed and sworn to by the applicant or if the applicant is a corporation, by
its duly authorized agent upon forms provided by the clerk. The application shall contain the full name, business address and residence address of the
applicant, the business telephone number of the applicant, the manufacturer's name, model, year of car, horsepower, and seating capacity of the vehicle
which applicant seeks to use. A separate application and separate license is required for each vehicle to be operated as a taxicab or public passenger
vehicle. The term and fee for engaging in the business of owning and operating taxicabs or causing them to be operated shall be as set forth in section 3-
1-7 of this title and the term and fee for each additional taxicab covered by the application for permit shall be as set forth in section 3-2-2 of this title. (Ord.
2004-10, 3-4-2004)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 97/498
3-7.5-7: BOND AND INSURANCE REQUIRED:
No such license shall be issued to any person unless the applicant has secured the bond provided by statute and unless he has submitted to the village
clerk, a copy or copies of his or their insurance policies, or certificate or certificates ofinsurance, demonstrating public liability insurance coverage payable
for personal injuries in an amount not less than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for each person and three hundred thousand dollars
($300,000.00) for each accident, and payable for property damage in an amount not less than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) for each accident. If at
any time in the judgment of the village manager or his designee, a policy of insurance given pursuant to this section is not sufficient for any good cause,
the village manager or his designee may require the owner of the taxicab who filed the same, to replace that policy of insurance with another good and
sufficient bond or insurance policy which complies with the provisions of this section. (1994 Code)
3-7.5-8: DRIVER'S REQUIREMENTS:
A. No license shall be issued to any person, to operate a taxicab within the village, including owners thereof, until he or she shall first have met the
application requirements herein. Each driver who shall drive any licensed taxicab in the village shall:
1. Be licensed by the state of Illinois;
2. Be eighteen (18) years of age or older;
3. Be first submitted to fingerprinting by the chief of police of this village or by a person whom he shall designate;
4. Have first submitted to photographing by the chief of police of this village or by a person whom he shall designate;
5. Have first paid an application fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00) which shall be used to defray the cost of processing the application.
B. Any person desiring to secure a license with the village shall make an application in writing with the village clerk, together with the above said license
fee. The village clerk shall supply said applicant with a license application form which shall set forth the name of applicant, his driver's license number,
and other pertinent information. It shall further require that the applicant attest to whether or not he has been convicted of a felony or driving under the
influence of intoxicating beverages;
C. No license shall be issued to any applicant if the results of the foregoing examination are unsatisfactory in any respect, nor to an applicant who made
false statements on his application. After the foregoing examination has been completed and the inspections required by this article have been made,
the police chief and any person so designated by him, shall endorse on the application his recommendation as to whether the license shall be issued
and thereupon forward said application to the village clerk, who shall issue saidlicense;
D. The annual fee to operate a taxicab shall be twenty five dollars ($25.00) per operator. (1994 Code)
3-7.5-9: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
The village manager or his designee is empowered and directed to revoke or suspend the license of any person owning and operating any taxicab found
not to be in safe condition, and in good condition with respect to appearance, cleanliness and mechanical operation, or is found not to be in accord with
the provisions of this article. Licenses when so suspended or revoked shall not be reissued until such vehicle and its appurtenances are put in fit condition
for use by the public in a manner that is satisfactory to the chief of police. (1994 Code)
3-7.5-10: NAME OF VEHICLE:
Every vehicle licensed as aforesaid shall bear on both sides of the vehicle thereof, in a conspicuous place, the name of the owner thereof, in letters not
less than two inches (2") high, which letters shall be of a color in contrast to the color of the vehicle, and shall be properly proportioned and legible.
If any licensee operates more than one taxicab, each vehicle should be numbered with figures not less than two inches (2") high and no two (2) vehicles
shall bear the same number. This section shall not apply to limousines; except that the operator of a limousine shall immediately identify the company
name upon request. (1994 Code)
3-7.5-11: CONDITION OF VEHICLES:
All vehicles licensed under this article must be kept in a safe, clean, and sanitary condition, and must be equipped with properly working brakes, lights and
warning signals, in accordance with the motor vehicle laws of the state, this article and the ordinances of the village, and no license shall be issued for the
operation of any public passenger vehicle under this Article until it is shown to be in good mechanical condition. (1994 Code)
3-7.5-12: VEHICLE LICENSE AND DRIVER'S LICENSE NONTRANSFERABLE:
Neither the public passenger vehicle license nor the taxicab and livery cab driver's licenses provided for in this article shall be transferable. (1994 Code)
3-7.5-13: NUMBER OF TAXICABS OPERATING IN VILLAGE:
The village shall have the right to limit the number of taxicab companies and licensees operating in the village. (1994 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 98/498
3-7.5-14: PENALTIES:
A. No person shall engage in the business of operating a taxicab in the village without first obtaining the permit required by section 3-7.5-6 of this article.
Every person who is found guilty of violating this section shall be punished by a fine as set forth in section 1-4-1 of this code for each offense. A
separate offense shall be deemed committed for each day a violation exists.
B. No person shall operate a taxicab in the village without first obtaining the permit required by section 3-7.5-8 of this article. Every person who is found
guilty of violating this section shall be punished by a fine as set forth in section 1-4-1 of this code for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed for each day a violation exits. (Ord. 1998-4, 1-8-1998)
ARTICLE 6. GASOLINE SERVICE STATIONS
3-7.6-1: DEFINITION:
A "service station" is any place of business where gasoline, or any highly volatile fuels for motor vehicles or internal combustion engines, are sold or
offered for sale at retail, and dispensed into fuel tanks of such motor vehicles. (1994 Code)
3-7.6-2: LICENSE REQUIRED, FEE:
It shall be unlawful to conduct or operate a service station in the Village without having first obtained a license therefor.
No such license shall be issued unless the location and equipment to be used fully comply with the provisions of this Code.
The annual fee for such license shall be as set forth in Section 3-2-2 of this Title. (1994 Code)
ARTICLE 7. MASSAGE
3-7.7-1: DEFINITIONS:
MASSAGE OR MASSAGE THERAPY: Any method of pressure on or friction, including, but not limited to, rubbing or kneading, against the external parts
of the human body with the hands or a device, with or without supplementary aids, in exchange for money or any other consideration. (Ord. 1999-68, 12-2-
1999)
3-7.7-2: REGISTRATION REQUIRED:
A. Requirements: No person shall engage in the practice of massage or massage therapy in the Village unless:
1. He or she is a professional licensed by the State of Illinois, including, but not limited to, physicians, nurses, physical or occupational therapists,
athletic trainers, chiropractors, podiatrists, naprapaths, barbers, cosmetologists, estheticians or nail technologists, limited to performing massage or
massage therapy in a manner consistent with and permitted by his or her State license, or
2. He or she is a massage therapist who:
a. Has graduated from a five hundred (500) hour massage therapy school approved by the American Massage Therapy Association Commission on
Accreditation and Training and/or approved by the Illinois State Board of Education, or is currently enrolled in such a school and is working under
the direct supervision of a licensed massage therapist, and
b. Is an active professional member in good standing of the American Massage Therapy Association, and
c. Is practicing massage therapy in a location where he or she is associated with the practice of a professional licensed by the State, including the
practice of a physician, nurse, physical or occupational therapist, athletic trainer, chiropractor, podiatrist, naprapath, barber, cosmetologist,
esthetician or nail technologist, and
d. Has registered his or her practice with the Village as required in subsection C of this Section.
B. Massage In Salons And Spas: In the case of a barbershop, or cosmetology, esthetics or nail technology salon where a massage therapist will operate:
1. The shop or salon must also be licensed by the State under 225 Illinois Compiled Statutes 410/3D-5, and
2. Massage facilities may make up only twenty five percent (25%) or less of the floor space of such shop or salon.
C. Registration:
1. All persons who practice massage therapy in the Village of Streamwood must register with the Village. Such registration shall be made with the
Village Clerk, and shall include:
a. Written evidence that such person has met the requirements to practice massage therapy in the Village as outlined in subsection A2 of this
Section, and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 99/498
b. Submission of personal/biographical information on a form prepared by the Village Clerk, and
c. A complete listing of all locations where he or she will practice massage therapy, as well as the name and state license number of the licensed
professional with whom the massage therapist's practice will be associated with, and (Ord. 1999-68, 12-2-1999)
d. The payment of an annual registration fee as set forth in section 3-2-2 of this title. (Ord. 1999-68, 12-2-1999; amd. Ord. 2003-52, 11-20-2003)
2. A person applying for registration as a massage therapist in the village must also submit to and pass a criminal background check in order to qualify
for registration. (Ord. 1999-68, 12-2-1999)
3. A massage therapist who is properly registered with the village will receive a "certificate of registration" which will be good for one year. The
certificate must be renewed annually, at a cost as set forth in section 3-2-2 of this title. Registered therapists shall provide the village with any
changes to his or her registration within thirty (30) days of their occurrence, including changes of address or a change in the place or places of
practice. (Ord. 1999-68, 12-2-1999; amd. Ord. 2003-52, 11-20-2003)
4. Registration under this section shall not be required for professionals licensed by the state, including, but not limited to, physicians, nurses, physical
or occupational therapists, athletic trainers, chiropractors, podiatrists, naprapaths, barbers, cosmetologists or estheticians, who are performing
massage or massage therapy in a manner consistent with and permitted by his or her state license. (Ord. 1999-68, 12-2-1999)
3-7.7-3: RESTRICTIONS:
A. Outcall massage, or any massage therapy conducted off the premises of the place of registration shall be prohibited, unless performed on an invalid or
other person under the care of a licensed physician.
B. No person shall, while practicing massage therapy under this article, touch the sexual or genital parts of another person in any way. Sexual or genital
parts include all genitals, pubic regions, the buttocks and female breasts.
C. All persons who practice massage therapy shall be clothed in clean, nontransparent outer garments that provide complete coverage of the massage
therapist's person from the neck to the knee. (Ord. 1999-68, 12-2-1999)
3-7.7-4: VIOLATION AND PENALTY:
A. It is unlawful to practice massage therapy in violation of this article. A person found in violation of this article or a person who practices massage therapy
without a valid registration as hereby required may have his or her registration revoked or application for registration denied. Additionally, such a
person may be banned from practicing massage therapy within the village for up to five (5) years and may be subject to a fine of up to five hundred
dollars ($500.00) per violation.
B. Any person registered to practice massage therapy in the village may have his or her registration revoked if he or she is found to have violated any
provision of this code, state or federal law.
C. The village clerk is charged with the administration of this article and may make all necessary and appropriate rules to provide for its enforcement. (Ord.
1999-68, 12-2-1999)
ARTICLE 8. ANIMAL CARE AND SALE
3-7.8-1: LICENSE REQUIRED, APPLICATION:
It shall be unlawful to engage in the sale or care of animals without having first obtained a license therefor. Applications for such licenses shall be made to
the village clerk and no such license shall be issued to any person who is not a person of good character or to any corporation that is not represented in
the village by a person of good character. (Ord. 2003-52, 11-20-2003)
3-7.8-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this article, the following terms mean:
ANIMAL: Any live, vertebrate creature, domestic or wild.
COMMERCIAL ANIMAL ESTABLISHMENT: Any pet shop, grooming shop, auction, riding school or stable, zoological park, circus, performing animal
exhibition, or kennel.
KENNEL: Any premises wherein any person engages in the business of boarding, breeding, buying, letting for hire, training for a fee, or selling dogs or
cats.
PET SHOP: Any establishment for the buying, selling or boarding of any species of animal, whether operated separately or in connection with another
business enterprise, except for a licensed kennel.
SHELTER: Any facility used to house animals for sale or care. (Ord. 2003-52, 11-20-2003)
3-7.8-3: STANDARDS FOR BUILDINGS AND PREMISES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 100/498
In order for any business to be licensed hereunder, the following minimum standards for the buildings and premises shall be followed:
A. Buildings: All housing facilities for animals must be:
1. Designed and constructed so that they are structurally sound;
2. Kept in good repair, protect the animals from injury, contain the animals securely, and restrict other animals from entering; and
3. Floors of buildings, that house or display animals, must be of permanent construction to enable thorough cleaning and sanitizing. Dirt and unfinished
wood floors are not permitted. Cleaning must be performed daily, or more often, to prevent accumulation of debris, dirt or waste.
B. Surfaces: All interior surfaces shall comply with the following:
1. Interior surfaces or any surfaces that come into contact with any animal must:
a. Be free of excessive rust that prevents the required cleaning and sanitation, or that affects the structural strength of the surface; and
b. Be free of jagged edges or sharp points that might injure the animals.
2. Hard surfaces that animals come into contact with must be spot cleaned daily and sanitized to prevent accumulation of excreta and reduce disease
hazards.
3. Floors made of absorbent bedding, sand, gravel, grass, or other similar material must be raked or spot cleaned with sufficient frequency to ensure all
animals freedom to avoid contact with excreta.
4. All other surfaces of housing facilities must be cleaned and sanitized daily.
5. The floors and walls of housing facilities, and any other surfaces that come into contact with the animals, must be impervious to moisture.
6. The ceilings of housing facilities must be impervious to moisture or be replaceable (e.g., a suspended ceiling with replaceable ceiling panels).
C. Shelter:
1. Dogs and cats must be provided with adequate shelter from the elements at all times to protect their health and well being.
2. The shelter structures must be large enough to allow each animal to sit, stand, and lie in a normal manner and to turn around freely.
3. All housing facilities and must provide adequate facilities for the separation of diseased animals to avoid exposure tohealthy animals.
D. Primary Enclosures:
1. General Requirements: Primary enclosures must:
a. Be constructed of a material that is impervious to urine and water and able to withstand damage from gnawing and chewing.
b. Be designed and constructed of suitable material so that they are structurally sound.
c. Be kept in good repair.
d. Be constructed and maintained so that they:
(1) Have no sharp points or edges that could injure the animals.
(2) Protect the animals from injury.
(3) Keep other animals from entering the enclosure.
(4) Contain the animals securely.
(5) Enable the animals to keep dry and clean.
(6) Provide shelter and protection from extreme temperature and weather conditions.
(7) Provide sufficient shade to shelter all the animals housed in the primary enclosure at one time.
(8) Provide all animals with easy and convenient access to clean food and water.
(9) Have surfaces that can be readily cleaned and sanitized.
(10) Have floors that are constructed in a manner that protects the animals' feet and legs from injury, and that, if a mesh or slatted construction, do
not allow the animals' feet to pass through any part of the floor.
e. Be cleaned and sanitized at least once a day, or more often if necessary, and all empty cages must be kept clean at all times.
f. Be of sufficient size to allow the animal to comfortably stand, sit, and lie, and offer freedom of movement (permanent tethering is prohibited).
2. Minimum Space Requirements: Primary enclosures for animals shall be as follows:
a. Primary Enclosures For Cats: Each cat, including weaned kittens, that is housed in any primary enclosure shall be provided minimum vertical
height and space as follows:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 101/498
(1) Must be at least twenty one inches (21") high.
(2) Cats up to and including nine (9) pounds must be provided at least three (3) square feet of open floor space.
(3) Cats over nine (9) pounds must be provided at least four (4) square feet of open floor space.
(4) If more than one cat occupies these primary enclosures, space will be figured for the first cat, with each additional cat needing one-half (1/2) of
the minimum space required.
b. Primary Enclosures For Dogs: Each primary enclosure, in which a dog spends the majority of its day, shall have the following minimum
requirements:
(1) Small dogs up to ten inches (10") high: 4.5 square feet.
(2) Small dogs up to sixteen inches (16") high: 6.0 square feet.
(3) Medium dogs up to twenty two inches (22") high: 9.0 square feet.
(4) Large dogs up to twenty six inches (26") high: 12 square feet.
(5) Extra large dogs up to thirty inches (30") high: 16 square feet.
(6) Giant breeds over thirty inches (30") high: 18 square feet.
(7) The height shall be one and one-half (11/2) times the height of the dog at the shoulder.
(8) If more than one dog occupies these primary enclosures, space will be figured for the first dog, with each additional dog needing one-half (1/2)
of the minimum space required.
E. Runs And Exercise Areas:
1. The length of the runs and the exercise areas should be at a minimum three (3) times the length of the dog, from the tip of the nose to the base of
the tail. The width should allow the dog to turn around easily, and the height shall be one and one-half (11/2) times the height of the dog.
2. Runs shall be constructed of material of sufficient strength and design to confine the animal(s).
3. They shall be kept in good repair and condition.
4. Surface of the run shall be designed to permit the surface to be cleaned and kept free from excessive accumulation of animal waste.
F. Water And Electrical Power:
1. The housing facilities must have reliable electrical power for heating, cooling, ventilation, and lighting.
2. The housing facilities must provide adequate running potable water for the animals' drinking and cleaning needs.
G. Storage:
1. All housing facilities and areas used for storing animal food or bedding must be free of any accumulation of trash, waste material, junk, weeds, and
other discarded materials.
2. Supplies of food and bedding must be stored in a manner that protects the supplies from spoilage, contamination, and vermin infestation.
3. All food must be stored in a manner that prevents contamination and deterioration of its nutritive value.
4. All open supplies of food and bedding must be kept in leakproof containers with tightly fitting lids to prevent contamination and spoilage.
5. Premises must have covered, leakproof containers available for storage of waste materials before disposal to control vermin and insects.
H. Drainage And Waste Disposal:
1. Housing facility operators must provide for regular and frequent collection, removal, and disposal of animal and food wastes, bedding, debris,
garbage, water, other fluids and wastes, and dead animals, in a manner that minimizes contamination and disease risks.
2. Housing facilities must be equipped with disposal facilities and drainage systems that are constructed and operated so that animal waste and water
are rapidly eliminated and stay dry.
3. All drains must be properly constructed, installed, and maintained.
I. Washrooms And Sinks: Washing facilities, such as washrooms, basins, sinks, or showers must be provided for animal caretakers and must be readily
accessible.
J. Temperature: Housing facilities must be sufficiently heated and cooled when necessary to protect the animals from temperature and humidity extremes
and to provide for their health and well being (50°F - 85°F).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 102/498
K. Ventilation: Housing facilities must be adequately ventilated at all times when animals are present to provide for their health and well being, and to
minimize odors, drafts, ammonia levels, and moisture condensation.
L. Lighting:
1. Housing facilities must be lighted well enough to permit routine inspection and cleaning of the facility, and observation of the dogs and cats.
2. Animal areas must be provided a regular diurnal lighting cycle of either natural or artificial light.
3. Primary enclosures must be placed so as to protect the dogs and cats from excessive light. (Ord. 2003-52, 11-20-2003)
3-7.8-4: GENERAL CARE OF ANIMALS:
A. Present Once A Day: The licensee or his representative must be present at least once a day for general care and maintenance of the animals.
B. Feeding:
1. Dogs and cats must be fed at least once a day, except as otherwise might be required to provide adequate care.
2. The food must be uncontaminated, wholesome, palatable, and of sufficient quantity and nutritive value to maintain the normal condition and weight
of the animal.
3. The diet must be appropriate for the individual animal's age and condition.
C. Food Receptacles: Food receptacles must:
1. Be readily accessible by the animals,
2. Be located as to avoid contamination by excreta and pests,
3. Be protected from rain or snow,
4. Be made of durable material or disposable,
5. Be cleaned and sanitized if not disposable,
6. Be discarded after one use if disposable.
D. Watering:
1. If potable water is not continually available to the animals, it must be offered as often as necessary to ensure their health and well being, but not less
than twice daily for at least one hour each time, unless restricted by a veterinarian.
2. Water receptacles must be kept clean and sanitized.
E. Exercise: Dogs must be given the opportunity to exercise for one hour each day.
F. Boarding:
1. Any animal that appears to be ill shall be promptly examined by a licensed veterinarian and a record shall be kept of the examination and treatment.
2. In the event that an animal dies while being boarded, the body shall be disposed of in compliance with the Illinois dead animal disposal act1 or
bodies may be submitted to a licensed veterinarian and a necropsy performed at the kennel operator's expense unless prior agreement was made. A
copy of the report is to be given to the owner.
3. Animals shall not be group housed at any time, unless they are owned by the same person and are compatible.
4. If cats or dogs are group housed, they must be provided with the minimum space requirements. (Ord. 2003-52, 11-20-2003)
3-7.8-5: CLEANING, SANITATION AND PEST CONTROL:
A. Cleaning Of Primary Enclosures:
1. Excreta and food waste must be removed daily to prevent an excessive accumulation of feces and food waste, to prevent soiling of the animals that
they contain, to reduce disease hazards, insects, pests and odors.
2. When steam or water is used to clean the primary enclosures, the animal must be removed, unless the enclosure is large enough to ensure the
animals would not be harmed, wetted, or distressed in the process.
B. Sanitization Of Primary Enclosures And Food And Water Receptacles:
1. Used primary enclosures and food and water receptacles must be cleaned and sanitized in accordance with this section before they can be used to
house, feed, or water another animal.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 103/498
2. Primary enclosures and food and water receptacles must be cleaned and sanitized at least once every two (2) weeks.
3. Hard surfaces of primary enclosures and food and water receptacles must be sanitized using one of the following methods:
a. Live steam under pressure.
b. Washing with hot water (180°F) and soap or detergent.
c. Washing all soiled surfaces with appropriate solutions and disinfectants, or by using a combination detergent/disinfectantproduct that
accomplishes the same purpose, with a thorough cleaning of the surfaces to remove organic material and mineral buildup.
4. Pens, runs, and outdoor housing areas using material that cannot be sanitized using one of the methods above, such as gravel, sand, grass, or
absorbent bedding, must be sanitized by removing the contaminated material as necessary to prevent odors, diseases, pests, insects, and vermin
infestation.
C. Housekeeping For Premises:
1. Premises where housing facilities are located, including buildings and surrounding grounds, must be kept clean and in good repair to protect the
animals from injury, and to reduce or eliminate breeding and living areas for rodents and other pests and vermin.
2. Premises must be kept free of accumulations of trash, junk, waste products, and discarded matter.
3. Weeds, grasses, and bushes must be controlled as to facilitate cleaning of the premises and pest control, and to protect the health and well being of
the animals. (Ord. 2003-52, 11-20-2003)
3-7.8-6: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this article shall be fined as set forth in section 1-4-1 of this code; and a separate offense shall be deemed committed
on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. A second or subsequent offense of this article may subject a license holder to a
suspension or revocation of the business license. (Ord. 2003-52, 11-20-2003)
ARTICLE 9. PAWNSHOPS AND PAWNBROKERS
3-7.9-1: DEFINITION:
"Pawnbroker" shall be defined as any individual, firm, corporation, business, partnership or other entity, whether or not currently in operation, which lends
money on the deposit or pledge of physically delivered personal property, other than property the ownership of which is subject to legal dispute, securities,
printed evidence of indebtedness or printed evidence of ownership of the personal property, or who deals in the purchase of said property on the condition
of selling the property back again at a stipulated price or used property purchased for resale. The business of a pawnbroker shall not include the lending of
money on deposit or pledge of title to property. (Ord. 2012-14, 5-3-2012)
3-7.9-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person, persons, business, corporation, partnership or other entity shall conduct or operate the business of a pawnbroker without having first been
licensed therefor as provided in this article and the licensing requirements of chapter 1 of this title. (Ord. 2012-14, 5-3-2012)
3-7.9-3: APPLICATION; INVESTIGATION OF APPLICANT; QUALIFICATIONS:
A. Application for a pawnbroker's license shall be made as provided by the licensing provisions of this title and any such application shall also state the
number of employees intended to be engaged therein. The chief of police of the village or his designee or any other officer or agent designated by the
chief of police shall investigate each license applicant and shall report in writing whether or not such applicant is a person of good character. No license
shall be issued to any person, partnership, corporation or other entity, if any owner, manager, partner, officer, director or any shareholder, owning in the
aggregate more than five percent (5%) of the shares of stock in the corporation where the stock is not publicly traded and that shareholder has been
convicted of any felony offense or convicted of the offense(s) of possession of stolen goods, burglary, robbery, theft, or who has been convicted of any
criminal offense involving dishonesty or moral turpitude.
B. Every applicant for a pawnbroker's license, as well as every owner, partner, manager, officer, director, employee, and, in this case, of a corporate
applicant, every shareholder owning in the aggregate more than five percent (5%) of the shares of stock in the corporation where the stock is not
publicly traded, shall undergo a criminal background investigation, which investigation may include fingerprinting, prior to the issuance of a
pawnbroker's license.
C. No person under the age of eighteen (18) years shall take pledge for pawn nor purchase any item for resale.
D. No person licensed under the provisions of this article shall accept or receive for pledge, pawn or resale any stun gun, taser, pistol, revolver or other
firearm. (Ord. 2012-14, 5-3-2012)
3-7.9-4: LICENSE TERM:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 104/498
The annual license fee for a pawnbroker's license shall be as set forth in chapter 2 of this title. (Ord. 2012-14, 5-3-2012)
3-7.9-5: DUTY TO REPORT STOLEN OR LOST ARTICLES RECEIVED:
Each pawnbroker or pawnbroker's employee or agent shall report to the chief of police any article pawned, pledged or sought to be pledged or any article
sought to be sold to or with the pawnbroker, if the pawnbroker, its employee or agent reasonably believes that said article was stolen or that the article was
lost and a person other than the rightful owner, is attempting to pawn, pledge or sell the item. (Ord. 2012-14, 5-3-2012)
3-7.9-6: ISSUANCE OF SIGNED MEMORANDUM:
Every pawnbroker shall, at the time of making any advancement or loan, deliver to the person pawning or pledging any property, a memorandum, contract,
or note signed by him containing an accurate account and description, in the English and Spanish languages, of all goods, articles or other things pawned
or pledged, the amount of money, value of things loaned thereon, the time of pledging the same, the rate of interest to be paid on the loan, the name and
residence of the person making the pawn or pledge, and the amount of any fees charged. (Ord. 2012-14, 5-3-2012)
3-7.9-7: RECORD REQUIREMENTS:
All pawnbrokers doing business in the village of Streamwood shall keep a standard record book that has been approved by the chief of police. At the time
of each purchase, loan or taking of a pledge, an accurate account and description, in the English language, of all the goods, articles or other things
purchased for resale, pawned or pledged; the amount of money, value or thing loaned thereon, the time of pledging the same, the rate of interest to be
paid on such loan and the name and residence address of the person making such sale, pawn or pledge shall be entered in the record book. All items of
jewelry, precious stones, semiprecious stones, coins, silver, gold, platinum, video, audio or electronic devices taken or purchased from any person for
resale or pawn or pledge or held shall be clearly photographed in color so as to be able to clearly identify the item and all photographs taken shall be
maintained and preserved as herein provided. All such entries shall be printed, typed, or written in ink in the record book. Record book entries shall also
include the serial number or any identification number, if any, of items received. Except for items purchased from dealers possessing a federal employee
identification number and who have provided a receipt to the pawnbroker, every pawnbroker shall also record, in its record book, an accurate account or
description, serial number or other identification number of all goods, articles and other things purchased or received for the purpose of resale or loan
collateral by the pawnbroker from any source, not in the course of a pledge or loan, the time of such purchase or receipt and the time and the name and
address of the person or business which sold or delivered such goods, articles or other things to the pawnbroker. No entry made in the record book shall
be erased, mutilated, altered or in any way changed. (Ord. 2012-14, 5-3-2012)
3-7.9-8: IDENTIFICATION REQUIRED:
A. It shall be unlawful for any pawnbroker, agent or employee of a pawnbroker to fail to request and require identification to be shown by each person
pledging, pawning or selling any item, article or other thing to the pawnbroker. One form of identification shall be a valid driver's license or identification
card issued by a governmental entity which contains a photograph of the person identified, as well as the person's address. If the pictured identification
is not government issued, then two (2) forms of identification must be shown, and at least one of the said two (2) forms of identification must contain a
photograph, and at least one form of identification must include the person's residence address. In addition to a valid driver's license or government
issued identification card, other acceptable forms of pictured identification shall include, but not be limited to, employee or student identification cards,
pictured credit card, or a pictured civic, union or professional association membership card. If the customer or person pawning, pledging, or selling any
item or article does not present identification issued by a governmental entity, the pawnbroker shall photograph the customer in color print and record
the customer's name, residence address, date of birth, gender, height and weight on the reverse side of the photograph.
B. In lieu of a record book, the pawnbroker may maintain such records required by this section in computer form if that computer form has been approved
in writing by the chief of police. (Ord. 2012-14, 5-3-2012)
3-7.9-9: SECURITY MEASURES:
A. The pawnbroker shall also have installed, and operating at all times during business hours, a video surveillance camera positioned so as to record all
transactions, as well as the facial features of those persons selling any item to the pawnbroker or pawning or pledging any item.
B. All pawnbrokers shall subscribe to and participate in "leadsonline.com". All items purchased, pawned or pledged shall be entered into the
leadsonline.com database within twelve (12) hours of receipt of the item. (Ord. 2012-14, 5-3-2012)
3-7.9-10: INSPECTION OF RECORDS:
The record book or computer generated records (if approved as herein provided), video surveillance records, photographs taken, as well as every article
or other thing of value sold, pawned or pledged, shall at all times be open to the inspection by the chief of police or any sworn law enforcement officer. The
record book, any computer generated records and all photographs taken shall be maintained for a period of three (3) years after the date on which the
record or pawn ticket was prepared. Video surveillance records shall be maintained for a period of one year after the date on which the record or pawn
ticket was prepared. (Ord. 2012-14, 5-3-2012)
3-7.9-11: DAILY REPORT:
Except as may be otherwise provided herein, every pawnbroker shall make, complete and deliver to the chief of police of the village or his designee, on a
daily business day basis, before twelve o'clock (12:00) noon, a legible exact copy of the record book or computer generated record as required herein.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 105/498
Such record shall list all property and other things of value received on deposit or purchased during the preceding twenty four (24) hour period, including
the exact time when such item was received or purchased, the required personal information of the person or persons by whom the item was left in
pledge, or from whom the item was purchased. (Ord. 2012-14, 5-3-2012)
3-7.9-12: TRANSACTIONS WITH PROHIBITED PARTIES:
A. It shall be unlawful for any pawnbroker, or its agent or employee, to purchase any item or to take or receive any pawn or pledge in advancement of any
loan from a person who is under the age of eighteen (18) years.
B. It shall be further unlawful for any pawnbroker to purchase or take any article in pawn or pledge from any person appearing to be intoxicated or under
the influence of any drug or controlled substance or from any person known to have been convicted of theft, burglary, deceptive practices, robbery or
armed robbery. It shall further be the duty of every pawnbroker, or agent or employee thereof, to return any purchased, pawned or pledged or sold
property to the rightful owner of such property without any service charge and without repayment of the payment of the money advanced by the
pawnbroker. (Ord. 2012-14, 5-3-2012)
3-7.9-13: SALE OF PROPERTY; SALE OF DEFAULTED PROPERTY:
A. No property received for resale or purchased for resale by any pawnbroker shall be sold by the pawnbroker or removed from the place of business of
such pawnbroker for a period of seven (7) days after the pawnbroker has taken possession of the item or property.
B. No property pawned or pledged shall be sold or otherwise disposed of by any pawnbroker prior to thirty (30) days after the date the pawner or pledger
has defaulted in the payment of interest on the money so advanced by the pawnbroker, unless by the written consent of the pawner or pledger. (Ord.
2012-14, 5-3-2012)
3-7.9-14: PROHIBITED ITEMS:
No pawnbroker, agent or employee thereof, shall receive, accept as a pawn or pledge or purchase for resale any stun gun or taser, pistol, revolver or other
firearm. (Ord. 2012-14, 5-3-2012)
3-7.9-15: VIEW FROM STREET:
No person shall install, place or erect any blind, screen, curtain, partition, article or other thing in the windows or upon the doors of any pawnshop which
prevents or restricts a clear and full view into the interior of the licensed premises from the street, road or sidewalk. The interior of all pawnshops shall be
illuminated by natural or artificial white lights during all hours that the pawnshop is open for business so that all parts of the interior of the premises are
clearly visible from the street, road or sidewalk. (Ord. 2012-14, 5-3-2012)
3-7.9-16: PENALTY:
A. Notwithstanding any other provision of this code to the contrary, any person who violates the provisions of this article shall be fined in an amount not
less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) or more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense.
B. A violation of the provisions of this article by an employee or agent of the licensee shall be imputed to the licensee and shall be considered the act of
the licensee for which the licensee may be fined or for which the license issued may be suspended or revoked as provided by this code. (Ord. 2012-14,
5-3-2012)
Chapter 8
RUMMAGE SALES/GARAGE SALES
3-8-1: DEFINITION:
The term "rummage sale" or "garage sale" shall mean the public auction or public sale by a Village resident either in his garage or elsewhere on any
premises of any wearing apparel, or other household items, whether new or used. (1994 Code)
3-8-2: REQUIREMENTS FOR CONDUCTING SALE:
A. Application: Any person who shall desire to conduct any rummage sale/garage sale shall first make application for said sale a minimum of seventy two
(72) hours in advance of the date of said sale. Such application shall be made to the Village Clerk on forms in triplicate; one copy to be retained by the
Village Clerk, one copy to be retained by the Village Police Department and one copy being retained by the applicant.
B. Fee: There shall be a fee of one dollar ($1.00) charged for each rummage sale/garage sale to be held within the Village.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 106/498
C. Posting Application: The applicant's copy of the application shall be posted prominently somewhere on the outside of the premises where said
rummage sale/garage sale is being held.
D. Time For Conducting Sale: Rummage sales/garage sales may be conducted only on any two (2) consecutive days of the week between the hours of
nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. and five o'clock (5:00) P.M.
E. Number Of Sales Limited: There shall be a limit of two (2) rummage sales/garage sales per applicant, per year.
F. Advertising: Signs advertising rummage sales/garage sales shall be a maximum size of eighteen inches by eighteen inches (18" x 18") in conformance
with the following sign requirements:
1. Only one rummage sale/garage sale sign is allowed per zoning lot, except that on a corner lot, two (2) signs; one facing each street shall be
permitted.
2. Two (2) additional rummage sale/garage sale signs shall be permitted which may be placed anywhere in the Village limits; provided, permission is
given by the owner of the property. These signs may be located in the front or side yard.
3. Each sign shall clearly identify the address of the rummage sale/garage sale location and date of rummage sale/garage sale with letters and
numbers no less than one and one-half inches (11/2") high.
4. No rummage sale/garage sale signs shall be placed in the public right of way or parkways.
5. Rummage sale/garage sale signs shall be removed by sunset of the last day of the sale.
G. Condition Of Apparel, Affidavit: The person making application for a rummage sale shall make and file an affidavit with the Village Clerk stating that any
garments or wearing apparel sold at any rummage sale/garage sale has been cleaned and that it has not been exposed to any contagious or infectious
disease. (1994 Code)
3-8-3: EXCEPTIONS:
This Chapter shall not apply to public or parochial schools and churches, civic or fraternal clubs, and other generally recognized charitable organizations,
including but not limited to the Girl Scouts and Boy Scouts. (1994 Code)
3-8-4: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this Chapter shall be fined as set forth in Section 1-4-1 of this Code. A separate offense shall be deemed committed
on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 1998-4, 1-8-1998)
Chapter 9
INDUSTRIAL PROJECT REVENUE BONDS
3-9-1: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context otherwise requires, the following terms used in this Chapter shall be construed according to the definitions given herein:
BOND RESOLUTION: A resolution authorizing a specific issue of bonds adopted by the President and Board of Trustees of the Village in accordance with
the policies and procedures set forth in this Chapter.
BOND(S): Industrial project revenue bonds.
INDUSTRIAL PROJECT: Any capital project, including one or more buildings and other structures, improvements, machinery and equipment whether or
not on the same site or sites now existing or hereafter acquired, suitable for use by any manufacturing, industrial, research or commercial enterprise,
including but not limited to, use as a factory, mill, processing plant, assembly plant, packaging plant, fabricating plant, office building, industrial distribution
center, warehouse, repair, overhaul or service facility, freight terminal, research facility, test facility, commercial facility, and including also the sites thereof
and other rights and land therefor whether improved or unimproved, site preparation and landscaping, and all appurtenances and facilities incidental
thereto such as utilities, access roads, railroad sidings, truck docking and similar facilities, parking facilities, dockage, wharfage, and other improvements
necessary or convenient thereto; or any land, buildings, machinery or equipment comprising in addition to, or renovation, rehabilitation or improvement of
any existingcapital project.
PERSON: Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, or any other legal entity,
whether legal representative, agent or their assigns.
PROJECT COSTS: The sum total of all costs and estimated costs of the issuance of such bonds, all engineering, inspection, fiscal and legal expenses,
and interest which it is estimated will accrue during the construction period and for six (6) months thereafter on money borrowed of which it is estimated
will be borrowed pursuant to this Chapter.
USER: The person or persons who will occupy, operate, maintain or employ the project after acquisition or construction thereof whether as owner,
purchaser, lessee or otherwise.
VILLAGE: The Village of Streamwood, Cook County, Illinois. (1994 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 107/498
3-9-2: DECLARATION OF PURPOSE:
It is hereby determined and declared that the purpose of this Chapter is to provide a financing device which will aid in financing the costs of industrial
projects; and the same is hereby declared and determined to be a public purpose and is necessary for the public safety, benefit and welfare of the
residents of the Village. (1994 Code)
3-9-3: ADDITIONAL POWERS:
In addition to the powers which it may now have, the Village shall have the power under this Chapter:
A. To construct, acquire by gift, lease or purchase, reconstruct, improve, better or extend, or to finance the construction, acquisition, reconstruction,
improvement, betterment, or extension of any industrial project within or without the Village or partially within or partially without the Village, but in no
event further than ten (10) miles from the territorial boundaries of the Village, and to acquire by gift, lease or purchase lands or rights in land in
connection therewith.
B. To issue its bonds to finance in whole or in part of the cost of the acquisition, purchase, construction, reconstruction, improvement, betterment or
extension of any industrial project. The Village need not acquire or hold title to such industrial project. The President and Board of Trustees of the
Village in determining such cost may include all cost and estimated cost of the issuance of such bonds, all engineering, inspection, fiscal and legal
expenses, and interest which it is estimated will accrue during theconstruction period and for six (6) months thereafter on money borrowed or which it is
estimated will be borrowed pursuant to this Chapter.
C. To rent, lease, sell or otherwise dispose of such industrial project or to loan the proceeds of its bonds to industrial or commercial enterprises (which may
include corporations, partnerships or individuals engaged in business or commerce) in such manner that rents or other payments to be derived with
respect to the industrial project shall be fixed and revised from time to time so as to produce income and revenues sufficient to provide for the prompt
payment of interest upon all bonds issued under this Chapter, and to create a sinking fund to pay the principal of such bonds when due, and to provide
for the operation and maintenance of such industrial project and for an adequate depreciation account in connection therewith.
D. To pledge to the punctual payment of bonds authorized under this Chapter and interest thereon the income and revenues to be received with respect to
such industrial project (including improvements, betterments or extensions thereto thereafter constructed or acquired) sufficient to pay such bonds and
interest as they become due and to create and maintain reasonable reserves therefor.
E. To mortgage or grant a security interest in such industrial project in favor of the holder or holders of bonds issued therefor.
F. To sell and convey such industrial project, including without limitation the sale and conveyance thereof subject to a mortgage or security interest as
provided in this Chapter, for such price and at such time as the President and Board of Trustees of the Village may determine. However, no sale or
conveyance of such industrial project shall ever be made in such manner as to impair the rights or interests of the holder or holders of any bonds
issued for the construction, purchase, improvement or extension of any such industrial project.
G. To issue its bonds to refund in whole or in part, bonds theretofore issued by the Village under authority of this Chapter.
The Village shall be exempt from the payment of taxes with respect to property acquired by the Village pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter while
such property is owned by the Village, but the occupant of such property shall be subject to taxation as if he were the owner of such property. (1994
Code)
3-9-4: EXERCISE OF POWERS; BONDS:
The financing of the construction, acquisition, reconstruction, improvement, betterment or extension of any industrial project may be authorized under this
Chapter andbonds may be authorized to be issued under this Chapter to provide bonds for such purpose or purposes or for the refunding of bonds
theretofore issued under this Chapter, by a resolution which may be adopted at the same meeting at which it is introduced by a three-fifths (3/5) affirmative
vote of all the corporate authorities thereof then in office and shall take effect immediately upon adoption.
The bonds shall bear interest at such rate or rates without regard to any limitation in any other law, payable at such times, may be in one or more series,
may bear such date or dates, may mature at such time or times not exceeding forty (40) years from their respective dates, may be payable in such
medium of payment at such place or places, may carry such registration privileges, may be subject to such terms of redemption, may be executed in such
manner, may contain such terms, covenants, and conditions, and may be in such form, either coupon or registered, as such bond resolution or subsequent
bond resolutions may provide. The bonds may be sold in such manner and upon such terms as may be deemed advisable by the President and Board of
Trustees. Pending the preparation of the definitive bonds, interim receipts or certificates in such form and with such provisions as the President and Board
of Trustees may determine, may be issued to the purchaser or purchasers of bonds sold pursuant to this Chapter. The bonds and interim receipts or
certificates are fully negotiable with the meaning and for all purposes of the "Uniform Commercial Code". (1994 Code)
3-9-5: VOTE REQUIRED:
No bonds may be issued under this Chapter unless the bond issue is approved by the affirmative vote of three-fifths (3/5) of the President and Board of
Trustees. (1994 Code)
3-9-6: COVENANTS IN BONDS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 108/498
Any bond resolution may contain covenants as to: a) the use and disposition of the income and revenues from or with respect to the industrial project for
which the bonds are to be issued, including the creation and maintenance of reserves; b) the issuance of other or additional bonds payable from the
income and revenues from or with respect to such industrial project; c) the maintenance and repair of such industrial project; d) the insurance to be carried
thereon and the use and disposition of the insurance monies; and e) the terms and conditions upon which the holder of the bonds or any portion thereof or
any trustees therefor, are entitled to the appointment of a receiver by the chancery court, which court has jurisdiction in such proceedings, and which
receiver may enter and take possession of the industrial project if it is then owned by the Village and lease, sell or otherwise dispose of it and maintain it,
prescribe rentals or other payments and collect, receive and apply all income and revenues thereafterarising therefrom in the same manner and to the
same extent as the Village itself might do.
Any bond resolution may provide that the principal of and interest on any bonds issued under this Chapter shall be secured by a mortgage or deed of trust
covering such industrial project for which the bonds are issued and may include any improvements or extensions thereafter made. Such mortgage or deed
of trust may contain such covenants and agreements to properly safeguard the bonds as may be provided for in the bond resolution but not inconsistent
with this Chapter and shall be executed in the manner as may be provided for in the bond resolution. A mortgage or deed of trust by which a security
interest is created or a financing statement relating thereto need not be filed or recorded under the Uniform Commercial Code, or otherwise, except in the
records of the Village. The provisions of this Chapter and any such bond resolution or bond resolutions and any such mortgage or deed of trust is a
contract with the holder or holders of the bonds and continues in effect until the principal of and the interest on the bonds so issued has been fully paid,
and duties of the Village and its President and Board of Trustees and officers under this Chapter and any such bond resolution or bond resolutions and
any such mortgage or deed of trust are enforceable by any bondholder by mandamus, foreclosure of any such mortgage or deed of trust or other
appropriate suit, action or proceedings in any court of competent jurisdiction. (1994 Code)
3-9-7: SIGNATURES OF OFFICERS ON BONDS; VALIDITY OF BONDS:
The bonds bearing the signatures of officers in office on the date of the signing thereof are valid and binding obligations, notwithstanding that before the
delivery thereof and payment therefor any or all the persons whose signatures appear thereon have ceased to be officers of the Village. The validity of the
bonds is not dependent on nor affected by the validity or regularity of any proceedings relating to the acquisition, purchase, construction, reconstruction,
improvement, betterment or extension of the industrial project for which the bonds are issued. The bond resolution may provide that the bonds shall
contain a recital that they are issued pursuant to 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-74-1 et seq., and this Chapter, which recital is conclusive evidence of
their validity and of the regularity of their issuance. (1994 Code)
3-9-8: LIEN OF BONDS:
All bonds issued under this Chapter have a lien upon the income and revenues delivered by the Village with respect to the industrial project for which the
bonds have been issued, and the President and Board of Trustees may provide in any bond resolution for the issuance of additional bonds to beequally
and ratably secured by a lien upon such income and revenues or may provide that the lien upon such income and revenues for future bonds is
subordinate. (1994 Code)
3-9-9: LIABILITY FOR BONDS:
No holder of any bonds issued under this Chapter has the right to compel any exercise of taxing power of the Village to pay the bonds or the interest
thereon, and the bonds do not constitute an indebtedness of the Village or a loan of credit thereof within the meaning of any constitutional or statutory
provisions. It shall be plainly stated on the face of each bond that it has been issued under time provisions of 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-74-1 et seq.,
and this Chapter, and that it does not constitute an indebtedness of the Village or a loan of credit thereof within the meaning of any constitutional or
statutory provision. (1994 Code)
3-9-10: REVENUES FROM INDUSTRIAL PROJECTS:
The President and Board of Trustees of the Village shall prescribe and collect revenues with respect to an industrial project and shall revise such from time
to time whenever necessary so that such revenues are always sufficient to pay when due all bonds and interest thereon for the payment of which such
revenues are pledged, including reserves therefor. (1994 Code)
3-9-11: NECESSITY OF CERTIFICATE, FRANCHISE, LICENSE, ETC:
It is not necessary for the Village, proceeding under this Chapter, to obtain any certificate of convenience or necessity, franchise, license, permit, or other
authorization from any bureau, board, commission, or other law instrumentality of the State in order to acquire, construct, purchase, reconstruct, improve,
better or extend any industrial project or for the issuance of bonds in connection therewith. (1994 Code)
3-9-12: ADDITIONAL AND SUPPLEMENTAL POWERS; LIMITATIONS; EFFECT:
The powers conferred by this Chapter are in addition and supplemental to, and the limitations imposed by this Chapter shall not affect, the powers
conferred by any other law. Industrial projects may be acquired, purchased, constructed, reconstructed, improved, bettered and extended, and bonds may
be issued under this Chapter for such purposes, notwithstanding that any other law may provide for the acquisition, purchase, construction, reconstruction,
improvement, betterment and extension of a like industrial project, or the issuance of bonds for like purposes, andwithout regard to the requirements,
restrictions, limitation or other provisions contained in any other law. (1994 Code)
3-9-13: DISCLOSURE OF INTEREST:
Any member of the corporate authority of the Village shall disclose any pecuniary interest in any employment, financing, agreement or other contract made
under the provisions of this Chapter before any action by the President and Board of Trustees on it, and shall not vote on any such matter. Notwithstanding
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 109/498
the provisions of any other law, any financing agreement or other contract made or procured in conformity with the provisions of this action shall not be
void by reason of the pecuniary interest of any member of the corporate authority of the Village therein; nor shall such person be subject to any penalty by
reason of the making or procuring thereof. (1994 Code)
3-9-14: FINANCING FEE:
The Village shall charge a financing fee each time that bonds are issued by it as provided in this Chapter. Said financing fee shall be negotiated with each
applicant for an industrial project revenue bond and shall not be computed at a rate less than ten dollars ($10.00) per thousand dollars ($1,000.00) of
bonds for the first one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) of bonds issued with a minimum fee of not less than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00); for bonds
issued exceeding one million dollars ($1,000,000.00), the Village shall charge an additional fee to be computed at a rate not less than five dollars ($5.00)
per one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) of bonds issued in excess of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00). Financing fees shall be calculated on the principal
amount of bonds issued at the time of the issuance of bonds by the Village. Financing fees shall be deemed reimbursement to the Village for its
administrative costs in reviewing, evaluating and administering any bond issue and shall be a project cost in addition to those costs described in Section 3-
9-1 of this Chapter. (1994 Code)
3-9-15: DEPOSIT:
Any person requesting the Village to finance any project by issuance of its bonds shall make a nonrefundable deposit with the Village Clerk in the amount
necessary to reimburse the Village for its preliminary expenses in investigating the desirability and feasibility of such financing. Upon the adoption of a
resolution indicating the Village's preliminary agreement to issue a specific amount of bonds for the proposed project, an additional deposit equal to onehalf
(1/2) of the financing fee shall be paid to the Village. Said deposits shall be disbursed by the Village in payment of the Village's expenses
notwithstanding that financing is not completed;however said deposits may be repaid as a project cost from the proceedings of any bonds issued to
finance the project. (1994 Code)
Chapter 10
RAFFLES
3-10-1: DEFINITIONS:
NET PROCEEDS: The gross receipts from the conduct of raffles, less reasonable sums expended for prizes, local license fees, and other reasonable
operating expenses incurred as a result of operating a raffle.
OTHER: Unless the context otherwise requires, all words and phrases used herein shall have the same meaning as the same or similar words or phrases
defined and used in the State law.
RAFFLE LICENSING AGENT: Raffle licensing agent for the Village of Streamwood is the Village Clerk.
STATE LAW: Whenever reference herein is made to "State law" it shall mean and refer to an act of the General Assembly of the State of Illinois, entitled
"An Act to provide for licensing and regulating certain games of chance and amending certain acts herein named", approved August 5, 1981, as amended.
(1994 Code)
3-10-2: QUALIFICATIONS:
A. A license to operate a raffle shall be issued only to bona fide religious, charitable, labor, fraternal, educational, or veterans' organizations, that operate
without profit to their members and which have been in existence continuously for a period of five (5) years immediately before making application for a
license and which have had during the entire five (5) year period a bona fide membership engaged in carrying out their objects.
B. No license shall be issued to:
1. Any person who has been convicted of a felony;
2. Any person who is or has been a professional gambler or gambling promoter;
3. Any person who is not of good moral character;
4. Any firm or corporation in which a person defined in subsection B2 or B3 hereof has a proprietary, equitable, or credit interest, or in which a person is
active or employed;
5. Any organization in which such a person defined in subsection B1, B2 or B3 hereof is an officer, director or employee, whether compensated or not;
6. Any organization in which a person defined in subsection B1, B2 or B3 hereof is to participate in the management or operation of a raffle as
described by State law. (1994 Code)
3-10-3: APPLICATION:
A. Required Information: Application forms shall be furnished by the raffle licensing agent and filed with same. Said applications shall show the following:
1. The name and address of the applicant;
2. The date, time and location at which winning chances will be determined;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 110/498
3. Place and date of chartering or incorporation of applicant, if applicable;
4. Name, address, telephone number, social security number and date of birth of presiding officer, secretary, and raffle manager of applicant;
5. The area or areas in which raffle tickets will be sold;
6. A list of prizes and the retail of each prize to be awarded in a single raffle; and
7. The price to be charged for each ticket sold.
B. Statement Of Accuracy: The license application shall contain a sworn statement attesting to the accuracy of the information provided and to the not-forprofit
character of the prospective licensee. Said statement shall be signed by the presiding officer, secretary, and raffle manager of that prospective
licensee.
C. Application Valid For One Raffle: An application for a license under this Chapter is valid for one raffle only.
D. Exception: Any raffle in which the aggregate value of the prizes is less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) shall be considered automatically licensed
without necessity of an application. (1994 Code)
3-10-4: REGULATIONS GOVERNING LICENSEE:
A. Conduct Of Raffles: The conducting of raffles is subject to the following restrictions:
1. The entire net proceeds of any raffle must be exclusively devoted to the lawful purposes of the licensee permitted to conduct that game.
2. No person except a bona fide member of the licensee organization may participate in the management or operation of the raffle.
3. No person may receive any remuneration or profit for participating in the management or operation of the raffle.
4. Raffle chances may be sold or issued only within the area or areas specified on the license.
5. Winning chances must be determined only at the time, date, and location specified on the license.
6. Any person selling raffle chances must carry a copy of the license issued for the raffle.
B. Raffle Limits:
1. The aggregate retail value of all prizes or merchandise awarded by a licensee in a single raffle shall not exceed fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00).
2. The maximum retail value of each prize awarded by a licensee in a single raffle shall not exceed fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00).
3. The maximum price which may be charged for each raffle chance issued or sold shall not exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00).
4. The maximum number of days during which chances may be issued or sold shall not exceed one hundred eighty (180).
5. The license shall not be valid for more than one hundred eighty (180) days.
C. Raffle Manager And Bond:
1. All operation and conduct of raffles shall be under the supervision of a single raffle manager as designated on the license application.
2. A manager shall give a fidelity bond in the sum of the aggregate retail value of the prizes as set out on the application. The bond shall be in favor of
the organization conditioned upon the raffle manager's honesty in the performance of his duties. Said bond shall provide that noticeshall be given in
writing to the licensing authority not less than thirty (30) days prior to its cancellation period. If the retail value of the prizes exceed fifteen thousand
dollars ($15,000.00), such bond shall be a corporate surety.
D. Records:
1. Gross receipts from the operation of raffle programs shall be segregated from other revenues of the licensee; (including bingo gross receipts, if bingo
games are also conducted by the same licensee pursuant to license issued by the Department of Revenue of the State), and placed in a separate
account. Each organization shall have separate records of its raffles. The person who accounts for gross receipts and expenses from the operation
of raffles shall not be the same person who accounts for other revenues of the organization.
2. Each licensee shall keep records of gross receipts, expenses, and net proceeds for each single raffle at which winning chances are determined. All
reasonable operating expenses deducted from gross receipts for each single raffle shall be documented with receipts or other records indicating the
amount, a description of the purchased item or service or other reason for the deduction, and the recipient. The distribution of net proceeds shall be
itemized as to payee, purpose, amount, and date of payment.
3. Each licensee, within thirty (30) days of the raffle, shall report to its membership and to the raffle licensing agent each of the following:
a. Gross receipts generated by the conducting of the raffle;
b. An itemized list of all reasonable operating expenses which have been deducted from the gross receipts;
c. Net proceeds from the conducting of the raffle;
d. An itemized list of the distribution of the net proceeds; and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 111/498
e. A list of prize winners.
4. Records required by this Section shall be presented for three (3) years, and the organization shall make available for public inspection their records
relating to the operation of a raffle at reasonable times and places.
E. Gambling Prohibited: Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to authorize the conducting or operating of any gambling scheme, enterprise, activity,
or device other than raffles as provided by State law. (1994 Code)
3-10-5: FEES:
Aggregate Prize Value Fee
Less than $500.00 None
$501.00 to $5,000.00 $5.00
5,001.00 and over 25.00
(1994 Code)
3-10-6: ADMINISTRATION:
A. The raffle licensing agent shall be charged with the administration of this Chapter.
B. The authority and jurisdiction of the Village to issue a license to a prospective licensee shall extend only to corporate limits of the Village.
C. The raffle licensing agent shall act upon a license application within ten (10) days from the date of the application.
D. The Village President and the Village Clerk may enter into a written contract with one or more municipalities which have adopted a raffle ordinance
consistent with this Chapter to jointly establish a system for the licensing of organizations to operate raffles within the corporate limits of any
municipality that is a party of such contract. Such contract shall be consistent with the limitations of this Chapter except that a license issued by one
government unit shall be valid throughout the jurisdiction of all parties to the contract. (1994 Code)
3-10-7: ENFORCEMENT:
A. Penalties: Failure to comply with any of the requirements of this Chapter shall constitute a violation. Whoever violates any of the provisions of this
Chapter is subject to a fine as set forth in Section 1-4-1 of this Code. Each day the violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. (Ord.
1998-4, 1-8-1998)
B. Prevention Of Unlawful Raffles: The imposition of the penalties herein prescribed shall not preclude the State's Attorney or Village Attorney from
instituting appropriate action to prevent unlawful raffles or to restrain, correct, or abate a violation of this Chapter or of the conditions of a raffle license
issued pursuant hereto. (1994 Code)
3-10-8: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
If any provision of this Chapter or the application thereof is held to be unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such ruling
shall not affect any other provisions of this Chapter not specifically included in such ruling or which can be given effect without the unconstitutional or
invalid provision or application; and to this end, the provisions of this Chapter are declared severable. (1994 Code)
Chapter 11
REAL ESTATE TRANSFER TAX
3-11-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this Chapter, whenever any of the following words, terms or definitions are used herein, they shall have the meanings ascribed to them
in this Section:
BENEFICIAL INTEREST: Any interest regardless of how small or minimal such interest may be, in a land trust, held by a trustee for the beneficiaries of
such land trust.
PERSON: Any natural individual, firm, partnership, association, joint stock company, joint venture, public or private corporation, or a receiver, executor,
trustee, conservator or other representative appointed by order of any court.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 112/498
RECORDATION: The recording of deeds with the office of Recorder of Deeds of Cook County, Illinois.
VALUE: The amount of full actual consideration for any transfer covered hereunder, including the amount of any lien or liens assumed by the grantee or
purchaser. (1994 Code)
3-11-2: TAX IMPOSED:
A tax is imposed on the privilege of transferring title to real estate located within the corporate limits of the Village as evidenced by the recordation of a
deed by any person and a tax is imposed on the privilege of transferring the beneficial interest in real estate located within the corporate limits of the
Village at the rate of three dollars ($3.00) per one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) of value for each transfer. Thetax herein levied shall be in addition to any
and all other taxes. (Ord. 1993-72, 12-16-1993, eff. 2-1-1994)
3-11-3: LIABILITY FOR TAX:
The ultimate incidence and liability for payment of the tax imposed by this Chapter shall be borne by the grantor of any deed subject to this Chapter or by
the grantor, assignor or transferrer of any instrument conveying the beneficial interest in real estate within the corporate limits of the Village. (1994 Code)
3-11-4: PURCHASE OF STAMPS:
The tax levied by this Chapter shall be paid by the purchase of tax stamps from the Finance Department or a designated agent. The payment of such tax
shall be denoted by an adhesive stamp or stamps affixed to the face of the deed or instrument transferring the beneficial interest. (1994 Code)
3-11-5: FILING OF DECLARATION:
At such time as the tax levied by this Chapter is paid, there shall be filed with the Finance Department a fully executed and completed copy of the "real
estate transfer declaration" required by section three of the real estate transfer tax of the State, or a declaration of the full consideration paid for the
transfer of beneficial interest which declaration shall be on a form provided by the Finance Director. Such declaration shall be deemed as a confidential
record. (1994 Code)
3-11-6: EXEMPTIONS:
The tax imposed by this Chapter shall not apply to the following transactions:
A. Transactions involving property acquired by or from any governmental body or by any corporation, society, association, foundation or institution
organized and operating exclusively for charitable, religious or educational purposes.
B. Transactions which secure debt or other obligation.
C. Transactions in which deeds, without additional consideration, confirm, correct, modify or supplement deeds previously recorded.
D. Transactions in which the actual consideration is less than one hundred dollars ($100.00).
E. Transactions in which the deeds are tax deeds.
F. Transactions which are releases of property which is security for a debt or other obligation.
G. Transactions of partitions.
H. Transactions made pursuant to merges, consolidations or transfers or sales of substantially all of the assets of a corporation pursuant to plans of
reorganization.
I. Transactions between subsidiary corporations and their parents for no consideration other than the cancellation or surrender of the subsidiary
corporation's stock.
J. Transactions wherein there is an actual exchange of real property except that the money difference or money's worth paid from one to the other shall
not be exempt from the tax.
K. Transactions representing transfers subject to the imposition of a documentary stamp tax imposed by the government of the United States.
L. Transactions wherein one of the grantors has continuously resided upon the property for the past one year and has evidence of a contract for sale as a
purchaser for a residence within the Village, such contract having closed within nine (9) months of the exempt transaction or to close by contract within
three (3) months after the exempt transaction. Every deed or other instrument which is tax exempt pursuant to this Section shall be presented to the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 113/498
Finance Department so as to be appropriately marked by said Department as an exempt deed or instrument eligible for recordation without the
payment of tax. At such time as a deed or instrument is presented to the Department, a certificate setting forth the facts which justify exemption shall
be presented.
M. Every deed or other instrument which is tax exempt pursuant to this Section shall be presented to the Finance Department and is to be appropriately
marked by said Department as an exempt deed or instrument eligible for recordation without the payment of tax. At such time as a deed or instrument
is presented to the Department, a certificate setting forth the facts which justify exemption shall be presented.
N. A processing fee in the amount of ten dollars ($10.00) shall be collected by the Director of Finance for real estate transfer stamps issued for
transactions determined to be exempt as provided for in this Section, except there shall be no processing fee for a transaction which is exempt as
provided by subsection L of this Section. Upon payment of the fee, the revenue stamp so issued shall be marked "exempt" and shall be affixed to the
deed or other instrument of conveyance. (Ord. 1993-72, 12-16-1993, eff. 2-1-1994)
3-11-7: REAL ESTATE TRANSFER TAX STAMPS REQUIRED:
The tax herein levied and imposed shall be collected by the Finance Department through the sale of real estate transfer tax stamps, which shall be caused
to be prepared by said Finance Department in such quantities as said Finance Director may from time to time prescribe. Such stamps shall be
substantially in a design as determined by the Finance Director. Such stamps shall be available for sale at and during the regular business hours of the
Village offices and the offices of such agent as the Village may designate. For the purpose of reviewing the request for the stamps, the Village shall
process a request within two (2) working days. Upon payment of the tax herein levied and imposed, the stamps so purchased shall be affixed to the deed
or other instrument of conveyance. Any person so using and affixing a stamp shall cancel it and so deface it as to render it unfit for use by marking it with
his initials and the day, month and year when the affixing occurs. Such marking shall be made by writing or stamping in indelible ink or by perforating with
a machine or punch; however, the stamp shall not be so defaced as to prevent ready determination of its genuineness. (1994 Code)
3-11-8: RECORDATION OF DEEDS:
No deed conveying real property within the corporate limits of the Village shall be entitled to recordation by the Recorder of Deeds of Cook County, Illinois,
unless such deed shall bear either a Village real estate transfer tax stamp or an exemption made from the Finance Department. (1994 Code)
3-11-9: DUTY OF TRUSTEE:
No trustee of real estate shall accept an assignment of beneficial interest in real estate located in the Village unless such instrument shall bear either a
Village real estate transfer tax stamp or an exemption mark from the Finance Department. (1994 Code)
3-11-10: PROCEEDS OF TAX:
All proceeds resulting from the collection of the tax imposed by this Chapter, including interest and penalties, shall be paid into the Village Treasury and
shall be credited to and deposited in the General Fund of the Village. (1994 Code)
3-11-11: INTEREST AND PENALTIES:
In the event of failure by any person to pay to the Finance Department the tax required hereunder when the same shall be due, interest shall accumulate
and be due upon said tax at the rate of one percent (1%) per month commencing as of the first day following the day when the deed was recorded or the
assignment of beneficial interest was accepted by the trustee.In addition, a penalty of fifty percent (50%) of the tax and interest shall be assessed and
collected against any person who fails to pay the tax imposed by this Chapter. (1994 Code)
3-11-12: CIVIL LIABILITY FOR TAX:
In the event of failure by any person to pay to the Finance Department the tax required hereunder when the same shall be due, said person shall be liable
to the Village for such tax, together with interest and penalties. The Village may bring an action to collect such tax, interest and penalties in any court of
competent jurisdiction. (1994 Code)
3-11-13: FINE FOR VIOLATION:
In addition to the remaining provisions of this Chapter, any person found guilty in a court of competent jurisdiction of violating, disobeying, omitting,
neglecting or refusing to comply with any provision of this Chapter, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine as set forth in Section 1-4-1 of this
Code for each offense. (Ord. 1998-4, 1-8-1998)
3-11-14: PAYMENT OF WATER, SEWER AND OTHER CHARGES:
No real estate transfer stamps shall be issued unless it is determined by the Finance Department that all water and sewer bills and assessments and any
penalties related thereto and other debts due and owing the Village with respect to the subject property are paid in full. The real estate transfer tax
declaration form shall be completed to include all information necessary for the billing and collection of the final water and sewer charges. (Ord. 1998-48,
9-10-1998)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 114/498
Chapter 12
TELECOMMUNICATIONS
3-12-1: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
3-12-1-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose and intent of this Chapter is to:
A. Establish a local policy concerning telecommunications providers and services;
B. Establish clear local guidelines, standards and time frames for the exercise of local authority with respect to the regulation of telecommunications
providers and services;
C. Promote competition in telecommunications;
D. Minimize unnecessary local regulation of telecommunications providers and services;
E. Encourage the provision of advanced and competitive telecommunications services on the widest possible basis to the businesses, institutions and
residents of the Village;
F. Permit and manage reasonable access to the public ways of the Village for telecommunications purposes on a competitively neutral basis;
G. Conserve the limited physical capacity of the public ways held in public trust by the Village;
H. Assure that the Village's current and ongoing costs of granting and regulating private access to and use of the public ways are fully paid by the persons
seeking such access and causing such costs;
I. Secure fair and reasonable compensation to the Village and the residents of the Village for permitting private use of the public ways;
J. Assure that all telecommunications carriers providing facilities or services within the Village comply with the ordinances, rules and regulations of the
Village;
K. Assure that the Village can continue to fairly and responsibly protect the public health, safety and welfare;
L. Enable the Village to discharge its public trust consistent with rapidly evolving Federal and State regulatory policies, industry competition and
technological development. (Ord. 1995-52, 10-19-1995)
3-12-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this Chapter, and the interpretation and enforcement thereof, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings,
unless the context of the sentence in which they are used shall indicate otherwise:
AFFILIATE: A person that (directly or indirectly) owns or controls, is owned or controlled by, or is under common ownership or control with another person.
ANNUAL GROSS REVENUE: The amount paid in a fiscal year for the act or privilege of originating or receiving telecommunications in the Village of
Streamwood and for all services rendered in connection therewith valued in money, whether paid in money or otherwise, including cash, credit, services
and property of every kind or nature, and material and for all services rendered in connection herewith; and shall be determined without any deduction on
account of the cost of transmitting such messages, product or commodity supplied, the cost of materials used, labor or service cost, or any other expense
whatsoever.
In case credit is extended, the amount thereof shall be included only as and when paid. However, "Annual Gross Revenue" shall not include:
A. Any amounts added to a purchaser's bill because of a charge made pursuant to:
1. The tax imposed by this Section;
2. Additional charges added to a purchaser's bill pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/9-222 of the Illinois Public Utilities Act;
3. The tax imposed by the Illinois Telecommunications Excise Tax Act; or
4. The tax imposed by section 4251 of the Internal Revenue Code.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 115/498
B. Charges for leased time on equipment or charges for the storage of data or information or subsequent retrieval or the processing of data or
information intended to change its form or content. Such equipment includes, but is not limited to the use of calculators, computers, data processing
equipment, tabulating equipment or accounting equipment and also includes the usage of computers under a time-sharing agreement.
C. Charges for customer equipment, including such equipment that is leased or rented by the customer from any source, herein such charges are
disaggregated and separately identified from othercharges.
D. Charges to business enterprises certified under 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/9-222.1 of the Illinois Public Utilities Act to the extent of such
exemption and during the period of time specified by the Department of Commerce and Community Affairs.
E. Charges for telecommunications and all services and equipment provided in connection herewith between a parent corporation and its wholly-owned
subsidiaries or between wholly-owned subsidiaries when the tax imposed under this Section has already been paid to a retailer and only to the
extent that the charges between the parent corporation and wholly-owned subsidiaries or between wholly-owned subsidiaries represent expense
allocations between the corporation and not the generation of profit for the corporation rendering such services.
F. Bad debts ("bad debt" means any portion of a debt that is related to a sale at retail for which gross revenue are not otherwise deductible or
excludable that has become worthless or uncollectible, as determined under applicable Federal income tax standards; if the portion of the debt
deemed to be bad is subsequently paid, the retailer shall report and pay the tax on that portion during the reporting period in which the payment is
made).
CABLE ACT: The Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, 47 U.S.C. section 532, et seq., as now and hereafter amended.
CABLE OPERATOR: A telecommunications carrier providing or offering to provide cable service within the Village of Streamwood as that term is defined in
the Cable Act.
CABLE SERVICE: For the purpose of this Chapter shall have the same meaning provided by the Cable Act.
CORPORATE AUTHORITIES: The Village President and Board of Trustees of the Village of Streamwood, Cook County, Illinois.
EXCESS CAPACITY: The volume or capacity in any existing or future duct, conduit, manhole, handhole or other utility facility within the public way that is
or will be available for use for additional telecommunications facilities.
FCC OR FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION: The Federal administrative agency, or lawful successor, authorized to regulate and oversee
telecommunications carriers, services and providers on a national level.
ICC OR ILLINOIS COMMERCE COMMISSION: The State administrative agency, or lawful successor, authorized to regulate and oversee
telecommunications carriers, services and providers in the State of Illinois.
OTHER WAYS: The highways, streets, alleys, utility easements or other rights of way within the Village, but under the jurisdiction and control of a
governmental entity other than the Village.
OVERHEAD FACILITIES: Utility poles, utility facilities and telecommunications facilities located above the surface of the ground, including the
underground supports and foundations for such facilities.
PERSON: Means and includes corporations, companies, associations, joint stock companies or associations, firms, partnerships, limited liability
companies and individuals and includes their lessors, trustees and receivers.
PUBLIC STREET: Any highway, street, alley or other public right of way for motor vehicle travel within the jurisdiction and control of the Village which has
been acquired, established, dedicated or devoted to highway purposes not inconsistent with telecommunications facilities.
PUBLIC WAY: Means and includes all public streets and utility easements, as those terms are defined herein, now or hereafter owned by the Village, but
only to the extent of the Village's right, title, interest or authority to grant a license or franchise to occupy and use such streets and easements for
telecommunications facilities.
STATE: The State of Illinois.
SURPLUS SPACE: That portion of the usable space on a utility pole which has the necessary clearance from other pole users, as required by the orders
and regulations of the Illinois Commerce Commission, to allow its use by a telecommunications carrier for a pole attachment.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS CARRIER: Means and includes every person that directly or indirectly owns, controls, operates or manages plant equipment or
property within the Village, used or to be used for the purpose of offering telecommunications service.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES: The plant, equipment and property, including but not limited to, cables, wires, conduits, ducts, pedestals,
antennae, electronics and other appurtenances used or to be used to transmit, receive, distribute, provide or offer telecommunications services.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER: Means and includes every person who provides telecommunications service over telecommunications facilities
without any ownership or management control of the facilities.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE: The providing or offering for rent, sale or lease, or in exchange for other value received, of the transmittal of voice,
data, image, graphic and video programming information between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite or similar
facilities, with or without benefit of any closed transmission medium.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM: See definition of Telecommunications Facilities.
UNDERGROUND FACILITIES: Utility and telecommunications facilities located under the surface of the ground, excluding the underground foundations or
supports for overhead facilities.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 116/498
USABLE SPACE: The total distance between the top of a utility pole and the lowest possible attachment point that provides the minimum allowable vertical
clearance as specified in the orders and regulations of the Illinois Commerce Commission.
UTILITY EASEMENT: Any easement owned by the Village and acquired, established, dedicated or devoted for public utility purposes not inconsistent with
telecommunications facilities.
UTILITY FACILITIES: The plant, equipment and property, including but not limited to the poles, pipes, mains, conduits, ducts, cables, wires, plant and
equipment located under, on or above the surface of the ground within the public ways of the Village and used or to be used for the purpose of providing
utility or telecommunications services.
VILLAGE: The Village of Streamwood, Cook County, Illinois, hereinafter referred to as the "Village".
VILLAGE PROPERTY: Means and includes all real property owned by the Village, other than public streets and utility easements as those terms are
defined herein, and all property held in a proprietary capacity by the Village, which are not subject to right-of-way licensing and franchising as provided in
this Chapter. (Ord. 1995-52, 10-19-1995)
3-12-1-3: REGISTRATION:
Except as otherwise provided herein, all telecommunications carriers and providers engaged in the business of transmitting, supplying or furnishing of
telecommunications originating or terminating in the Village shall register with the Village pursuant to Section 3-12-2 of this Chapter. (Ord. 1995-52, 10-19-
1995)
3-12-1-4: TELECOMMUNICATIONS LICENSE:
Except as otherwise provided therein, any telecommunications carriers who desire to construct, install, operate, maintain, or otherwise locate
telecommunications facilities in, under, over oracross any public way of the Village for the sole purpose of providing telecommunications service to persons
and areas outside the Village shall first obtain a license granting the use of such public ways from the Village pursuant to Section 3-12-3 of this Chapter.
(Ord. 1995-52, 10-19-1995)
3-12-1-5: TELECOMMUNICATIONS FRANCHISE:
Except as otherwise provided herein, any telecommunications carriers who desire to construct, install, operate, maintain or otherwise locate
telecommunications facilities in, under, over or across any public way of the Village, and to also provide telecommunications service to persons or areas in
the Village, shall first obtain a franchise granting the use of such public ways from the Village pursuant to Section 3-12-4 of this Chapter. (Ord. 1995-52,
10-19-1995)
3-12-1-6: CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE:
Except as otherwise provided herein, any telecommunications carrier who desires to construct, install, operate, maintain or locate telecommunications
facilities in any public way of the Village for the purpose of providing cable service to persons in the Village shall first obtain a cable franchise from the
Village as provided in Section 3-12-5 of this Chapter. (Ord. 1995-52, 10-19-1995)
3-12-1-7: APPLICATION TO EXISTING FRANCHISE ORDINANCES AND AGREEMENTS:
This Chapter shall have no effect on any existing franchise ordinance or franchise agreement until:
A. The expiration of said franchise ordinance or agreement;
B. An amendment to an unexpired franchise ordinance or franchise agreement, unless both parties agree to defer full compliance to a specific date not
later than the present expiration date. (Ord. 1995-52, 10-19-1995)
3-12-1-8: PENALTIES:
Any person found guilty of violating, disobeying, omitting, neglecting or refusing to comply with any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be fined not less
than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each offense. A separate and distinct offense shall be deemed
committed each day on which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 1995-52, 10-19-1995)
3-12-1-9: OTHER REMEDIES:
Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed as limiting any judicial remedies that the Village may have, at law or in equity, for enforcement of this Chapter.
(Ord. 1995-52, 10-19-1995)
3-12-2: REGISTRATION OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS CARRIERS AND PROVIDERS:
3-12-2-1: REGISTRATION REQUIRED:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 117/498
All telecommunications carriers and providers that offer or provide any telecommunications service for a fee directly to the public, either within the Village,
or outside the corporate limits of the Village from telecommunications facilities within the Village, shall register with the Village pursuant to this Chapter on
forms to be provided by the Village Clerk, which shall include the following:
A. The identity and legal status of the registrant, including any affiliates.
B. The name, address and telephone number of the officer, agent or employee responsible for the accuracy of the registration statement.
C. A description of registrant's existing or proposed telecommunications facilities within the Village.
D. A description of the telecommunications service that the registrant intends to offer or provide, or is currently offering or providing, to persons, firms,
businesses or institutions within the Village.
E. Information sufficient to determine whether the registrant is subject to public way licensing or franchising under this Chapter.
F. Information sufficient to determine whether the transmission, origination or receipt of the telecommunications services provided or to be provided by the
registrant constitutes an occupation or privilege subject to any Municipal telecommunications tax, utility message tax or other occupation tax imposed
by the Village.
G. Information sufficient to determine that the applicant has applied for and received any certificate of authority required by the Illinois Commerce
Commission to provide telecommunications services or facilities within the Village.
H. Information sufficient to determine that the applicant has applied for and received any construction permit, operating license or other approvals required
by the Federal Communications Commission to provide telecommunications services or facilities within the Village.
I. Such other information as the Village Clerk may reasonably require. (Ord. 1995-52, 10-19-1995)
3-12-2-2: REGISTRATION FEE:
Each application for registration as a telecommunications carrier or provider shall be accompanied by a fee of seventy five dollars ($75.00). (Ord. 1995-52,
10-19-1995)
3-12-2-3: PURPOSE OF REGISTRATION:
The purpose of registration under this Section 3-12-2 is to:
A. Provide the Village with accurate and current information concerning the telecommunications carriers and providers who offer or provide
telecommunications services within the Village, or that own or operate telecommunication facilities within the Village;
B. Assist the Village in enforcement of this Chapter;
C. Assist the Village in the collection and enforcement of any Municipal taxes, franchise fees, license fees or charges that may be due the Village;
D. Assist the Village in monitoring compliance with local, State and Federal laws. (Ord. 1995-52, 10-19-1995)
3-12-3: TELECOMMUNICATIONS LICENSE:
3-12-3-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
A telecommunications license shall be required of any telecommunications carrier who desires to occupy specific public ways of the Village for the sole
purpose of providing telecommunications services to persons or areas outside the Village. (Ord. 1995-52, 10-19-1995)
3-12-3-2: LICENSE APPLICATION:
Any person that desires a telecommunications license pursuant to this Section 3-12-3 shall file an application with the Village which shall include the
following information:
A. The identity of the license applicant, including all affiliates of the applicant.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 118/498
B. A description of the telecommunications services that are or will be offered or provided by licensee over its telecommunications facilities.
C. A description of the transmission medium that will be used by the licensee to offer or provide such telecommunications services.
D. Preliminary engineering plans, specifications and a network map of the facilities to be located within the Village, all in sufficient detail to identify:
1. The location and route requested for applicant's proposed telecommunications facilities;
2. The location of all overhead and underground public utility, telecommunication, cable, water, sewer drainage and other facilities in the public way
along the proposed route;
3. The location(s), if any, for interconnection with the telecommunications facilities of other telecommunications carriers;
4. The specific trees, structures, improvements, facilities and obstructions, if any, that applicant proposes to temporarily or permanently remove or
relocate.
E. If applicant is proposing to install overhead facilities, evidence that surplus space is available for locating its telecommunications facilities on existing
utility poles along the proposed route.
F. If applicant is proposing an underground installation in existing ducts or conduits within the public ways, information in sufficient detail to identify:
1. The excess capacity currently available in such ducts or conduits before installation of applicant's telecommunications facilities;
2. The excess capacity, if any, that will exist in such ducts or conduits after installation of applicant's telecommunications facilities.
G. If applicant is proposing an underground installation within new ducts or conduits to be constructed within the public ways:
1. The location proposed for the new ducts or conduits;
2. The excess capacity that will exist in such ducts or conduits after installation of applicant's telecommunications facilities.
H. A preliminary construction schedule and completion date.
I. A preliminary traffic-control plan in accordance with the IDOT Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
J. Financial statements prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles demonstrating the applicant's financial ability to construct,
operate, maintain, relocate andremove the facilities.
K. Information in sufficient detail to establish the applicant's technical qualifications, experience and expertise regarding the telecommunications facilities
and services described in the application.
L. Information to establish that the applicant has obtained all other governmental approvals and permits to construct and operate the facilities and to offer
or provide the telecommunications services.
M. All fees, deposits or charges required pursuant to Section 3-12-6 of this Chapter.
N. Such other and further information as may be required by the Village Manager. (Ord. 1995-52, 10-19-1995)
3-12-3-3: DETERMINATION BY VILLAGE:
Within one hundred twenty (120) days after receiving a complete application under Section 3-12-3-2 hereof, the corporate authorities shall issue a written
determination granting or denying the application in whole or in part, applying the following standards. If the application is denied, the written determination
shall include the reasons for denial.
A. The financial and technical ability of the applicant.
B. The legal ability of the applicant.
C. The capacity of the public ways to accommodate the applicant's proposed facilities.
D. The capacity of the public ways to accommodate additional utility and telecommunications facilities if the license is granted.
E. The damage or disruption, if any, of public or private facilities, improvements, service, travel or landscaping if the license is granted.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 119/498
F. The public interest in minimizing the cost and disruption of construction within the public ways.
G. The service that applicant will provide to the community and region.
H. The effect, if any, on public health, safety and welfare if the license is granted.
I. The availability of alternate routes and/or locations for the proposed facilities.
J. Applicable Federal and State telecommunications laws,regulations and policies.
K. Such other factors as may demonstrate that the grant to use the public ways will serve the community interest. (Ord. 1995-52, 10-19-1995)
3-12-3-4: AGREEMENT:
No license granted hereunder shall be effective until the applicant and the Village have executed a written agreement setting forth the particular terms and
provisions under which the license to occupy and use public ways of the Village will be granted. (Ord. 1995-52, 10-19-1995)
3-12-3-5: NONEXCLUSIVE GRANT:
No license granted under this Section 3-12-3 shall convey any exclusive right, privilege, license or franchise to occupy or use the public ways of the Village
for delivery of telecommunications services or any other purposes. (Ord. 1995-52, 10-19-1995)
3-12-3-6: RIGHTS GRANTED:
No license granted under this Section 3-12-3 shall convey any right, title or interest in the public ways, but shall be deemed a license only to use and
occupy the public ways for the limited purposes and term stated in the grant. Further, no license shall be construed as any warranty of title. (Ord. 1995-52,
10-19-1995)
3-12-3-7: TERM OF GRANT:
Unless otherwise specified in a license agreement, a telecommunications license granted hereunder shall be in effect for a term of ten (10) years. (Ord.
1995-52, 10-19-1995)
3-12-3-8: LICENSE ROUTE:
A telecommunications license granted under this Section 3-12-3 shall be limited to a grant of specific public ways and defined portions thereof. (Ord. 1995-
52, 10-19-1995)
3-12-3-9: LOCATION OF FACILITIES:
Unless otherwise specified in a license agreement, all facilities shall be constructed, installed and located in accordance with the following terms and
conditions:
A. Telecommunications facilities shall be installed within an existing underground duct or conduit whenever excess capacity exists within such utility facility.
B. A licensee with permission to install overhead facilities shall install its telecommunications facilities on pole attachments to existing utility poles only, and
then only if surplus space is available.
C. Whenever any existing electric utilities, cable facilities or telecommunications facilities are located underground within a public way of the Village, a
licensee with permission to occupy the same public way must also locate its telecommunications facilities underground.
D. Whenever any new or existing electric utilities, cable facilities or telecommunications facilities are located or relocated underground within a public way
of the Village, a grantee that currently occupies the same public way shall relocate its facilities underground within a reasonable period of time, which
shall not be later than the end of the grant term. Absent extraordinary circumstances or undue hardship as determined by the Village Engineer, such
relocation shall be made concurrently to minimize the disruption of the public ways.
E. Whenever new telecommunications facilities will exhaust the capacity of a public street or utility easement to reasonably accommodate future
telecommunications carriers or facilities, the grantee shall provide additional ducts, conduits, manholes and other facilities for nondiscriminatory access
to future telecommunications carriers. (Ord. 1995-52, 10-19-1995)
3-12-3-10: CONSTRUCTION PERMITS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 120/498
All licensees are required to obtain construction permits for telecommunications facilities as required in Section 3-12-7 of this Chapter; provided, however,
that nothing in this Section 3-12-3 shall prohibit the Village and a licensee from agreeing to alternative plan review, permit and construction procedures in a
license agreement, provided such alternative procedures provide substantially equivalent safeguards for responsible construction practices. (Ord. 1995-52,
10-19-1995)
3-12-3-11: COMPENSATION TO VILLAGE:
Each license granted under this Section 3-12-3 is subject to the Village's right, which is expressly reserved, to annually fix a fair and reasonable
compensation to be paid for the property rights granted to the licensee; provided, nothing in this Section 3-12-3 shall prohibit the Village and a licensee
from agreeing to the compensation to be paid. (Ord. 1995-52, 10-19-1995)
3-12-3-12: SERVICE TO VILLAGE USERS:
A licensee may be permitted to offer or provide telecommunications services to persons or areas within the Village upon submitting an application for
approval pursuant toSection 3-12-4 of this Chapter. (Ord. 1995-52, 10-19-1995)
3-12-3-13: AMENDMENT TO GRANT:
A. A new license application and grant shall be required of any telecommunications carrier that desires to extend or locate its telecommunications facilities
in public ways of the Village which are not included in a license previously granted under this Chapter.
B. If ordered by the Village to locate or relocate its telecommunications facilities in public ways not included in a previously granted license, the Village
shall grant a license amendment without further application. (Ord. 1995-52, 10-19-1995)
3-12-3-14: RENEWAL APPLICATIONS:
A grantee that desires to renew its license under this Section 3-12-3 shall, not more than one hundred eighty (180) days nor less than ninety (90) days
before expiration of the current license, file an application with the Village for renewal of its license which shall include the following information:
A. The information required pursuant to Section 3-12-3-2 of this Chapter.
B. Any information required pursuant to the license agreement between the Village and the grantee. (Ord. 1995-52, 10-19-1995)
3-12-3-15: RENEWAL DETERMINATIONS:
Within ninety (90) days after receiving a complete application under Section 3-12-3-14 hereof, the corporate authorities shall issue a written determination
granting or denying the renewal application in whole or in part, applying the following standards. If the renewal application is denied, the written
determination shall include the reasons for nonrenewal.
A. The financial and technical ability of the applicant.
B. The legal ability of the applicant.
C. The continuing capacity of the public ways to accommodate the applicant's existing facilities.
D. The applicant's compliance with the requirements of this Chapter and the license agreement.
E. Applicable Federal, State and local telecommunications laws, rules and policies.
F. Such other factors as may demonstrate that the continued grant to use the public ways will serve the community interest. (Ord.1995-52, 10-19-1995)
3-12-3-16: OBLIGATION TO CURE AS CONDITION OF RENEWAL:
No license shall be renewed until any ongoing violations or defaults in the licensee's performance of the license agreement, or of the requirements of this
Chapter, have been cured, or a plan detailing the corrective action to be taken by the grantee has been approved by the Village. (Ord. 1995-52, 10-19-
1995)
3-12-4: TELECOMMUNICATIONS FRANCHISE:
3-12-4-1: FRANCHISE REQUIRED:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 121/498
A telecommunications franchise shall be required of any telecommunications carrier who desires to occupy public ways of the Village and to provide
telecommunications services to any person or area in the Village. (Ord. 1995-52, 10-19-1995)
3-12-4-2: FRANCHISE APPLICATION:
Any person that desires a telecommunications franchise pursuant to this Section 3-12-4 shall file an application with the Village which shall include the
following information:
A. The identity of the franchise applicant, including all affiliates of the applicant.
B. A description of the telecommunications services that are or will be offered or provided by the franchise applicant over its existing or proposed facilities.
C. A description of the transmission medium that will be used by the franchisee to offer or provide such telecommunications services.
D. Preliminary engineering plans, specifications and a network map of the facilities to be located within the Village, all in sufficient detail to identify:
1. The location and route requested for applicant's proposed telecommunications facilities;
2. The location of all overhead and underground public utility, telecommunication, cable, water, sewer drainage and other facilities in the public way
along the proposed route;
3. The location(s), if any, for interconnection with the telecommunications facilities of other telecommunications carriers;
4. The specific trees, structures, improvements, facilities andobstructions, if any, that applicant proposes to temporarily or permanently remove or
relocate.
E. If applicant is proposing to install overhead facilities, evidence that surplus space is available for locating its telecommunications facilities on existing
utility poles along the proposed route.
F. If applicant is proposing an underground installation in existing ducts or conduits within the public ways, information in sufficient detail to identify:
1. The excess capacity currently available in such ducts or conduits before installation of applicant's telecommunications facilities;
2. The excess capacity, if any, that will exist in such ducts or conduits after installation of applicant's telecommunications facilities.
G. If applicant is proposing an underground installation within new ducts or conduits to be constructed within the public ways:
1. The location proposed for the new ducts or conduits;
2. The excess capacity that will exist in such ducts or conduits after installation of applicant's telecommunications facilities.
H. A preliminary construction schedule and completion dates.
I. A preliminary traffic-control plan in accordance with the IDOT Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
J. Financial statements prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles demonstrating the applicant's financial ability to construct,
operate, maintain, relocate and remove the facilities.
K. Information in sufficient detail to establish the applicant's technical qualifications, experience and expertise regarding the telecommunications facilities
and services described in the application.
L. Information to establish that the applicant has obtained all other governmental approvals and permits to construct and operate the facilities and to offer
or provide the telecommunications services.
M. Whether the applicant intends to provide cable service, video dialtone service or other video programming service, and sufficient information to
determine whether such service is subject to cable franchising.
N. An accurate map showing the location of any existing telecommunications facilities in the Village that applicant intends to use or lease.
O. A description of the services or facilities that the applicant will offer or make available to the Village and other public, educational and governmental
institutions.
P. A description of applicant's access and line extension policies.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 122/498
Q. The area or areas of the Village the applicant desires to serve and a schedule for build-out to the entire franchise area.
R. All fees, deposits or charges required pursuant to Section 3-12-6 of this Chapter.
S. Such other and further information as may be requested by the Village Manager. (Ord. 1995-52, 10-19-1995)
3-12-4-3: DETERMINATION BY VILLAGE:
Within one hundred fifty (150) days after receiving a complete application under Section 3-12-3-2 hereof, the corporate authorities shall issue a written
determination granting or denying the application in whole or in part, applying the following standards. If the application is denied, the written determination
shall include the reasons for denial.
A. The financial and technical ability of the applicant.
B. The legal ability of the applicant.
C. The capacity of the public ways to accommodate the applicant's proposed facilities.
D. The capacity of the public ways to accommodate additional utility and telecommunications facilities if the franchise is granted.
E. The damage or disruption, if any, of public or private facilities, improvements, service, travel or landscaping if the franchise is granted.
F. The public interest in minimizing the cost and disruption of construction within the public ways.
G. The service that applicant will provide to the community and region.
H. The effect, if any, on public health, safety and welfare if the franchise requested is granted.
I. The availability of alternate routes and/or locations for the proposed facilities.
J. Applicable Federal and State telecommunications laws, regulations and policies.
K. Such other factors as may demonstrate that the grant to use the public ways will serve the community interest. (Ord. 1995-52, 10-19-1995)
3-12-4-4: AGREEMENT:
No franchise shall be granted hereunder unless the applicant and the Village have executed a written agreement setting forth the particular terms and
provisions under which the franchise to occupy and use public ways of the Village will be granted. (Ord. 1995-52, 10-19-1995)
3-12-4-5: NONEXCLUSIVE GRANT:
No franchise granted under this Section 3-12-4 shall convey any exclusive right, privilege, license or franchise to occupy or use the public ways of the
Village for delivery of telecommunications services or any other purposes. (Ord. 1995-52, 10-19-1995)
3-12-4-6: TERM OF GRANT:
Unless otherwise specified in a franchise agreement, a telecommunications franchise granted hereunder shall be valid for a term of ten (10) years. (Ord.
1995-52, 10-19-1995)
3-12-4-7: RIGHTS GRANTED:
No franchise granted under this Section 3-12-4 shall convey any right, title or interest in the public ways, but shall be deemed a franchise only to use and
occupy the public ways for the limited purposes and term stated in the grant. Further, no franchise shall be construed as any warranty of title. (Ord. 1995-
52, 10-19-1995)
3-12-4-8: FRANCHISE TERRITORY:
A telecommunications franchise granted under this Section 3-12-4 shall be limited to the specific geographic area of the Village to be served by the
franchise grantee, and the specific public ways necessary to serve such areas. (Ord. 1995-52, 10-19-1995)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 123/498
3-12-4-9: LOCATION OF FACILITIES:
Unless otherwise specified in a franchise agreement, all facilities shall be constructed, installed and located in accordance with the following terms and
conditions:
A. Telecommunications facilities shall be installed within an existing underground duct or conduit whenever excess capacity exists within such utility facility.
B. A franchisee with permission to install overhead facilities shall install its telecommunications facilities on pole attachments to existing utility poles only,
and then only if surplus space is available.
C. Whenever any existing electric utilities, cable facilities or telecommunications facilities are located underground within a public way of the Village, a
franchisee with permission to occupy the same public way must also locate its telecommunications facilities underground.
D. Whenever any new or existing electric utilities, cable facilities or telecommunications facilities are located or relocated underground within a public way
of the Village, a grantee that currently occupies the same public way shall relocate its facilities underground within a reasonable period of time, which
shall not be later than the end of the grant term. Absent extraordinary circumstances or undue hardship as determined by the Village Engineer, such
relocation shall be made concurrently to minimize the disruption of the public ways.
E. Whenever new telecommunications facilities will exhaust the capacity of a public street or utility easement to reasonably accommodate future
telecommunications carriers or facilities, the grantee shall provide additional ducts, conduits, manholes and other facilities for nondiscriminatory access
to future carriers. (Ord. 1995-52, 10-19-1995)
3-12-4-10: CONSTRUCTION PERMITS:
All franchisees are required to obtain construction permits for telecommunications facilities as required in Section 3-12-7 of this Chapter; provided,
however, that nothing in this Section 3-12-4 shall prohibit the Village and a franchisee from agreeing to alternative plan review, permit and construction
procedures in a franchise agreement, provided such alternative procedures provide substantially equivalent safeguards for responsible construction
practices. (Ord. 1995-52, 10-19-1995)
3-12-4-11: COMPENSATION TO VILLAGE:
Unless otherwise agreed in a franchise grant agreement, each franchise grantee shall pay an annual license fee to the Village equal to five percent (5%) of
the annual gross revenue in monthly installments as reimbursement for the Village's costs in connection with inspecting and supervising the use and
occupancy of the public ways on behalf of the public, existing or future users. Said franchise grantee shall be entitled to a credit against said compensation
for any fees paid to the Village under Section 3-3-4 (Utility Tax) of this Title as a result of services provided pursuant to the telecommunications franchise.
(Ord. 1995-52, 10-19-1995)
3-12-4-12: NONDISCRIMINATION:
A franchisee shall make its telecommunications services available to any customer within its franchise area who shall request such service, without
discrimination as to the terms, conditions, rates or charges for grantee's services; provided, however, that nothing in this Section 3-12-4 shall prohibit a
franchisee from making any reasonable classifications among differently situated customers. (Ord. 1995-52, 10-19-1995)
3-12-4-13: SERVICE TO VILLAGE:
A franchisee shall make its telecommunications services available to the Village at its most favorable rate for similarly situated users, unless otherwise
provided in a license or franchise agreement. (Ord. 1995-52, 10-19-1995)
3-12-4-14: AMENDMENT OF GRANT:
A. A new franchise application and grant shall be required of any telecommunications carrier that desires to extend its franchise territory or to locate its
telecommunications facilities in public ways of the Village which are not included in a franchise previously granted under this Chapter.
B. If ordered by the Village to locate or relocate its telecommunications facilities in public ways not included in a previously granted franchise, the Village
shall grant a franchise amendment without further application. (Ord. 1995-52, 10-19-1995)
3-12-4-15: RENEWAL APPLICATIONS:
A grantee that desires to renew its franchise under this Section 3-12-4 shall, not more than two hundred forty (240) days nor less than one hundred fifty
(150) days before expiration of the current franchise, file an application with the Village for renewal of its franchise which shall include the following
information:
A. The information required pursuant to Section 3-12-4-2 of this Chapter.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 124/498
B. Any information required pursuant to the franchise agreement between the Village and the grantee. (Ord. 1995-52, 10-19-1995)
3-12-4-16: RENEWAL DETERMINATIONS:
Within one hundred fifty (150) days after receiving a complete application under Section 3-12-4-15 hereof, the corporate authorities shall issue a written
determination granting or denying the renewal application in whole or in part, applying the following standards. If the renewal application is denied,
thewritten determination shall include the reasons for nonrenewal.
A. The financial and technical ability of the applicant.
B. The legal ability of the applicant.
C. The continuing capacity of the public ways to accommodate the applicant's existing facilities.
D. The applicant's compliance with the requirements of this Chapter and the franchise agreement.
E. Applicable Federal, State and local telecommunications laws, rules and policies.
F. Such other factors as may demonstrate that the continued grant to use the public ways will serve the community interest. (Ord. 1995-52, 10-19-1995)
3-12-4-17: OBLIGATION TO CURE AS CONDITION OF RENEWAL:
No franchise shall be renewed until any ongoing violations or defaults in the grantee's performance of the franchise agreement, or of the requirements of
this Chapter, have been cured, or a plan detailing the corrective action to be taken by the grantee has been approved by the Village. (Ord. 1995-52, 10-19-
1995)
3-12-5: CABLE FRANCHISE:
(Reserved) (Ord. 1995-52, 10-19-1995)
3-12-6: FEES AND COMPENSATION:
3-12-6-1: PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this Section 3-12-6 to provide for the payment and recovery of all direct and indirect cost and expenses of the Village related to the
enforcement and administration of this Chapter. (Ord. 1995-52, 10-19-1995)
3-12-6-2: APPLICATION AND REVIEW FEE:
A. Any applicant for a license or franchise pursuant to Section 3-12-3 or 3-12-4 of this Chapter shall pay a fee of one thousand five hundred dollars
($1,500.00) or one percent (1%) of the estimated cost of applicant's proposed telecommunications facilities, as certified by the applicant's professional
engineer, whichever is greater.
B. The application and review fee shall be deposited with the Village as part of the application filed pursuant to Section3-12-3 or 3-12-4 of this Chapter.
(Ord. 1995-52, 10-19-1995)
3-12-6-3: OTHER VILLAGE COSTS:
All license or franchise grantees shall, within thirty (30) days after written demand therefor, reimburse the Village for all direct and indirect costs and
expenses, in excess of the funds provided for in subsection 3-12-6-2A of this Chapter, incurred by the Village in connection with any modification,
amendment, renewal or transfer of the license or franchise or any license or franchise agreement. (Ord. 1995-52, 10-19-1995)
3-12-6-4: RESERVED COMPENSATION FOR PUBLIC WAYS:
The Village reserves its right to annually fix a fair and reasonable compensation to be paid for the property rights granted to a telecommunications license
or franchise grantee. Nothing in this Section 3-12-6 shall prohibit the Village and a grantee from agreeing to the compensation to be paid for the granted
property rights. (Ord. 1995-52, 10-19-1995)
3-12-6-5: COMPENSATION FOR VILLAGE PROPERTY:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 125/498
If the right is granted, by lease, license, franchise or other manner, to use and occupy Village property for the installation of telecommunications facilities,
the compensation to be paid shall be fixed by the Village. (Ord. 1995-52, 10-19-1995)
3-12-6-6: CONSTRUCTION PERMIT FEE:
Prior to issuance of a construction permit, the permittee shall pay a permit fee equal to one and one-half percent (1.5%) of the estimated cost of
constructing the telecommunication facilities, as certified by the applicant's engineer and approved by the Village Engineer, whichever is greater. (Ord.
1995-52, 10-19-1995)
3-12-6-7: CABLE FEES:
Cable television franchises shall be subject to the franchise fees, payments and costs provided in Section 3-12-5 of this Chapter. (Ord. 1995-52, 10-19-
1995)
3-12-6-8: REGULATORY FEES AND COMPENSATION NOT A TAX:
The regulatory fees and costs provided for in this Section 3-12-6, and any compensation charged and paid for the public ways provided for in Section 3-
12-6-4 of this Chapter, are separate from, and additional to, any and all Federal, State, local and city taxes as may be levied, imposed or due from
atelecommunications carrier or provider, its customers or subscribers, or on account of the lease, sale, delivery or transmission of telecommunications
services. (Ord. 1995-52, 10-19-1995)
3-12-7: CONDITIONS OF GRANT:
3-12-7-1: LOCATION OF FACILITIES:
All facilities shall be constructed, installed and located in accordance with the following terms and conditions, unless otherwise specified in a license or
franchise agreement:
A. A grantee shall install its telecommunications facilities within an existing underground duct or conduit whenever excess capacity exists within such utility
facility.
B. A grantee with permission to install overhead facilities shall install its telecommunications facilities on pole attachments to existing utility poles only, and
then only if surplus space is available.
C. Whenever any existing electric utilities, cable facilities or telecommunications facilities are located underground within a public way of the Village, a
grantee with permission to occupy the same public way must also locate its telecommunications facilities underground.
D. Whenever any new or existing electric utilities, cable facilities or telecommunications facilities are located or relocated underground within a public way
of the Village, a grantee that currently occupies the same public way shall relocate its facilities underground within a reasonable period of time, which
shall not be later than the end of the grant term. Absent extraordinary circumstances or undue hardship as determined by the Village Engineer, such
relocation shall be made concurrently to minimize the disruption of the public ways.
E. Whenever new telecommunications facilities will exhaust the capacity of a public street or utility easement to reasonably accommodate future
telecommunications carriers or facilities, the grantee shall provide additional ducts, conduits, manholes and other facilities for nondiscriminatory access
to future carriers. (Ord. 1995-52, 10-19-1995)
3-12-7-2: COMPLIANCE WITH JULIE:
All license or franchise grantees shall, before commencing any construction in the public ways, comply with all regulations of JULIE. (Ord. 1995-52, 10-19-
1995)
3-12-7-3: CONSTRUCTION PERMITS:
All license or franchise grantees are required to obtain construction permits for telecommunications facilities as required in Section 3-12-8 of this Chapter.
However, nothing in this Section 3-12-7 shall prohibit the Village and a grantee from agreeing to alternative plan review, permit and construction
procedures in a license or franchise agreement, provided such alternative procedures provide substantially equivalent safeguards for responsible
construction practices. (Ord. 1995-52, 10-19-1995)
3-12-7-4: INTERFERENCE WITH PUBLIC WAYS:
No license or franchise grantee may locate or maintain its telecommunications facilities so as to unreasonably interfere with the use of the public ways by
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 126/498
the Village, by the general public or by other persons authorized to use or be present in or upon the public ways. All such facilities shall be moved by the
grantee, temporarily or permanently, as determined by the Village Engineer. (Ord. 1995-52, 10-19-1995)
3-12-7-5: DAMAGE TO PROPERTY:
No license or franchise grantee nor any person acting on a grantee's behalf shall take any action or permit any action to be done which may impair or
damage any Village property, public ways of the Village, other ways or other property located in, on or adjacent thereto. (Ord. 1995-52, 10-19-1995)
3-12-7-6: NOTICE OF WORK:
Unless otherwise provided in a license or franchise agreement, no license or franchise grantee, nor any person acting on the grantee's behalf, shall
commence any nonemergency work in or about the public ways of the Village or other ways without ten (10) working days' advance notice to the Village.
(Ord. 1995-52, 10-19-1995)
3-12-7-7: REPAIR AND EMERGENCY WORK:
In the event of an unexpected repair or emergency, a grantee may commence such repair and emergency response work as required under the
circumstances, provided the grantee shall notify the Village as promptly as possible, before such repair or emergency work or as soon thereafter as
possible if advance notice is not practicable. (Ord. 1995-52, 10-19-1995)
3-12-7-8: MAINTENANCE OF FACILITIES:
Each license or franchise grantee shall maintain its facilities in a good and safe condition and in a manner that complies with all applicable Federal, State
and local requirements. (Ord.1995-52, 10-19-1995)
3-12-7-9: RELOCATION OR REMOVAL OF FACILITIES:
Within thirty (30) days following written notice from the Village, a license or franchise grantee shall, at its own expense, temporarily or permanently
remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any telecommunications facilities within the public ways whenever the corporate authorities shall have
determined that such removal, relocation, change or alteration is reasonably necessary for:
A. The construction, repair, maintenance or installation of any Village or other public improvement in or upon the public ways.
B. The operations of the Village or other governmental entity in or upon the public ways. (Ord. 1995-52, 10-19-1995)
3-12-7-10: REMOVAL OF UNAUTHORIZED FACILITIES:
Within thirty (30) days following written notice from the Village, any grantee, telecommunications carrier, or other person that owns, controls or maintains
any unauthorized telecommunications system, facility or related appurtenances within the public ways of the Village shall, at its own expense, remove
such facilities or appurtenances from the public ways of the Village. A telecommunications system or facility is unauthorized and subject to removal in the
following circumstances:
A. Upon expiration or termination of the grantee's telecommunications license or franchise.
B. Upon abandonment of a facility within the public ways of the Village.
C. If the system or facility was constructed or installed without the prior grant of a telecommunications license or franchise.
D. If the system or facility was constructed or installed without the prior issuance of a required construction permit.
E. If the system or facility was constructed or installed at a location not permitted by the grantee's telecommunications license or franchise. (Ord. 1995-52,
10-19-1995)
3-12-7-11: EMERGENCY REMOVAL OR RELOCATION OF FACILITIES:
The Village retains the right and privilege to cut or move any telecommunications facilities located within the public ways of the Village, as the Village may
determine to be necessary, appropriate or useful in response to any public health or safety emergency. (Ord. 1995-52, 10-19-1995)
3-12-7-12: DAMAGE TO GRANTEE'S FACILITIES:
Unless directly and proximately caused by the wilful, intentional or malicious acts by the Village, the Village shall not be liable for any damage to or loss of
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 127/498
any telecommunications facility within the public ways of the Village as a result of or in connection with any public works, public improvements,
construction, excavation, grading, filling, or work of any kind in the public ways by or on behalf of the Village. (Ord. 1995-52, 10-19-1995)
3-12-7-13: RESTORATION OF PUBLIC WAYS, OTHER WAYS AND VILLAGE PROPERTY:
A. When a license or franchise grantee, or any person acting on its behalf, does any work in or affecting any public ways, other ways or Village property, it
shall, at its own expense, promptly remove any obstructions therefrom and restore such ways or property to as good a condition as existed before the
work was undertaken, unless otherwise directed by the Village.
B. If weather or other conditions do not permit the complete restoration required by this Section, the grantee shall temporarily restore the affected ways or
property. Such temporary restoration shall be at the licensee's sole expense and the licensee shall promptly undertake and complete the required
permanent restoration when the weather or other conditions no longer prevent such permanent restoration.
C. A grantee or other person acting on its behalf shall use suitable barricades, flags, flagmen, lights, flares and other measures as required for the safety
of all members of the general public and to prevent injury or damage to any person, vehicle or property by reason of such work in or affecting such
ways or property. (Ord. 1995-52, 10-19-1995)
3-12-7-14: FACILITIES MAPS:
Each license or franchise grantee shall provide the Village with an accurate map or maps certifying the location of all telecommunications facilities within
the public ways. Each grantee shall provide updated maps annually. (Ord. 1995-52, 10-19-1995)
3-12-7-15: DUTY TO PROVIDE INFORMATION:
Within ten (10) days of a written request from the Village Manager, each license or franchise grantee shall furnish the Village with information sufficient to
demonstrate:
A. That grantee has complied with all requirements of this Chapter.
B. That all Municipal sales, message and/or telecommunications taxes due the Village in connection with the telecommunications services and facilities
provided by the grantee have been properly collected and paid by the grantee.
C. All books, records, maps and other documents, maintained by the grantee with respect to its facilities within the public ways shall be made available for
inspection by the Village at reasonable times and intervals. (Ord. 1995-52, 10-19-1995)
3-12-7-16: LEASED CAPACITY:
A license or franchise grantee shall have the right, without prior Village approval, to offer or provide capacity or bandwidth to its customers; provided:
A. Grantee shall furnish the Village with a copy of any such lease or agreement.
B. The customer or lessee has complied, to the extent applicable, with the requirements of this Chapter. (Ord. 1995-52, 10-19-1995)
3-12-7-17: GRANTEE INSURANCE:
Unless otherwise provided in a license or franchise agreement, each grantee shall, as a condition of the grant, secure and maintain the following liability
insurance policies insuring both the grantee and the Village, and its elected and appointed officers, officials, agents and employees as coinsureds:
A. Comprehensive general liability insurance with limits not less than:
1. Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for bodily injury or death to each person;
2. Two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) for property damage resulting from any one accident; and
3. Two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) for all other types of liability.
B. Automobile liability for owned, nonowned and hired vehicles with a limit of two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) for each person and two million dollars
($2,000,000.00) for each accident.
C. Worker's compensation within statutory limits and employer's liability insurance with limits of not less than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00).
D. Comprehensive form premises-operations, explosions and collapse hazard, underground hazard and products completed hazard with limits of not less
than three million dollars ($3,000,000.00).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 128/498
E. The liability insurance policies required by this Section shall be maintained by the grantee throughout the term of the telecommunications license or
franchise, and such other period of time during which the grantee is operating without a franchise or license hereunder, or is engaged in the removal of
its telecommunications facilities. Each such insurance policy shall contain the following endorsement:
It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be cancelled nor the intention not to renew be stated until ninety (90) days after receipt
by the Village of Streamwood, by registered mail, of a written notice addressed to the Village Manager of such intent to cancel or not to renew.
F. Within sixty (60) days after receipt by the Village of said notice, and in no event later than thirty (30) days prior to said cancellation, the grantee shall
obtain and furnish to the Village replacement insurance policies meeting the requirements of this Section. (Ord. 1995-52, 10-19-1995)
3-12-7-18: GENERAL INDEMNIFICATION:
Each license or franchise agreement shall include, to the extent permitted by law, grantee's express undertaking to defend, indemnify and hold the Village
and its officers, employees, agents and representatives harmless from and against any and all damages, losses and expenses, including reasonable
attorney fees and costs of suit or defense, arising out of, resulting from or alleged to arise out of or result from the negligent, careless or wrongful acts,
omissions, failures to act or misconduct of the grantee or its affiliates, officers, employees, agents, contractors or subcontractors in the construction,
operation, maintenance, repair or removal of its telecommunications facilities, and in providing or offering telecommunications services over the facilities or
network, whether such acts or omissions are authorized, allowed or prohibited by this Chapter or by a grant agreement made or entered into pursuant to
this Chapter. (Ord. 1995-52, 10-19-1995)
3-12-7-19: PERFORMANCE AND CONSTRUCTION SURETY:
Before a license or franchise granted pursuant to this Chapter is effective, and as necessary thereafter, the grantee shall provide and deposit such monies,
bonds, letters of credit or other instruments in form and substance acceptable to the Village as may be required by this Chapter or by an applicable license
or franchise agreement. (Ord. 1995-52, 10-19-1995)
3-12-7-20: SECURITY FUND:
Each grantee shall establish a permanent security fund with theVillage by depositing the amount of two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00) with the
Village in cash, an unconditional letter of credit, or other instrument acceptable to the Village, which fund shall be maintained at the sole expense of
grantee so long as any of grantee's telecommunications facilities are located within the public ways of the Village.
A. The fund shall serve as security for the full and complete performance of this Chapter, including any costs, expenses, damages or loss the Village pays
or incurs because of any failure attributable to the grantee to comply with the codes, ordinances, rules, regulations or permits of the Village.
B. Before any sums are withdrawn from the security fund, the Village shall give written notice to the grantee:
1. Describing the act, default or failure to be remedied, or the damages, cost or expenses which the Village has incurred by reason of grantee's act or
default;
2. Providing a reasonable opportunity for grantee to first remedy the existing or ongoing default or failure, if applicable;
3. Providing a reasonable opportunity for grantee to pay any monies due the Village before the Village withdraws the amount thereof from the security
fund, if applicable;
4. That the grantee will be given an opportunity to review the act, default or failure described in the notice with the Village Manager or his or her
designee.
C. Grantees shall replenish the security fund within fourteen (14) days after written notice from the Village that there is a deficiency in the amount of the
fund. (Ord. 1995-52, 10-19-1995)
3-12-7-21: CONSTRUCTION AND COMPLETION BOND:
Unless otherwise provided in a license or franchise agreement, a performance bond written by a corporate surety acceptable to the Village equal to at
least one hundred percent (100%) of the estimated cost of constructing grantee's telecommunications facilities within the public ways of the Village shall
be deposited before construction is commenced.
A. The construction bond shall remain in force until sixty (60) days after substantial completion of the work, as determined by the Village Engineer,
including restoration of public ways and other property affected by the construction.
B. The construction bond shall guarantee, to the satisfaction of the Village:
1. Timely completion of construction;
2. Construction in compliance with applicable plans, permits,technical codes and standards;
3. Proper location of the facilities as specified by the Village;
4. Restoration of the public ways and other property affected by the construction;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 129/498
5. The submission of as-built drawings after completion of the work as required by this Chapter;
6. Timely payment and satisfaction of all claims, demands or liens for labor, material or services provided in connection with the work. (Ord. 1995-52,
10-19-1995)
3-12-7-22: COORDINATION OF CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES:
All grantees are required to cooperate with the Village and with each other.
A. By February 1 of each year, grantees shall provide the Village with a schedule of their proposed construction activities in, around or that may affect the
public ways.
B. Each grantee shall meet with the Village, other grantees and users of the public ways annually or as determined by the Village to schedule and
coordinate construction in the public ways.
C. All construction locations, activities and schedules shall be coordinated, as ordered by the Village Engineer, to minimize public inconvenience,
disruption or damages. (Ord. 1995-52, 10-19-1995)
3-12-7-23: ASSIGNMENTS OR TRANSFERS OF GRANT:
Ownership or control of a telecommunications system, license or franchise may not, directly or indirectly, be transferred, assigned or disposed of by sale,
lease, merger, consolidation or other act of the grantee, by operation of law or otherwise, without the prior consent of the Village, which consent shall not
be unreasonably withheld or delayed, as expressed by ordinance and then only on such reasonable conditions as may be prescribed therein.
A. No grant shall be assigned or transferred in any manner within twelve (12) months after the initial grant of the license or franchise, unless otherwise
provided in a license or franchise agreement.
B. Absent extraordinary and unforeseeable circumstances, no grant, system or integral part of a system shall be assigned or transferred before
construction of the telecommunications system has been completed.
C. Grantee and the proposed assignee or transferee of the grantor system shall provide and certify the following information to the Village not less than
one hundred fifty (150) days prior to the proposed date of transfer:
1. Complete information setting forth the nature, terms and condition of the proposed transfer or assignment;
2. All information required of a telecommunications license or franchise applicant pursuant Section 3-12-3 or 3-12-4 of this Chapter with respect to the
proposed transferee or assignee;
3. Any other information reasonably required by the Village.
D. No transfer shall be approved unless the assignee or transferee has the legal, technical, financial and other requisite qualifications to own, hold and
operate the telecommunications system pursuant to this Chapter.
E. Unless otherwise provided in a license or franchise agreement, the grantee shall reimburse the Village for all direct and indirect fees, costs, and
expenses reasonably incurred by the Village in considering a request to transfer or assign a telecommunications license or franchise.
F. Any transfer or assignment of a telecommunications grant, system or integral part of a system without prior approval of the Village under this Section or
pursuant to a license or franchise agreement shall be void and is cause for revocation of the grant. (Ord. 1995-52, 10-19-1995)
3-12-7-24: TRANSACTIONS AFFECTING CONTROL OF GRANT:
Any transactions which singularly or collectively result in a change of twenty percent (20%) or more of the ownership or working control of the grantee, of
the ownership or working control of a telecommunications license or franchise, of the ownership or working control of affiliated entities having ownership or
working control of the grantee or of a telecommunications system, or of control of the capacity or bandwidth of grantee's telecommunication system,
facilities or substantial parts thereof, shall be considered an assignment or transfer requiring Village approval pursuant to Section 3-12-7-22 of this
Chapter. Transactions between affiliated entities are not exempt from Village approval. (Ord. 1995-52, 10-19-1995)
3-12-7-25: REVOCATION OR TERMINATION OF GRANT:
A license or franchise granted by the Village to use or occupy public ways of the Village may be revoked for the following reasons:
A. Construction or operation in the Village or in the public ways of the Village without a license or franchise grant of authorization.
B. Construction or operation at an unauthorized location.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 130/498
C. Unauthorized substantial transfer of control of the grantee.
D. Unauthorized assignment of a license or franchise.
E. Unauthorized sale, assignment or transfer of grantee's franchise or license assets, or a substantial interest therein.
F. Misrepresentation or lack of candor by or on behalf of a grantee in any application to the Village.
G. Abandonment of telecommunications facilities in the public ways.
H. Failure to relocate or remove facilities as required in this Chapter.
I. Failure to pay taxes, compensation, fees or costs when and as due the Village.
J. Insolvency or bankruptcy of the grantee.
K. Violation of material provisions of this Chapter.
L. Violation of the material terms of a license or franchise agreement. (Ord. 1995-52, 10-19-1995)
3-12-7-26: NOTICE AND DUTY TO CURE:
In the event that the Village Manager believes that grounds exist for revocation of a license or franchise, the Manager shall give the grantee written notice
of the apparent violation or noncompliance, providing a short and concise statement of the nature and general facts of the violation or noncompliance, and
providing the grantee a reasonable period of time not exceeding thirty (30) days to furnish evidence:
A. That corrective action has been, or is being actively and expeditiously pursued, to remedy the violation or noncompliance.
B. That rebuts the alleged violation or noncompliance.
C. That it would be in the public interest to impose some penalty or sanction less than revocation. (Ord. 1995-52, 10-19-1995)
3-12-7-27: HEARING:
In the event that a grantee fails to provide evidence reasonably satisfactory to the Village Manager as provided in Section 3-12-7-26 of this Chapter, the
Manager shall refer the apparent violation or noncompliance to the corporate authorities. The corporate authorities shall provide the grantee with notice
and a reasonable opportunity to be heard concerning the matter. (Ord.1995-52, 10-19-1995)
3-12-7-28: STANDARDS FOR REVOCATION OR LESSER SANCTIONS:
If persuaded that the grantee has violated or failed to comply with material provisions of this Chapter, or of a franchise or license agreement, the corporate
authorities shall determine whether to revoke the license or franchise, or to establish some lesser sanction and cure, considering the nature,
circumstances, extent and gravity of the violation as reflected by one or more of the following:
A. Whether the misconduct was egregious.
B. Whether substantial harm resulted.
C. Whether the violation was intentional.
D. Whether there is a history of prior violations of the same or other requirements.
E. Whether there is a history of overall compliance.
F. Whether the violation was voluntarily disclosed, admitted or cured. (Ord. 1995-52, 10-19-1995)
3-12-8: CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 131/498
3-12-8-1: GENERAL:
No person shall commence or continue with the construction, installation or operation of telecommunications facilities within the Village except as provided
in this Section 3-12-8. (Ord. 1995-52, 10-19-1995)
3-12-8-2: CONSTRUCTION CODES:
Telecommunications facilities shall be constructed, installed, operated and maintained in accordance with all applicable Federal, State and local codes,
rules and regulations including the National Electrical Safety Code. (Ord. 1995-52, 10-19-1995)
3-12-8-3: CONSTRUCTION PERMITS:
No person shall construct or install any telecommunications facilities within the Village without first obtaining a construction permit therefor; provided,
however:
A. No permit shall be issued for the construction or installation of telecommunications facilities within the Village unless the telecommunications carrier has
filed a registration statementwith the Village pursuant to Section 3-12-2 of this Chapter.
B. No permit shall be issued for the construction or installation of telecommunications facilities in the public ways unless the telecommunications carrier
has applied for and received a license or franchise pursuant to Section 3-12-3, 3-12-4 or 3-12-5 of this Chapter.
C. No permit shall be issued for the construction or installation of telecommunications facilities without payment of the construction permit fee established
in Section 3-12-6-6 of this Chapter. (Ord. 1995-52, 10-19-1995)
3-12-8-4: APPLICATIONS:
Applications for permits to construct telecommunications facilities shall be submitted upon forms to be provided by the Village and shall be accompanied
by drawings, plans and specifications in sufficient detail to demonstrate:
A. That the facilities will be constructed in accordance with all applicable codes, rules and regulations.
B. The location and route of all facilities to be installed on existing utility poles.
C. The location and route of all facilities to be located under the surface of the ground, including the line and grade proposed for the burial at all points
along the route which are within the public ways.
D. The location of all existing underground utilities, conduits, ducts, pipes, mains and installations which are within the public ways along the underground
route proposed by the applicant.
E. The location of all other facilities to be constructed within the Village, but not within the public ways.
F. The construction methods to be employed for protection of existing structures, fixtures, and facilities within or adjacent to the public ways.
G. The location, dimension and types of all trees within or adjacent to the public ways along the route proposed by the applicant, together with a landscape
plan for protecting, trimming, removing, replacing and restoring any trees or areas to be disturbed during construction. (Ord. 1995-52, 10-19-1995)
3-12-8-5: ENGINEER'S CERTIFICATION:
All permit applications shall be accompanied by the certification of a registered professional engineer that the drawings, plans and specifications submitted
with the application comply with applicable technical codes, rules and regulations. (Ord. 1995-52,10-19-1995)
3-12-8-6: TRAFFIC-CONTROL PLAN:
All permit applications which involve work on, in, under, across or along any public ways shall be accompanied by a traffic-control plan demonstrating the
protective measures and devices that will be employed, consistent with Uniform Manual of Traffic Control Devices, to prevent injury or damage to persons
or property and to minimize disruptions to efficient pedestrian and vehicular traffic. (Ord. 1995-52, 10-19-1995)
3-12-8-7: ISSUANCE OF PERMIT:
Within forty five (45) days after submission of all plans and documents required of the applicant and payment of the permit fees required by this Chapter,
the Village Engineer, if satisfied that the applications, plans and document comply with all requirements of this Chapter, shall issue a permit authorizing
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 132/498
construction of the facilities, subject to such further conditions, restrictions or regulations affecting the time, place and manner of performing the work as he
or she may deem necessary or appropriate. (Ord. 1995-52, 10-19-1995)
3-12-8-8: CONSTRUCTION SCHEDULE:
The permittee shall submit a written construction schedule to the Village Engineer ten (10) working days before commencing any work in or about the
public ways. The permittee shall further notify the Village Engineer not less than two (2) working days in advance of any excavation or work in the public
ways. (Ord. 1995-52, 10-19-1995)
3-12-8-9: COMPLIANCE WITH PERMIT:
All construction practices and activities shall be in accordance with the permit and approved final plans and specifications for the facilities. The Village
Engineer and his or her representatives shall be provided access to the work and such further information as he or she may require to ensure compliance
with such requirements. (Ord. 1995-52, 10-19-1995)
3-12-8-10: DISPLAY OF PERMIT:
The permittee shall maintain a copy of the construction permit and approved plans at the construction site, which shall be displayed and made available for
inspection by the Village Engineer or his or her representatives at all times when construction work is occurring. (Ord. 1995-52, 10-19-1995)
3-12-8-11: SURVEY OF UNDERGROUND FACILITIES:
If the construction permit specifies the location of facilities by depth, line, grade, proximity to other facilities or other standard, the permittee shall cause the
location of such facilities to be verified by a registered Illinois land surveyor. The permittee shall relocate any facilities which are not located in compliance
with permit requirements. (Ord. 1995-52, 10-19-1995)
3-12-8-12: NONCOMPLYING WORK:
Upon order of the Village Engineer, all work which does not comply with the permit, the approved plans and specifications for the work, or the
requirements of this Chapter, shall be removed. (Ord. 1995-52, 10-19-1995)
3-12-8-13: COMPLETION OF CONSTRUCTION:
The permittee shall promptly complete all construction activities so as to minimize disruption of the Village ways and other public and private property. All
construction work authorized by a permit within Village ways, including restoration, must be completed within one hundred twenty (120) days of the date of
issuance. (Ord. 1995-52, 10-19-1995)
3-12-8-14: AS-BUILT DRAWINGS:
Within sixty (60) days after completion of construction, the permittee shall furnish the Village with two (2) complete sets of plans, drawn to scale and
certified to the Village as accurately depicting the location of all telecommunications facilities constructed pursuant to the permit. (Ord. 1995-52, 10-19-
1995)
3-12-8-15: RESTORATION OF IMPROVEMENTS:
Upon completion of any construction work, the permittee shall promptly repair any and all public and private property improvements, fixtures, structures
and facilities in the public ways or otherwise damaged during the course of construction, restoring the same as nearly as practicable to its condition before
the start of construction. (Ord. 1995-52, 10-19-1995)
3-12-8-16: LANDSCAPING RESTORATION:
A. All trees, landscaping and grounds removed, damaged or disturbed as a result of the construction, installation maintenance, repair or replacement of
telecommunications facilities, whether such work is done pursuant to a franchise, license, or permit shall be replaced or restored as nearly as may be
practicable to the condition existing prior to performance ofwork.
B. All restoration work within the public ways shall be done in accordance with landscape plans approved by the Village Engineer. (Ord. 1995-52, 10-19-
1995)
3-12-8-17: CONSTRUCTION SURETY:
Prior to issuance of a construction permit, the permittee shall provide a performance bond, as provided in Section 3-12-7-21 of this Chapter. (Ord. 1995-
52, 10-19-1995)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 133/498
3-12-8-18: EXCEPTIONS:
Unless otherwise provided in a license or franchise agreement, all telecommunications carriers are subject to the requirements of this Section 3-12-8.
(Ord. 1995-52, 10-19-1995)
3-12-8-19: RESPONSIBILITY OF OWNER:
The owner of the facilities to be constructed and, if different, the license or franchise grantee, are responsible for performance of and compliance with all
provisions of this Section 3-12-8. (Ord. 1995-52, 10-19-1995)
Chapter 13
TELECOMMUNICATIONS INFRASTRUCTURE MAINTENANCE FEE
(Rep. by Ord. 2002-36, 9-19-2002, eff. 1-1-20031)
Chapter 14
RENTAL RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY
3-14-1: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
The following general provisions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this chapter:
A. Purpose: It is hereby declared that the purpose of this chapter is to provide for the licensing and periodic inspection of rental residential property in order
to protect, preserve and promote public health, safety and welfare as follows:
1. By protecting the public health, safety and welfare by ensuring rental residential property complies with the property maintenance code of the village.
2. By preventing housing conditions from developing that adversely affect or are likely to adversely affect the health, safety and general welfare,
including the physical, mental and social well being of persons occupying rental residential property within the village.
3. By preventing the overcrowding of dwellings by ensuring compliance with minimum space standards per occupant for each dwelling unit as
established by the village property maintenance code.
4. By facilitating the enforcement of minimum standards for the maintenance of existing residential buildings which will help to prevent dilapidated
structures.
5. By seeking to preserve the value of land and buildings throughout the village. (Ord. 2000-9, 3-16-2000)
6. By seeking to ensure that all lessors and lessees of rental residential property in the village work together to prevent criminal activity, property
maintenance code violations, chronic nuisance property and unsafe conditions from occurring or persisting on rental residential property within the
village. (Ord. 2015-23, 10-1-2015, eff. 1-1-2016)
B. Inspection Rights And Penalties: This chapter shall not be construed to impede in any way the right of the village to inspect any property pursuant to
any other provisions of this code, nor to seek penalties for violations of other provisions of this code. (Ord. 2000-9, 3-16-2000)
3-14-2: DEFINITIONS:
CODE OFFICIAL: The community development director or his designee.
MULTIPLE-FAMILY RENTAL RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY: Rental residential property containing two (2) or more dwelling units.
PREMISES: A lot, plot or parcel of land, including the interior and exterior of any structures thereon.
PROPERTY AGENT: A person, operator, firm, partnership, corporation, or other legal entity designated in writing by the property owner to the director of
community development to be responsible for the compliance with property maintenance of a rental residential property, and to receive any notices or
citations.
RENTAL RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY: Residential structures or dwelling units intended to be rented or leased, including single-family detached structures.
RENTAL RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY OWNER: Any person, corporation or other entity holding in whole or in part legal or equitable title or a beneficial
interest in any form of rental residential property within the village.
Words or phrases as used in this chapter and not herein defined shall be defined as provided by the adopted international property maintenance code, and
international building code, as amended. (Ord. 2000-9, 3-16-2000; amd. Ord. 2002-23, 6-20-2002; Ord. 2006-12, 3-16-2006; Ord. 2015-23, 10-1-2015, eff.
1-1-2016)
3-14-3: LICENSE REQUIRED:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 134/498
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, or other legal entity to operate, maintain or offer to rent within the village
any rental residential property, whether vacant or occupied, without first having obtained and maintained a current license or a temporary certificate, as
provided in this chapter.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to occupy a rental residential property, or for any owner or property agent to allow anyone to occupy a rental
residential property, which is not currently licensed or which is without a temporary certificate, as provided in this chapter.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, partnership, corporation, or other legal entity to offer for rent or to occupy any vacant dwelling unit or any
dwelling unit that becomes vacant in a rental residential property, for which a license has been revoked or while such license is under suspension.
D. This chapter shall not apply to the following structures:
1. Single-family owner occupied structures;
2. Single-family residential structures or dwelling units which are vacant but which are not intended to be let for rent;
3. Townhouse and condominium owner occupied units;
4. Hotels, motels, and other structures which rent rooms to occupants if such occupancy is transient only;
5. Dwellings, buildings, structures and uses licensed and inspected by the state or federal government, including, but not limited to, nursing homes,
retirement communities and rest homes; and
6. Dwellings, buildings and structures used or owned by other governmental agencies and public housing authorities and otherwise inspected by them
for compliance. (Ord. 2000-9, 3-16-2000)
3-14-4: LICENSE APPLICATION AND REQUIREMENTS:
A. Application Requirements: Each applicant for a license to maintain a residential property for the purpose of renting it to others shall file a written
application with the code official stating: (Ord. 2006-12, 3-16-2006)
1. The full legal name, address, and home and work telephone number of every rental residential property owner and property agent, where applicable.
(Ord. 2015-23, 10-1-2015, eff. 1-1-2016)
2. If the residential property is held in a trust, the name, address and phone number of the trustee and each beneficial interest holder;
3. The address of the rental residential property;
4. The number of dwelling units within the rental property;
5. The names and phone numbers of each tenant;
6. The name, address and phone number of any management company retained as property agent for the property;
7. The name, address and twenty four (24) hour phone number or numbers of a responsible person who, in emergency situations, will be available on a
twenty four (24) hour basis and who has the authority to make repairs as needed; and
8. The square footage designated for living and sleeping purposes including individual room sizes as stipulated by the village's property maintenance
code, as amended. (Ord. 2006-12, 3-16-2006)
B. Application Fee: Each application for a new license or a renewal of an existing license shall be accompanied by a fee of one hundred fifty dollars
($150.00) for each rental residential unit inspection, provided, however, for multi-family dwelling structures containing ten (10) or more dwelling units
which are under single ownership, the inspection fee shall be one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for the first unit inspected and fifty dollars ($50.00) for
each additional unit inspected within the structure. All such fees shall be payable at the village of Streamwood community development department.
(Ord. 2011-29, 11-17-2011)
C. Due Date; Late Fee: All license fees shall be due and payable on or before December 1 of each calendar year. All licenses shall expire on December
31 of each calendar year. License fees that remain unpaid after December 31 shall be assessed a late payment fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) in addition
to the license fee. The late payment fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) shall be increased by double every thirty (30) days that the license fee and late payment
fees remain unpaid, up to a maximum of seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). (Ord. 2009-26, 10-15-2009)
D. Alterations Or Repairs: No structural, mechanical, electrical or plumbing alterations or repairs, or any remodeling, shall be made to the units in a
licensed property unless all zoning and building code requirements have been met.
E. Record Of Tenant Names: A copy of the record of tenant names required under subsection 3-14-9A of this chapter shall be filed with the license
application.
F. Change In Ownership: Whenever there is a change in the ownership or in the occupancy of a rental residential property or the owner's property agent,
the owners shall within thirty (30) days of such changes, file an updated written notice with the code official indicating such changes.
G. Not Transferrable: A license or a temporary certificate for a rental residential property cannot be transferred to another rental residential property, nor to
a succeeding owner. (Ord. 2006-12, 3-16-2006)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 135/498
H. Additional Registration Requirements: In addition to all other application requirements as may be provided by this chapter, every license application or
renewal application, for rental residential property by an owner residing outside of Cook, DuPage, Kane, Lake or McHenry Counties, Illinois, shall
include the name, street address and telephone number of a natural person twenty one (21) years of age or older, and designated by the nonresident
owner as that owner's property agent for receiving notices of code violations and for receiving service of process in any court proceeding or
administrative hearing proceeding for rental residential property owned by the nonresident owner. Said designated agent shall reside in Cook, DuPage,
Kane, Lake or McHenry Counties, Illinois. (Ord. 2015-23, 10-1-2015, eff. 1-1-2016)
3-14-5: INSPECTION REQUIREMENTS; TEMPORARY CERTIFICATE, LICENSE ISSUANCE OR DENIAL:
A. An inspection shall be scheduled with the code official within thirty (30) days of the application for a new license or a renewal thereof for any rental
residential properties.
B. Upon receipt of a completed application for a license for any rental residential property including the payment of all required fees, and the scheduling of
a required licensing inspection, the code official shall issue a temporary certificate indicating that a license has been duly applied for, and that such
license shall be issued or denied after the property has been inspected for compliance with applicable village codes. A temporary certificate shall
authorize continued occupancy of the rental residential property pending the inspection, issuance or denial of the license. In no event shall a temporary
certificate be valid for longer than one hundred twenty (120) days after issuance.
C. Licensing inspections of single-family rental residential property shall include the interior and exterior of the premises and, in the case of multi-family
rental residential property, shall include the interior of each unit and the building's common area.
D. When a licensing inspection of a rental residential property reveals any violations of applicable codes, a compliance time frame will be set by the code
official. In establishing a compliance time frame, the code official shall determine the reasonable maximum time necessary to correct the violations
based upon the number and severity of the violations. The code official shall send notice to the property owner or the listed property agent and the
named prospective current tenant(s) by regular U.S. mail at the last address provided on the most recent license application. Said notice shall include
the following:
1. Description of the property sufficient for identification;
2. A statement listing the violations of applicable codes;
3. A statement of the date upon which the licensing reinspection will occur; and
4. An explanation that, if upon completion of the licensing reinspection the requirements of applicable village codes have not been met, then a written
denial of the license application revoking the temporary certificate will be issued.
E. A licensing reinspection will be conducted at the end of the compliance time frame. Upon completion of the licensing reinspection of the rental
residential property, a license shall be issued if the rental residential property meets the requirements of applicable village codes. If the code official
finds that the requirements of applicable village codes have not been met, then a written denial of the license application revoking the temporary
certificate and specifying the defect shall be transmitted by regular U.S. mail to the applicant.
F. Rental residential property which is in total compliance at the time of the licensing inspection shall be issued a license to replace the temporary
certificate. If said property remains in compliance and no violations occur within the period covered by the license and the tenants do not change during
the license period, a one year extension of the license may be given, at no additional charge and with no additional inspections being required. If any
violation occurs, then an additional inspection may be required.
G. All additional inspections made necessary because of cited violations remaining uncorrected at the time of the initial license reinspection shall be
subject to a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) per inspection/per inspector.
H. Applications for license renewal shall be made in the same manner as for new applications except that such applications shall state thereon that it is for
license renewal.
I. As part of the rental housing inspection, all rental units shall be equipped with working smoke detectors as required by the code and a minimum of one
carbon monoxide detector. The type of carbon monoxide detector as required by the code and approved by the code official as to location and type.
(Ord. 2006-12, 3-16-2006)
3-14-6: ENFORCEMENT:
It shall be the duty of the department of community development to enforce the provisions of this chapter as authorized by this code and the international
property maintenance code as adopted and amended from time to time by the village. (Ord. 2000-9, 3-16-2000)
3-14-7: VIOLATIONS:
The following shall constitute violations of this chapter:
A. Failure of the owner or owners of record of the rental residential property to license such property with the village.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 136/498
B. Failure of the occupants of the rental residential property to vacate such property within sixty (60) days after receiving notice from the code official that
such property is not properly licensed or that the license or temporary certificate has been revoked.
C. Failure of the owner or owners of the residential rental property to vacate all tenants from said property within sixty (60) days after the license or
temporary certificate has been revoked.
D. Failure of the owner or owners of record of the rental residential property to maintain the structure, dwelling units and premises in compliance with
applicable building, property maintenance and zoning ordinances.
E. Any person other than one authorized by the code official who removes or defaces any notices which have been posted pursuant to this chapter shall
be liable for penalties as provided by this chapter. (Ord. 2000-9, 3-16-2000)
F. Failure or refusal by the owner(s) of record or person(s) in control of or in possession of the rental residential property to allow, permit, authorize or
schedule a rental residential property inspection, as required by section 3-14-5 of this chapter. (Ord. 2013-11, 4-18-2013)
G. Failure of a rental residential property owner to appoint and maintain a property agent when required by subsection 3-14-4H of this chapter. (Ord. 2015-
23, 10-1-2015, eff. 1-1-2016)
3-14-8: LICENSE; SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION:
A. A license may be suspended by the code official when any violation of applicable village codes has been identified by the department of community
development and the property owner has been properly notified of the violation and given a period of time in which to correct the violation, but has
failed to do so. A license may also be suspended by the code official when any information provided in the license application is determined by the
code official to be false.
B. When an inspection of a licensed rental residential property reveals any violation of applicable codes, a compliance time frame will be set by the code
official using the standard as set forth in subsection 3-14-5D of this chapter. The code official shall send notice to the property owner or the listed
property agent by regular U.S. mail at the last address provided on the most recent license application. Said notice shall include the following:
1. Description of the property sufficient for identification;
2. A statement listing the violation(s) of applicable codes;
3. A statement indicating the date upon which a reinspection will occur; and
4. An explanation that if upon completion of the reinspection the requirements of applicable village codes have not been met, then the license for the
rental residential property will be suspended.
C. A reinspection will be conducted at the end of the compliance time frame. If the code official finds that the requirements of applicable village codes have
not been met upon the completion of such reinspection, then the license for the rental residential property shall be suspended.
D. When a license is suspended, the code official shall send notice to the property owner or the listed property agent and the tenant at the last address
provided on the most recent license application. Said notice shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested. The notice shall include the
following:
1. Description of the property sufficient for identification;
2. A statement of the reasons for the suspension;
3. An explanation of the property owners right to appeal the suspension to the village manager; and
4. If the property owner changes his address or changes property management agents and fails to notify the department of community development,
such notice shall be sufficient if sent by certified mail to the owner or his property agent's last address provided on the last license application.
E. A property owner whose license has been suspended may request a reinspection prior to revocation. If upon reinspection, the department of community
development finds that the licensed property, in connection with which the notice was issued, is now in compliance with this chapter, then the code
official may reinstate the license. The request for a reinspection shall not stay the revocation of the license.
F. Any person whose license has been suspended shall be entitled to appeal said suspension to the village manager by filing a written petition within
twenty (20) days after the date of suspension. The code official shall transmit to the village manager copies of all records and notices upon which the
suspension is based. A hearing shall be scheduled as soon as practical upon receipt of a timely petition. The village manager, in considering any such
petition, may immediately revoke the license or continue the suspension to a definite compliance date. The penalty for noncompliance shall be
revocation by the village manager and/or prosecution of violations in the circuit court of Cook County and any fines and penalties imposed by said
court. The village manager may dismiss the charges and reinstate the license upon proof of compliance or lack of evidence of noncompliance.
G. A license may be revoked by the village manager when a petition for appeal has not been filed within twenty (20) days following the date of issuance of
an order of suspension. A license may be revoked by the code official when, in the opinion of the code official, emergency conditions exist in a rental
residential property that require the immediate vacating of a structure as specified in the property maintenance code.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 137/498
H. A license which has been properly revoked as herein provided shall not be reinstated. The property owner may, however, obtain a new license after all
violations have been corrected and by following the procedures for obtaining a new license and payment of appropriate fee as set forth in this chapter.
I. If a license is revoked without having the opportunity of a suspension hearing, the property owner has the right to appeal that revocation. Said appeal
shall conform to subsection F of this section. Such an appeal shall not operate as a stay of revocation until such time as the village manager renders a
decision on the appeal, unless the code official grants a request for a stay upon a showing of good cause by the property owner.
J. Whenever a temporary certificate or license is revoked, the code official shall send notice to the property owner or the listed property agent at the last
address provided on the most recent license application. Said notice shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested. The code official shall also
notify all tenants of the rental residential property by posting a notice on all entrances to the rental residential structure. The notice to the tenants shall
include the following:
1. You are hereby notified that the temporary certificate or license for this structure has been revoked pursuant to Title 3, Chapter 14 of the
Streamwood Municipal Code.
2. You must vacate this structure within sixty (60) days of the date of this notice, except if said revocation is pursuant to a declaration of emergency
condition by the Code Official. If emergency conditions exist, the notice to tenants shall provide for the immediate vacation of the structure or dwelling
unit.
3. If you fail to vacate this structure, you will be in violation of Title 3, Chapter 14 of the Streamwood Municipal Code and subject to a minimum fine of
$50.00 and a maximum fine of $750.00 for each day you remain in the rental residential property in violation of this Chapter.
K. Whenever an owner or property agent of a rental property fails to obtain a proper license, the code official shall notify all tenants of the rental property
by posting a notice on all entrances to the rental property indicating the following:
1. You are hereby notified that the owner or agent of this rental structure has failed to license this rental property with the Village of Streamwood in
violation of Title 3, Chapter 14 of the Streamwood Municipal Code.
2. You must vacate this structure within sixty (60) days of this notice.
3. If you fail to vacate this structure, you will be subject to a minimum fine of $50.00 and a maximum fine of $750.00 for each day you remain in the
rental residential property in violation of this Chapter.
(Ord. 2000-9, 3-16-2000)
3-14-9: OWNER RESPONSIBILITY:
A. The owner of the rental residential property shall maintain a record for each property with the full legal names of every tenant in each dwelling unit.
B. The owner or property agent of a rental residential property shall provide each tenant with the name and telephone number of a responsible person
who, in emergency situations, will be available on a twenty four (24) hour basis and who has the authority to make repairs as needed.
C. The owner of a rental residential property shall inform each tenant, in writing, prior to occupancy, of the maximum number of persons, per dwelling unit,
allowable by the village property maintenance code, as amended. This number shall be determined by the code official in accordance with this code.
(Ord. 2000-9, 3-16-2000)
3-14-10: LEASES AND RENTAL AGREEMENTS:
A. All rental agreements, leases and renewal agreements shall be in writing, signed by the tenant. (Ord. 2000-9, 3-16-2000)
B. Each rental agreement, lease or renewal agreement shall contain the following provision:
The tenant(s) is hereby notified that, upon proper notice, the Village of Streamwood may conduct annual inspections with the consent of the tenant,
solely for purposes of compliance with the Village of Streamwood Rental Residential Property Ordinance and other relevant provisions of the Village
Code.
(Ord. 2006-12, 3-16-2006)
C. Except as provided herein, this chapter is not intended to affect the rights and obligations of the parties to a lease or rental agreement for rental
residential property. (Ord. 2000-9, 3-16-2000)
3-14-11: INSPECTION ACCESS:
If any owner, property agent, tenant, occupant or other person in control of rental residential property or a dwelling unit contained therein fails or refuses to
consent to free access and entry to the property or dwelling unit under his control for any inspection pursuant to this chapter, and if the Village has the
probable cause necessary to obtain an administrative warrant, the Code official or his designee may upon proper notice apply to the Circuit Court of Cook
County for an administrative search warrant or other appropriate court order authorizing such inspection. (Ord. 2006-12, 3-16-2006)
3-14-12: PENALTY FOR VIOLATION:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 138/498
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter, in addition to other legal and equitable remedies available to the Village shall
upon conviction thereof be subject to a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each violation.
Each day during which a violation of this chapter continues or is permitted to exist shall be considered a separate and distinct offense, provided, however,
there shall exist an affirmative defense for an owner or property agent cited for a violation of section 3-14-11 of this chapter that the owner, occupant or
other person in control or possession of the rental unit refuses to consent to the inspection. (Ord. 2006-12, 3-16-2006)
3-14-13: CRIME FREE HOUSING INITIATIVE; REQUIREMENTS; FEE:
A. Crime Free Housing Initiative: There is hereby created the Village of Streamwood crime free housing initiative. (Ord. 2015-23, 10-1-2015, eff. 1-1-2016)
B. Completion Of Seminar Required: All applicants for a rental residential property license, and when applicable, designated property agents, must attend
and successfully complete an in person or online Village of Streamwood crime free housing initiative seminar or have successfully completed similar
crime free housing training from another municipality within five (5) years prior to the issuance of a Village rental residential property license. (Ord.
2017-26, 11-2-2017)
C. Certification Of Completion: The in person Village of Streamwood crime free housing initiative seminar shall be held once each month and shall be
administered by the Streamwood Police Department. Certifications of completion shall be issued to those persons successfully completing the seminar.
Online Village of Streamwood crime free housing initiative seminars shall also be available through the Village website.
D. Attendance Requirements: Every person who acts as, or is appointed as, an owner's property agent for any premises for which a rental residential
property license is required must also complete the Village of Streamwood crime free housing initiative seminar within six (6) months of first becoming
a property agent. Each President or equivalent officer of a condominium association, townhome association or homeowners' association which has
authority over rental residential properties in the Village shall also attend and satisfactorily complete the Village of Streamwood crime free housing
initiative seminar within six (6) months of first becoming President or equivalent officer of the condominium, townhome or homeowners' association.
(Ord. 2015-23, 10-1-2015, eff. 1-1-2016)
E. Renewal Certificate: After initially completing either the in-person Village of Streamwood crime free housing initiative seminar or the on-line Village of
Streamwood crime free housing initiative seminar, or similar crime free housing training from another municipality as required by subsection B of this
section all required parties shall retake and successfully complete the in-person or on-line Streamwood crime free housing initiative seminar or similar
crime free housing seminar training from another municipality, every five (5) years. (Ord. 2017-26, 11-2-2017)
F. Certificate Requirements: A certificate of completion of the Village of Streamwood crime free housing initiative seminar, and/or online Village of
Streamwood crime free housing initiative seminar, or similar crime free housing training from another municipality or an online Streamwood crime free
initiative recertification seminar must be presented to the Department of Community Development in order to obtain or renew a rental residential
property license.
G. Cost: The cost for attending the in person or online seminar shall be twenty five dollars ($25.00) payable to the village at the time.
H. Requirement To Retake Seminar: The village director of community development may require a rental residential property owner, property agent, or
president or equivalent officer of a condominium, townhome or homeowners' association to retake a village of Streamwood crime free housing initiative
seminar or full online village of Streamwood crime free housing initiative seminar under the following circumstances:
1. A rental residential property has been declared a chronic nuisance property by the village.
2. A rental residential property has three (3) or more separate violations of the village's property maintenance code continuing after disposition or
finding of guilty by the circuit court of Cook County, or finding of liable for such violations by the village administrative hearing officer. (Ord. 2015-23,
10-1-2015, eff. 1-1-2016)
3-14-14: CRIME FREE LEASE ADDENDUM:
A. For purposes of this chapter a crime free lease addendum is a provision which makes it a violation of the lease for a lessee, an occupant of the
premises, a guest of the lessee or any other party present on the property with express permission or consent of the lessee to allow the property to
become a chronic nuisance as defined in title 7, chapter 9 of this code, or to engage in, commit, facilitate or conspire to commit a misdemeanor criminal
offense in violation of the Illinois criminal code on more than two (2) separate occasions within a twelve (12) month period while on the leased
premises, or any single commission of any felony criminal offense in violation of the Illinois criminal code while on the leased premises. Except as
otherwise provided by 65 Illinois Compiles Statutes 5/1-2-1.5 and 735 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/9-106.2, the crime free lease addendum shall
provide the lessor with the authority to evict the lessee in accordance with the Illinois forcible entry and detainer act1, if it is established by a
preponderance of evidence that a violation of the crime free lease addendum has occurred.
B. Leases for all premises requiring a rental residential property license shall be in writing and shall contain a crime free lease addendum or have a clause
in the lease similar to a crime free lease addendum. A sample crime free lease addendum will be available on the village's website. (Ord. 2015-23, 10-
1-2015, eff. 1-1-2016)
3-14-15: SEVERABILITY:
Any provision of this chapter found to be invalid for any reason shall not render invalid any of the remaining provisions of this chapter, which can be given
effect without the invalid provision. (Ord. 2000-9, 3-16-2000; amd. Ord. 2015-23, 10-1-2015, eff. 1-1-2016)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 139/498
3-14-16: EFFECTIVE DATE:
The provisions of this chapter shall be in full force and effect from and after March 1, 2006. (Ord. 2006-12, 3-16-2006; amd. Ord. 2015-23, 10-1-2015, eff.
1-1-2016)
Chapter 15
CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE AND PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEE
3-15-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
CABLE SERVICE: That term as defined in 47 USC section 522(6).
COMMISSION: The Illinois commerce commission.
GROSS REVENUES: All consideration of any kind or nature, including, without limitation, cash, credits, property, and in-kind contributions received by the
holder for the operation of a cable or video system to provide cable service or video service within the holder's cable service or video service area within
the village.
A. Gross revenues shall include the following:
1. Recurring charges for cable or video service.
2. Event based charges for cable service or video service, including, but not limited to, pay per view and video on demand charges.
3. Rental of set top boxes and other cable service or video service equipment.
4. Service charges related to the provision of cable service or video service, including, but not limited to, activation, installation, and repair charges.
5. Administrative charges related to the provision of cable service or video service, including, but not limited to, service order and service termination
charges.
6. Late payment fees or charges, insufficient funds check charges, and other charges assessed torecover the costs of collecting delinquent
payments.
7. A pro rata portion of all revenue derived by the holder or its affiliates pursuant to compensation arrangements for advertising or for promotion or
exhibition of any products or services derived from the operation of the holder's network to provide cable service or video service within the village.
The allocation shall be based on the number of subscribers in the village divided by the total number of subscribers in relation to the relevant
regional or national compensation arrangement.
8. Compensation received by the holder that is derived from the operation of the holder's network to provide cable service or video service with
respect to commissions that are received by the holder as compensation for promotion or exhibition of any products or services on the holder's
network, such as a "home shopping" or similar channel, subject to subsection A9 of this definition.
9. In the case of a cable service or video service that is bundled or integrated functionally with other services, capabilities, or applications, the portion
of the holder's revenue attributable to the other services, capabilities, or applications shall be included in the gross revenue unless the holder can
reasonably identify the division or exclusion of the revenue from its books and records that are kept in the regular course of business.
10. The service provider fee permitted by 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(b).
B. Gross revenues do not include any of the following:
1. Revenues not actually received, even if billed, such as bad debt, subject to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(c)(1)(vi).
2. Refunds, discounts, or other price adjustments that reduce the amount of gross revenues received by the holder of the state issued authorization
to the extent the refund, rebate, credit, or discount is attributable to cable service or video service.
3. Regardless of whether the services are bundled, packaged, or functionally integrated with cable service or video service, any revenuesreceived
from services not classified as cable service or video service, including, without limitation, revenue received from telecommunication services,
information services, or the provision of directory or internet advertising, including yellow pages, white pages, banner advertisement, and electronic
publishing or any other revenues attributed by the holder to noncable service or nonvideo service in accordance with the holder's books and
records and records kept in the regular course of business and any applicable laws, rules, regulations, standards, or orders.
4. The sale of cable services or video services for resale in which the purchaser is required to collect the service provider fee from the purchaser's
subscribers to the extent the purchaser certifies in writing that it will resell the service within the village and pay the fee permitted by 220 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(b) with respect to the service.
5. Any tax or fee of general applicability imposed upon the subscribers or the transaction by a city, state, federal, or any other governmental entity
and collected by the holder of the state issued authorization and required to be remitted to the taxing entity, including sales and use taxes.
6. Security deposits collected from subscribers.
7. Amounts paid by subscribers to "home shopping" or similar vendors for merchandise sold through any home shopping channel offered as part of
the cable service or video service.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 140/498
C. Revenue of an affiliate of a holder shall be included in the calculation of gross revenues to the extent the treatment of the revenue as revenue of the
affiliate rather than the holder has the effect of evading the payment of the fee permitted by 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(b) which would
otherwise be paid by the cable service or video service.
HOLDER: A person or entity that has received authorization to offer or provide cable or video service from the commission pursuant to 220 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/21-401.
PEG: Public, education and governmental.
PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEE: The amount paid under this chapter and 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(d) by the holder to thevillage for the
service areas within its territorial jurisdiction.
SERVICE: The provision of "cable service" or "video service" to subscribers and the interaction of subscribers with the person or entity that has received
authorization to offer or provide cable or video service from the commission pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-401.
SERVICE PROVIDER FEE: The amount paid under this chapter and 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801 by the holder to a village for the service
areas within its territorial jurisdiction.
VIDEO SERVICE: Video programming and subscriber interaction, if any, that is required for the selection or use of such video programming services, and
which is provided through wireline facilities located at least in part in the public right of way without regard to delivery technology, including internet protocol
technology. This definition does not include any video programming provided by a commercial mobile service provider defined in 47 USC section 332(d) or
any video programming provided solely as part of, and via, service that enables users to access content, information, electronic mail, or other services
offered over the public internet. (Ord. 2008-2, 1-17-2008)
3-15-2: CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE IMPOSED:
A. Fee Imposed: A fee is hereby imposed on any holder providing cable service or video service in the village.
B. Amount Of Fee: The amount of the fee imposed hereby shall be five percent (5%) of the holder's gross revenues.
C. Notice To The Village: The holder shall notify the village at least ten (10) days prior to the date on which the holder begins to offer cable service or video
service in the village.
D. Holder's Liability: The holder shall be liable for and pay the service provider fee to the village. The holder's liability for the fee shall commence on the
first day of the calendar month following thirty (30) days after receipt of the ordinance adopting this chapter by the holder. The ordinance adopting this
chapter shall be sent by mail, postage prepaid, to the address listed on the holder's application notice sent pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/21-401(b)(6) to the village.
E. Payment Date: The payment of the service provider fee shall be due on a quarterly basis, forty five (45) days after the close of the calendar quarter. If
mailed, the fee is considered paid on the date it is postmarked. Each payment shall include a statement explaining the basis for the calculation of the
fee.
F. Exemption: The fee hereby imposed does not apply to existing cable service or video service providers that have an existingfranchise agreement with
the village in which a fee is paid.
G. Credit For Other Payments: An incumbent cable operator that elects to terminate an existing agreement pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/21-301(c) with credit for prepaid franchise fees under that agreement may deduct the amount of such credit from the fees that operator owes under
subsection B of this section. (Ord. 2008-2, 1-17-2008)
3-15-3: PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEE IMPOSED:
A. PEG Fee Imposed: A PEG access support fee is hereby imposed on any holder providing cable service or video service in the village in addition to the
fee imposed pursuant to section 3-15-2 of this chapter.
B. Amount Of Fee: The amount of the PEG access support fee imposed hereby shall be one percent (1%) of the holder's gross revenues or, if greater, the
percentage of gross revenues that incumbent cable operators pay to the village or its designee for PEG access support in the village.
C. Payment: The holder shall pay the PEG access support fee to the village or to the entity designated by the village to manage PEG access. The holder's
liability for the PEG access support fee shall commence on the date set forth in subsection 3-15-2D of this chapter.
D. Payment Due: The payment of the PEG access support fee shall be due on a quarterly basis, forty five (45) days after the close of the calendar quarter.
If mailed, the fee is considered paid on the date it is postmarked. Each payment shall include a statement explaining the basis for the calculation of the
fee.
E. Credit For Other Payments: An incumbent cable operator that elects to terminate an existing agreement pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-
301(c) shall pay, at the time they would have been due, all monetary payments for PEG access that would have been due during the remaining term of
the agreement had it not been terminated pursuant to that section. All payments made by an incumbent cable operator pursuant to the previous
sentence may be credited against the fees that that operator owes under subsection B of this section. (Ord. 2008-2, 1-17-2008)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 141/498
3-15-4: APPLICABLE PRINCIPLES:
All determinations and calculations under this chapter shall be made pursuant to generally accepted accounting principles. (Ord. 2008-2, 1-17-2008)
3-15-5: NO IMPACT ON OTHER TAXES DUE FROM HOLDER:
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to exempt a holder from any tax that is or may later be imposed by the village, including any tax that is
or may later be required to be paid by or through the holder with respect to cable service or video service. A state issued authorization shall not affect any
requirement of the holder with respect to payment of the village's simplified municipal telecommunications tax or any other tax as it applies to any
telephone service provided by the holder. A state issued authorization shall not affect any requirement of the holder with respect to payment of the local
unit of government's 911 or E911 fees, taxes or charges. (Ord. 2008-2, 1-17-2008)
3-15-6: AUDITS OF CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER:
A. Audit Requirement: The village will notify the holder of the requirements it imposes on other cable service or video service providers to submit to an
audit of its books and records. The holder shall comply with the same requirements the village imposes on other cable service or video service
providers in its jurisdiction to audit the holder's books and records and to recompute any amounts determined to be payable under the requirements of
the village. If all local franchises between the village and cable operator terminate, the audit requirements shall be those adopted by the village
pursuant to the local government taxpayers' bill of rights act, 50 Illinois Compiled Statutes 45/1 et seq. No acceptance of amounts remitted should be
construed as an accord that the amounts are correct.
B. Additional Payments: Any additional amount due after an audit shall be paid within thirty (30) days after the village's submission of an invoice for the
sum. (Ord. 2008-2, 1-17-2008)
3-15-7: LATE FEES/PAYMENTS:
All fees due and payments which are past due shall be governed by ordinances adopted by this village pursuant to the local government taxpayers' bill of
rights act, 50 Illinois Compiled Statutes 45/1 et seq. (Ord. 2008-2, 1-17-2008)
Chapter 16
COOK COUNTY EARNED SICK LEAVE ORDINANCE
3-16-1: DEFINITIONS:
EMPLOYEE: An individual permitted to work by an employer regardless of the number of persons the employer employs. For purposes of this chapter,
"employee" does not mean an employee of the Village of Streamwood.
EMPLOYER: Any individual, partnership, association, corporation, limited liability company, business trust, or any person or group of persons that gainfully
employs at least one (1) covered employee with a place of business in Cook County. For purposes of this chapter, the term "employer" does not include: a)
the government of the United States or a corporation wholly owned by the government of the United States; b) an Indian tribe or a corporation wholly
owned by an Indian tribe; c) the government of the State of Illinois or any agency or department thereof; or d) units of local government, including the
Village of Streamwood.
VILLAGE: The Village of Streamwood, Cook County, Illinois. (Ord. 2017-11, 4-6-2017)
3-16-2: EARNED SICK LEAVE:
A. Employers located or conducting business within the territorial boundaries of the Village of Streamwood shall not be required to offer or provide earned
sick leave to employees who work at least eighty (80) hours within any one hundred twenty (120) day period. No additional obligations with regard to
earned sick leave adopted by the Cook County Board of Commissioners shall apply to employers located or conducting business within the Village of
Streamwood.
B. All employers located or conducting business within the Village shall comply with all applicable Federal and/or State laws, regulations and labor
agreements as such laws, regulations and labor agreements may exist from time to time with regard to the payment of paid sick leave.
C. Except for incentive agreements directly between employers and the County of Cook, including but not limited to 6b tax classification status incentives,
no additional obligations with regard to paid sick leave, including, without limitation, any additional obligations by ordinance adopted by the County of
Cook Board of Commissioners, shall apply to employers located or conducting business within the Village. (Ord. 2017-11, 4-6-2017)
Chapter 17
COOK COUNTY MINIMUM WAGE ORDINANCE
3-17-1: DEFINITIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 142/498
EMPLOYEE: Shall have the meaning ascribed to such term in section 3(d) of the Illinois Minimum Wage Law1. For purposes of this chapter, "employee"
shall not include an employee of the Village of Streamwood.
EMPLOYER: Any individual, partnership, association, corporation, limited liability company, business trust, or any person or group of persons that gainfully
employs at least one (1) covered employee. To qualify as an employer, such individual, group, or entity must maintain a business facility within the
geographic boundaries of the Village or conduct business within the Village. For purposes of this chapter, the term "employer" shall not include: a) the
government of the United States or a corporation wholly owned by the government of the United States; b) an Indian tribe or a corporation wholly owned
by an Indian tribe; c) the government of the State of Illinois or any agency or department thereof; or d) units of local government, including the Village of
Streamwood.
VILLAGE: The Village of Streamwood, Cook County, Illinois. (Ord. 2017-11, 4-6-2017)
3-17-2: MINIMUM WAGE:
A. Employers located in or conducting business within the Village shall comply with all applicable Federal and State of Illinois laws and regulations with
respect to the payment of minimum hourly wages for non-tipped employees, including but not limited to wages established by the Fair Labor Standards
Division Illinois Department of Labor. No employer located in or conducting business within the Village of Streamwood shall be required to pay
employees a minimum hourly wage in excess of those wages established by Federal and State of Illinois laws, including, but not limited to, the
minimum wage rate established by the Fair Labor Standards Division of the Illinois Department of Labor.
B. Except for incentive agreements directly between employers and the County of Cook, including but not limited to 6b tax classification status incentives,
no additional obligations with regard to minimum hourly wages, including, without limitation, any additional obligations by ordinance adopted by the
County of Cook Board of Commissioners, shall apply to employers located in or conducting business within the Village, except those required by
Federal and/or State laws and regulations as such laws and regulations may exist from time to time. (Ord. 2017-11, 4-6-2017)
Title 4
POLICE REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
POLICE DEPARTMENT AND POLICE PROTECTION
4-1-1: DEPARTMENT CREATED, DUTIES:
A. There is hereby created a Police Department, an executive department of the Village. The Police Department shall consist of one Chief of Police,
Deputy Chiefs, commanders, sergeants, and police officers, in such numbers as may be provided from time to time by the President and Board of
Trustees. Such members of the police force shall be appointed by the President with the approval of the Board of Trustees; provided, that the approval
of the Chief of Police shall also be required for all positions other than Chief of Police.
B. It shall be the duty of the members of the Police Department to see to the enforcement of all ordinances of the Village, of all statutes effective in the
Village, and to preserve order and prevent infractions of the law and to arrest violators thereof. Every sworn member of the Police Department is
hereby declared to be a conservator of the peace. (1994 Code)
4-1-2: CHIEF OF POLICE:
A. Office Created: There is hereby created the office of Chief of Police, which officer shall be appointed by the President and Board of Trustees. If the
Chief shall, at a later date, no longer be Chief of Police, he shall automatically revert back to and continue to retain his rank held at the time of his
appointment and such person shall not lose his rank by virtue of such appointment.
B. Duties: The Chief of Police shall:
1. Be the keeper of the Village jail, and shall have custody of all persons incarcerated therein.
2. Keep such records and make such response concerning the activities of his Department as may be required by statute or Village ordinance.
3. Be responsible for the performance by the Police Department of all its functions, and all persons who are members of the Department shall serve
subject to the orders of the Chief of Police.
4. Be the custodian of all lost, abandoned or stolen property in the Village.
5. Be authorized to serve writs, summons and other processes, and no officer or patrolman shall serve any such summons or process except on the
order of the Chief of Police, or of the Village President. (1994 Code; amd. Ord. 1998-2, 1-8-1998)
4-1-3: DEPUTY CHIEF OF POLICE:
A. Office Created: There is hereby created the office of Deputy Chief of Police, which officer shall be appointed by the Village Manager from
recommendations of the Chief of Police. There shall be two (2) such positions. If a Deputy Chief shall, at a later date, no longer be Deputy Chief of
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 143/498
Police, he shall automatically revert to and continue his rank, if any, held at the time of his appointment and such person shall not lose his rank, if any,
by virtue of such appointment.
B. Duties: A Deputy Chief of Police shall:
1. Act for the Chief of Police during his absences or as delegated; execute general and special assignments in the planning, administration,
coordination, direction, and review of departmental operations and activities.
2. The deputy chief in charge of field services administers, directs, and coordinates the activities of a large and complex division; develops internal
policies and procedures and approves methods and procedures recommended by subordinate supervisors; reviews and evaluates the results of
various programs and activities through consultation with watch and section commanders.
3. The deputy chief in charge of support services, administers, directs, and coordinates the department administrative and staff services functions
including personnel and training, records, auxiliary services, fiscal control, and property and evidence control; supervises and participates in the
preparation and control of the department's budget.
4. Serve as a member of the department's management team providing advice and assistance to the chief of police; assist in setting department goals
and in evaluating the extent and nature of their accomplishment.
5. Represent the department in relationships with other government officials and members of the public; conduct special assignments at the direction of
the chief of police.
6. Perform related work as required. (1994 Code)
4-1-4: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The chief of police may make or prescribe such rules and regulations for the guidance of the members of the police department as the chief of police
deems necessary and proper and such rules and regulations shall be binding on the members of the police department. (Ord. 1999-45, 10-7-1999)
4-1-5: CONDUCT OF MEMBERS:
It shall be the duty of every member of the police department to conduct himself in a proper and law abiding manner, and to avoid the use of unnecessary
force at all times, even when off duty. (1994 Code)
4-1-6: WITNESS FEES:
Any member of the police department shall appear as a witness whenever this is necessary in a prosecution for violation of a village ordinance or a state
or federal law. But no such member shall receive any witness fee for such services in any action or suit to which the village is a party. All fees due for such
services shall, if paid, be turned over to the village treasurer. (1994 Code)
4-1-7: SCHOOL CROSSING GUARDS:
A. There is hereby created the office of school crossing guard.
B. School crossing guards shall have such powers and duties as assigned to that office by the chief of police, and shall receive compensation from the
village as agreed upon by the board of trustees.
C. Appointments may be revoked at any time by the chief of police.
D. This section does not make school crossing guards members of the police department and does not give them privileges or benefits otherwise provided
for members of the police department. (1994 Code)
4-1-8: CERTAIN CODE VIOLATIONS, PENALTIES:
A. Issuance Of Citations: Whenever a police officer is authorized to cite or arrest a person because of the following violations:
1. An ordinance prohibiting or regulating the parking of a vehicle in a designated area;
2. An ordinance restricting the length of time a vehicle may be parked there;
3. An ordinance providing for business licenses (title 3 of this code);
such police officer may instead issue to such person a citation or notice designated "Citation Issued by Streamwood Police Department", giving the
name and address of the defendant, and the village ordinance which he has violated, and indicating on said citation how and where the penalty for
said violation can be paid.
B. Penalties Which May Be Mailed To Village: The following penalties may be mailed to the village collector at the Streamwood village hall, with checks
made payable to the village of Streamwood:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 144/498
If Paid
Within 10 Days
After
10 Days
After
45 Days
All parking violations $25.00 $40.00 $50.00
Dog at large violations 25.00 40.00 50.00
Snow removal violations 25.00 40.00 50.00
Signs in right of way 25.00 40.00 50.00
C. Penalties To Be Paid In Person: The following penalties may be paid only in person at the village hall and upon supplying the proper documentation as
to current required licensing:
If Paid
Within 10 Days
After
10 Days
After
45 Days
No business license $25.00 $40.00 $50.00
Failure to have rabies shot administered to animal 25.00 40.00 50.00
(Ord. 2009-36, 12-17-2009)
D. Notice Of Violation; Manner Of Resolving: Whenever a village employee or police officer is authorized to cite or arrest a person because of the following
violations:
1. An ordinance regulating the construction of buildings, their materials and design (section 6-2-1 of this code);
2. An ordinance regulating the health and environment of the village (title 7 of this code);
3. An ordinance regulating conduct on streets, sidewalks and public ways (title 8 of this code);
4. An ordinance regulating the construction of buildings, their materials and design (title 9 of this code);
they may instead issue to such person notice designated "Notice Issued by Village of Streamwood", giving the name and address of the person, the
ordinance which he has violated and indicating on such notice how such violation may be disposed of without a traffic ticket or other court citation
being issued as set forth below.
E. Voluntary Correction Of Violation: Whenever a notice described in subsection D of this section is issued, such notice shall inform the violator that he
may avoid the issuance of a traffic ticket, notice to appear, summons or complaint and warrant by voluntarily correcting the violation described in this
notice and bringing documentary proof thereof to the issuing department of the village. Such notice shall further inform the violator that no penalty will
be assessed through such administrative disposition of the violation but that an administrative fee will be assessed. Upon presentation of such
satisfactory proof and payment of such administrative fee, the violator shall not be cited into court. (1994 Code)
F. Payment Of Administrative Fee: In order to defray the reasonable expense of such administrative disposition as set forth in subsections D and E of this
section and to take advantage of such procedure, the person who receives such notice shall pay an administrative fee based upon the following
schedule:
1. Twenty five dollars ($25.00) if paid within ten (10) days of the issuance of the citation.
2. Forty dollars ($40.00) if paid eleven (11) days or later after the issuance of the citation. (Ord. 2009-36, 12-17-2009)
G. Failure To Pay Citation: If any such notices so issued for such ordinance violations are not paid within ten (10) days of the time of issuance of said
notice, then the village employee or officer shall have the authority to cause an arrest warrant, notice to appear, summons or traffic ticket, as the case
may be, to be issued to the person for appearance in the circuit court of Cook County.
H. Each Day Separate Offense: In the case of such citations, violation within each twenty four (24) hour period shall constitute a separate violation. (1994
Code)
Chapter 2
ANIMAL CONTROL REGULATIONS
4-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following terms mean:
ANIMAL: Any live, vertebrate creature, domestic or wild.
ANIMAL SHELTER: Any facility operated by a humane society or municipal agency, or its authorized agents for the purpose of impounding or caring for
animals held under the authority of this chapter or state law.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 145/498
AUCTION: Any place or facility where animals are regularly bought, sold or traded, except for those facilities otherwise defined in this chapter. This
definition does not apply to individual sales of animals by owners.
CIRCUS: A commercial variety show featuring animal acts for public entertainment.
COMMERCIAL ANIMAL ESTABLISHMENT: Any pet shop, grooming shop, auction, riding school or stable, zoological park, circus, performing animal
exhibition, or kennel.
DOMESTICATED: Tamed, especially by generations of breeding, to live in close association with human beings as a pet or work animal and usually
creating a dependency such that the animal loses its ability to live in the wild.
FERAL: Not domesticated or existing in a wild state, or having reverted to a wild state as from domestication; undomesticated. Feral animals shall include,
but not be limited to, cats, mice, rats, rabbits, dogs and ferrets.
GROOMING SHOP: A commercial establishment where animals are bathed, clipped, plucked or otherwise groomed.
GROUND FEEDING: To spread, cast, deposit or dump food, including corn, bread, birdseed, food scraps, pet food or commercial animal chow, or any like
or similar substance on any public or private property in the village.
HUMANE OFFICER: Any person designated by the state of Illinois, a municipal government or a humane society as a law enforcement officer who is
qualified to perform such duties under the laws of this state.
KENNEL: Any premises wherein any person engages in the business of boarding, breeding, buying, letting for hire, training for a fee, or selling dogs or
cats.
OWNER: Any person owning, keeping or harboring one or more animals. An animal shall be deemed to be harbored if it is fed or sheltered for three (3) or
more consecutive days.
PERFORMING ANIMAL EXHIBITION: Any spectacle, display, act or event other than circuses, in which performing animals are used.
PET: Any animal kept for pleasure rather than utility, subject to the additional provisions of this chapter.
PET SHOP: Any establishment for the buying, selling or boarding of any species of animal, whether operated separately or in connection with another
business enterprise, except for a licensed kennel.
PUBLIC NUISANCE: Any animal which:
A. Molests passersby or passing vehicles.
B. Attacks other animals.
C. Trespasses on school grounds.
D. Is running at large.
E. Damages private or public property.
F. Barks, whines or howls in an excessive, continuous or untimely fashion.
RESTRAINT: Any animal secured by a leash or lead, or under the control of a responsible person and obedient to that person's commands, or within the
real property limits of its owner.
RIDING SCHOOL OR STABLE: Any place which has available for hire, boarding and/or riding instruction, any horse, pony, donkey, mule or burro.
VETERINARY HOSPITAL: Any establishment maintained and operated by a licensed veterinarian for surgery, diagnosis and treatment of diseases and
injuries of animals.
VICIOUS ANIMAL: Any animal that constitutes a physical threat to human beings or other animals.
WILD ANIMAL: Any warm or cold blooded animal which can normally be found in the wild state.
ZOOLOGICAL PARK: Any facility, other than a pet shop or kennel, displaying or exhibiting one or more species of nondomesticated animals operated by a
person, partnership, corporation or government agency. (1994 Code; amd. Ord. 2010-9, 5-6-2010)
4-2-2: REGISTRATION AND REQUIREMENTS:
A. Any person owning, keeping, harboring or having custody of any animal over four (4) months of age within the village must have the animal(s)
vaccinated for rabies by a licensed veterinarian or antirabies clinic, and must continue to have the animal(s) vaccinated every year, or as required by a
licensed veterinarian or antirabies clinic.
B. Any person owning, keeping, harboring or having custody of any animal over four (4) months of age within the village may register the animal as herein
provided. This provision may not apply to the keeping of small cage birds or aquatic and amphibian animals solely as pets.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 146/498
C. Written application for registration shall be made with the police department, which application shall include the name and address of the applicant,
description of the animal and a rabies certificate issued by a licensed veterinarian or antirabies clinic, for every dog or cat over the age of four (4)
months.
D. Upon acceptance of the registration application, the registering authority shall issue a durable tag or identification collar, stamped with an identifying
number. Tags should be designed so that they may be conveniently fastened or riveted to the animal's collar or harness.
E. Dogs and cats must wear identification tags or collars at all times when off the premises of the owners.
F. The registering authority shall maintain a record of the identifying numbers of all tags issued and shall make this record available to the public. (Ord.
2001-45, 10-4-2001)
G. No residence shall maintain or house more than three (3) animals with the exception of a new litter up to the age of four (4) months. This provision may
not apply to the keeping of caged birds or aquatic and caged amphibian animals solely as pets. (Ord. 2008-3, 2-7-2008)
4-2-3: RESTRAINT OF ANIMALS:
A. No household domesticated animals shall be allowed on the streets of the village of Streamwood or in public places or upon property other than that of
its owner, unless under the control of the owner and kept on a suitable, dependable leash or tether. (Ord. 2008-3, 2-7-2008)
B. No owner shall fail to exercise proper care and control of his animals to prevent them from becoming a public nuisance.
C. Every female dog or cat in heat shall be confined in a building or secure enclosure in such a manner that such female dog or cat cannot come into
contact with another animal, except for planned breeding.
D. Every vicious animal, as determined by the licensing authority, shall be confined by the owner within a building or secure enclosure and shall be
securely muzzled or caged whenever off the premises of its owner.
E. All dog runs shall be installed and maintained so as not to be a nuisance to any neighbor. (1994 Code; amd. Ord. 2001-45, 10-4-2001)
4-2-4: IMPOUNDMENT AND VIOLATION, NOTICE:
A. Unrestrained dogs and nuisance animals shall be taken by the police, animal control officers or humane officers and impounded in an animal shelter
and there confined in a humane manner.
B. Impounded dogs shall be kept for not less than five (5) working days.
C. If by an identification tag or other means, the owner of an impounded animal can be identified, the animal control officer shall immediately, upon
impoundment, notify the owner by telephone or mail.
D. Any animal not reclaimed by its owner within five (5) working days shall become the property of the local government authority, or humane society, and
shall be placed for adoption in a suitable home or humanely euthanized.
E. The owner of an impounded animal may also be proceeded against for violation of this chapter. (1994 Code; amd. Ord. 2001-45, 10-4-2001)
4-2-5: ANIMAL CARE:
A. Food, Shelter, Care And Treatment: No owner shall fail to provide his animals with sufficient good and wholesome food and water, proper shelter and
protection from the weather, veterinary care when needed to prevent suffering, and with humane care and treatment.
B. Abuse And Fighting Prohibited: No person shall beat, cruelly ill treat, torment, overload, overwork or otherwise abuse an animal, or cause, instigate or
permit any dogfight, cockfight, bullfight or other combat between animals or between animals and humans.
C. Abandonment Prohibited: No owner of an animal shall abandon such animal.
D. Using Animals As Prizes Prohibited: No person shall give away any live animal, fish, reptile or birds as a prize for, or as an inducement to, enter any
contest, game or other competition, or as an inducement to enter a place of amusement; or offer such vertebrate as an incentive to enter into any
business agreement whereby the offer was for the purpose of attracting trade.
E. Motor Vehicle Accident: Any person who, as the operator of a motor vehicle, strikes a domestic animal shall stop at once and render such assistance as
may be possible and shall immediately report such injury or death to the animal's owner. In the event the owner cannot be ascertained and located,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 147/498
such operator shall at once report the accident to the appropriate law enforcement agency or to the local humane society.
F. Poisons Prohibited; Exception: No person shall expose any known poisonous substance, whether mixed with food or not, so that the same shall be
liable to be eaten by any animal; provided, that it shall not be unlawful for a person to expose on his own property common rat poison mixed only with
vegetable substances. (1994 Code; amd. Ord. 2001-45, 10-4-2001)
G. Ground Feeding Prohibited: The ground feeding of feral animals is hereby declared a nuisance and is prohibited. (Ord. 2010-9, 5-6-2010)
4-2-6: KEEPING OF ANIMALS AND REPTILES:
A. No person shall keep or permit to be kept on his premises any wild or vicious animal for display or for exhibition purposes, whether gratuitously or for a
fee. This section shall not be construed to apply to zoological parks, performing animal exhibitions or circuses.
B. No person shall keep or permit to be kept any wild animal, poisonous or dangerous reptiles. (1994 Code; amd. Ord. 2001-45, 10-4-2001)
C. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prohibit the possession and keeping of any animal, fowl, amphibian, or reptile kept pursuant to applicable
federal or state issued permit or license; provided the keeping of such animal, fowl, amphibian or reptile remains an accessory land use. (Ord. 1994-54,
10-20-1994; amd. Ord. 2001-45, 10-4-2001)
D. It is prohibited to harbor or keep any live horse, cattle, swine, sheep or goat, or to raise any chickens or fowl anywhere in the village. Exceptions to this
subsection are animals kept in agriculture zoning districts or as allowed under special use. (1994 Code; amd. Ord. 2001-45, 10-4-2001)
4-2-7: PERFORMING ANIMAL EXHIBITIONS:
A. No performing animal exhibition or circus shall be permitted in which animals are induced or encouraged to perform through the use of chemical,
mechanical, electrical or manual devices in a manner which will cause, or is likely to cause, physical injury or suffering.
B. All equipment used on a performing animal shall fit properly and be in good working condition. (1994 Code; amd. Ord. 2001-45, 10-4-2001)
4-2-8: RIDING HORSES:
It shall be illegal to ride a horse or other animal within the village on any public property other than dedicated street pavements. Any person violating any
provision of this section shall be fined as set forth in section 1-4-1 of this code for each offense. (Ord. 1998-7, 1-22-1998; amd. Ord. 2001-45, 10-4-2001)
4-2-9: ANIMAL WASTE:
The owner of every animal shall be responsible for the removal of any excreta deposited by his animal(s) on public streets, walks, recreation areas or
private property. At no time shall any person allow animal excreta to accumulate on any property within the village so as to become a public health
nuisance. (1994 Code; amd. Ord. 2001-45, 10-4-2001)
4-2-10: KILLING OR WOUNDING BIRDS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to kill or wound, or attempt to kill or wound, by the use of firearm, slingshot, bow and arrow, pelting with stones or
otherwise, any quail, pheasant, robin, blue jay or any other song, plumage or game bird within any private grounds or upon any public park, square, street
or grounds, or for any person to take the eggs or young of any such quail, pheasant, songbird, plumage or game bird within any private enclosure or upon
any public grounds belonging to the village. (1994 Code; amd. Ord. 2001-45, 10-4-2001)
4-2-11: HUNTING PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person within the limits of the village to hunt by trap or with a gun or other weapon, any game animals, wild animals or wild birds of
any kind. (1994 Code; amd. Ord. 2001-45, 10-4-2001)
4-2-12: ENFORCEMENT:
The civil and criminal provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by those persons or agencies designated by municipal authority. It shall be a violation of
this chapter to interfere with a humane officer in the performance of his duties. (1994 Code; amd. Ord. 2001-45, 10-4-2001)
4-2-13: PENALTY:
Unless otherwise provided herein, any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a
fine as set forth in section 1-4-1 of this code. If any violation be continuing, each day's violation shall be deemed a separate violation. (Ord. 1998-4, 1-8-
1998; amd. Ord. 2001-45, 10-4-2001)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 148/498
Chapter 3
MISDEMEANORS
4-3-1: ASSAULT:
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit the following acts:
A. Assault: A person commits an assault when, without lawful authority, he engages in conduct which places another in reasonable apprehension of
receiving a battery.
B. Battery: A person commits a battery if he intentionally or knowingly, without legal justification: 1) causes bodily harm to an individual, or 2) makes
physical contact of an insulting or provoking nature with an individual.
C. Reckless Conduct: A person who causes bodily harm to or endangers the bodily safety of an individual by any means, commits reckless conduct, if he
performs recklessly the acts which cause the harm or endanger safety, whether they otherwise are lawful or unlawful.
D. Mob Action: Mob action consists of any of the following:
1. The use of force or violence disturbing the public peace by two (2) or more persons acting together and without authority of law; or
2. The assembly of two (2) or more persons to do an unlawful act; or
3. The assembly of two (2) or more persons, without authority of law, for the purpose of doing violence to the person or property of anyone supposed to
have been guilty of a violation of the law, or for the purpose of exercising correctional powers or regulative powers over any person by violence.
E. Hate Crime: A person commits a hate crime when, by reason of the race, color, creed, religion, ancestry, gender, sexual orientation, physical or mental
disability, or national origin of another individual or group of individuals, he commits assault, battery, aggravated assault, misdemeanor theft, criminal
trespass to residence, misdemeanor criminal damage to property, criminal trespass to vehicle, criminal trespass to real property or mob action as these
crimes are defined in subsections A, B, and D of this section, respectively. (1994 Code)
4-3-2: DISORDERLY CONDUCT:
A. A person commits the offense of disorderly conduct, which is a violation of this section, when he/she knowingly:
1. Does any act in such unreasonable manner as to alarm or disturb another and to provoke a breach of the peace; or
2. Transmits or causes to be transmitted in any manner to the village fire department a false alarm of fire, knowing at the time of such transmission that
there is no reasonable ground for believing that such fire exists; or
3. Transmits or causes to be transmitted in any manner to another a false alarm to the effect that a bomb or other explosive of any nature is concealed
in any place within the village, that its explosion would endanger human life, knowing at the time of such transmission that there is no reasonable
ground for believing that such bomb or explosive is concealed in such place; or
4. Transmits or causes to be transmitted in any manner to any peace officer, public officer or public employee of the village a report to the effect that an
offense will be committed, is being committed, or has been committed, knowing at the time of such transmission that there is no reasonable ground
for believing that such an offense will be committed, is being committed, or has been committed; or
5. Enters upon the property of another within the village and for a lewd or unlawful purpose deliberately looks into a dwelling on that property through
any window or other opening in it; or
6. Calls the number "911" for the purpose of making or transmitting a false alarm or complaint and reporting information when, at the time the call or
transmission is made, the person knows there is no reasonable ground for making the call or transmission and further knows that the call or
transmission could result in the emergency response of the village of Streamwood police department or fire department. (Ord. 2010-15, 8-5-2010)
4-3-3: DISORDERLY HOUSES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain any bawdy or disorderly house, or any house or other place where any person is permitted or
suffered to make any improper noise or disturbance. (1994 Code)
4-3-4: DISTURBING ASSEMBLIES FOR PUBLIC WORSHIP:
It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb any congregation or assembly met for religious worship, by making a noise, or by rude and indecent behavior
or profane discourse, within their place of worship, or so near the same as to disturb the order and solemnity of the meeting. (1994 Code)
4-3-5: HOUSES OF ILL FAME:
No person shall keep or maintain, or be an inmate of, or in any way be connected with, or in any way contribute to the support of any house of ill fame or
assignation. (1994 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 149/498
4-3-6: INDECENT, OBSCENE ACTS:
A. Indecent Exposure, Dress; Lewd Books: It shall be unlawful for any person to appear in a public place in a state of nudity, or in a dress not belonging to
his or her sex or in an indecent or lewd dress, or to make any indecent exposure of his or her person, or be guilty of any lewd or indecent act or
behavior, or to exhibit, possess, sell or offer to sell any indecent or lewd book, picture or other thing, or exhibit or perform any indecent, immoral or lewd
play or representation.
B. Indecent Language; Threats: It shall be unlawful for any person to commit any indecent, lewd or filthy act in any place in the village, or to utter any lewd
or filthy words, or use any threatening language toward any other person tending to a breach of the peace, or to make any obscene gesture to or about
any other person publicly.
C. Indecent Or Lewd Writing: It shall be unlawful for any person in any public place, or place open to public view, within the village, to write or draw, cut,
make or exhibit any lewd or indecent word, sentence, design or figure. (1994 Code)
4-3-7: INTOXICATION:
It shall be unlawful for any person to be in a state of intoxication on any highway, street, alley or thoroughfare or other public place in the Village. (1994
Code)
4-3-8: LIQUOR CONSUMPTION:
It shall be unlawful for any person to drink alcoholic beverages or have open liquor in his possession on any street, alley or other public place within the
Village:
A. Public places shall include, but are not limited to, parks, publicly owned property, open areas in commercial zoning districts and common areas of
residential condominiums.
B. The provisions of this Section 4-3-8 shall not apply to the drinking of alcoholic beverages within such public places as are licensed to sell alcoholic
beverages by the Village or at block parties pursuant to a permit issued by the Village. (Ord. 1996-37, 9-19-1996)
4-3-9: GAMBLING:
It shall be unlawful for any person to:
A. Gamble or attend any gambling resort or to make a bet, lottery or gambling hazard, or to buy or sell any chances or tickets in any gambling game.
B. Possess or expose for public use any slot machine, pinball machine or coin-operated device designed for gambling or any other gambling device,
punchboard or paraphernalia with the intent to use the same for an unlawful purpose; and any such device or paraphernalia kept with such intent may
be confiscated by any member of the Police Department.
C. Maintain or patronize any establishment maintained for a gambling house or resort anywhere in the Village or within one mile thereof.
D. Advertise any gambling house or resort in any street, alley or other public place within the Village. (1994 Code)
4-3-10: TRESPASSING PROHIBITED:
A. Trespasses Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to commit a trespass within the Village upon either public or private property.
B. Specifically Enumerated Trespasses, Suppression: Without constituting any limitation upon the provisions of subsection A hereof, any of the following
acts committed by any person shall be deemed included among those that constitute trespasses in violation of the provisions of said subsection A, and
appropriate action may be taken hereunder at any time, or from time to time, to prevent or suppress any violation of this Section, the aforesaid
enumerated acts so included, being as follows:
1. An entry upon the premises, or any part thereof, of another, including any public property in violation of a notice posted or exhibited at the main
entrance to said premises or at any point of approach or entry or in violation of any notice, warning or protest given orally or in writing, by any owner
or occupant thereof; or
2. The pursuit of a course of conduct or action incidental to the making of an entry upon the land of another in violation of a notice posted or exhibited
at the main entrance to said premises or at any point of approach or entry, or in violation of any notice, warning or protest given orally or in writing by
any owner or occupant thereof; or
3. A failure or refusal to depart from the premises of another in case of being requested, either orally or in writing, to leave by any owner or occupant
thereof; or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 150/498
4. An entry into or upon any vehicle, aircraft or watercraft made without the consent of the person having the right to the possession or control thereof,
or a failure or refusal to leave any such vehicle, aircraft or watercraft after being requested to leave by the person having such right. (1994 Code)
C. Penalty: Any person violating any of the provisions of this Section shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined as set forth in Section 1-4-1 of this Code.
(Ord. 1998-7, 1-22-1998)
4-3-11: BURGLAR'S TOOLS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to have in his possession any nippers of the description known as "burglar's nippers", "picklock" or "skeleton key" to be
used with a bit, jimmy or other burglar's instruments or tools, of whatsoever kind or description, unless it is shown that such possession is innocent or for a
lawful purpose. (1994 Code)
4-3-12: PALMISTRY, SPIRITUALISM PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to obtain any money or property from another by fraudulent devices and practices in the name of or by means of spirit
mediumship, palmistry, card reading, astrology, seership or like crafty science, or fortunetelling of any kind.
It shall further be unlawful for any person to hold or give any public or private meeting, gathering, circle or seance of any kind in the name of spiritualism or
of any other religious body, society or denomination, and therein practice or permit to be practiced fraud or deception of any kind. (1994 Code)
4-3-13: FALSE ALARMS:
A. Fire Alarms: It shall be unlawful for any person to falsely notify a firefighting agency or any agency, governmental or private, whose duties it would be to
pass on such notification of a fire to a firefighting agency.
B. Police Alarms: It shall be unlawful for any person to falsely notify the Police Department of a crime going to be or having been committed with the
intention thereby to disrupt the regular duties of the said Department or to cause members of the Department to be called upon to act as if a crime were
being or had been committed. (1994 Code)
4-3-14: BATHING IN PUBLIC:
It shall be unlawful for any person to bathe at any public place or in any place open to the public view unless such person is adequately garbed in a
bathing suit. (1994 Code)
4-3-15: ADVERTISING NOISES, MATERIALS:
A. Audible Advertising: It shall be illegal for any person to make or cause, permit or allow to be made any noise of any kind by crying, calling or shouting or
by means of any whistle, rattle, bell, gong, clapper, hammer, drum, horn or similar mechanical device, for the purpose of advertising any goods, wares
or merchandise or of attracting the attention or inviting the patronage of any person to any business whatsoever; provided, however, these provisions
shall not apply in amusement grounds, parks, halls and other places duly licensed in accordance with the provisions of Title 3, Chapter 5 of this Code.
B. Advertising By Mechanical Devices: No person shall operate or cause to be operated upon any premises within the Village any talking machine, radio or
other mechanical device for the purpose of advertising any goods, wares or merchandise or of attracting attention and inviting the patronage of any
person to any business whatsoever in such a way as to disturb the peace and good order of society or disturb the peace of any person in the ordinary
conduct of business.
C. Throwing Advertising Matter Or Samples: It is hereby prohibited for any person to cast, throw and place any advertising matter or samples of
merchandise from the streets or sidewalks of the Village to or upon private property or upon the streets, alleys or public places of the Village; provided
however, said prohibition shall not apply to the delivery of daily newspapers or the delivery of weekly, monthly or other publications of general
circulation. (1994 Code)
4-3-16: THROWING STONES:
No person shall throw or cast any stone or other missile upon or at any building, vehicle, railroad car, tree or any public or private property, or upon or at
any person anywhere in the Village, nor shall any person aid or abet in the same. (1994 Code)
4-3-17: OBSTRUCTING STAIRWAYS OR EXITS:
It shall be unlawful to obstruct or permit the obstruction of any stairway, aisle, corridor or exit in any office building, factory, hotel, school, church, theater,
assembly hall, lodge or other public hall, or any building used by two (2) or more tenants or families in such manner that it interferes with the free use of
such stairway, aisle, corridor or exit. (1994 Code)
4-3-18: MEDIAN STRIPS, ACTIVITIES PROHIBITED:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 151/498
All activities of any kind are hereby prohibited on median strips in boulevards.
Any person who shall violate this Section shall pay a fine as set forth in Section 1-4-1 of this Code, upon conviction thereof. A separate offense shall be
deemed committed for each and every day that a violation exists. (Ord. 1998-4, 1-8-1998)
4-3-19: DESTROYING OR INTERFERING WITH PUBLIC OR PRIVATE PROPERTY:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person carelessly or maliciously to break, deface, carry away or in any way injure or destroy any electric light, telephone or
telegraph wire, or any appurtenance thereto, or public lamp or lamppost, street sign or any other sign, gate, sidewalk or fence in the Village, or to climb
upon any public lamppost or fence, or hang or place any goods or merchandise thereon, or to place any goods, boxes, wood or any other heavy
material upon or against the same.
B. No person shall cut, injure, mark or deface any building not his own or any tree, grass, shrub or walk in any square, street or public park, or any sewer,
water pipe or hydrant laid or placed by the Village.
C. No person shall string wires in the Village and put them up in such a manner as to damage or injure any tree standing in any street, park or alley of the
Village, either by abrasion caused by contact of such wires with any such tree, or by burning the branches or trunk of any such tree by electric current
conducted by such wires, or by cutting or climbing into or upon any such tree when putting up or repairing such wires.
D. It shall be unlawful for any person other than one authorized by the Director of Public Works and Buildings to do or suffer to be done any act or thing the
effect of which would be to divert storm waters from the course of drainage established in accord with engineering plans approved by the Village.
E. It shall be unlawful for any person other than one authorized by the Director of Public Works and Buildings to tamper with or suffer to be tampered with
manhole covers or walls of manholes or to throw anything into a manhole. (1994 Code)
4-3-20: LICENSE PLATES, PROHIBITIONS:
A. Stealing, Detaching Or Mutilating: It shall be unlawful for any person, without the consent of the owner or licensee, to take, carry away, detach or
mutilate any metal plate, tag, badge or license worn by or attached to any person, animal or vehicle, or attached to any article, substance or thing
whatsoever as a mark of identification or otherwise in compliance with the requirements of any ordinance of the Village.
B. Exhibiting Or Displaying Unlawfully: It shall be unlawful for any person, not being authorized by any ordinance of the Village to exhibit or cause to be
exhibited or displayed upon his person or upon any animal or vehicle or upon any article, substance or thing whatsoever, any metal plate or any tag,
badge or license issued as a mark of identification or otherwise in compliance with any provision of this Village Code. (1994 Code)
4-3-21: INSTALLING FUEL TANKS:
It shall be unlawful to install or maintain any fuel oil, gas or liquid gas tanks above ground. All such tanks must be placed below the ground surface. (1994
Code)
4-3-22: ABANDONED REFRIGERATORS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon any refrigerator, ice box or deep freeze in any place accessible to the public without first removing the doors
of such refrigerator, ice box or deep freeze. (1994 Code)
4-3-23: INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLES:
It shall be unlawful to park, place or permit the parking or placing in the open, of any inoperable motor vehicle on any premises within the Village. The
Police Department shall give five (5) days' notice by posting upon any such motor vehicle the requirement that said vehicle is to be moved or stored under
roof. Upon the failure to remove said vehicle upon the expiration of the five (5) days' notice, such motor vehicle shall be deemed abandoned and shall be
confiscated by the Police Department and disposed of according to the statutes and ordinances of the Village in such cases made and provided. The
foregoing penalty shall be in addition to all other penalties authorized by law. (1994 Code)
4-3-24: PENALTY:
Unless otherwise provided herein, any person violating any provision of this Chapter shall be fined as set forth in Section 1-4-1 of this Code; and a
separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (1994 Code)
4-3-25: ABATEMENT OF PROHIBITED SIGNS:
A. Abatement Required; Graffiti Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for the owner of any property to not remove or paint over any prohibited sign painted
directly on an exterior wall of a building or on any structure upon that property. A prohibited sign includes but is not limited to any permanent display of
any letter, numeral, figure, emblem, insignia, picture, outline, character, spectacle, delineation, announcement or any combination thereof which are
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 152/498
painted of a color different from the color of the exterior of the structure on which it is painted and which are visible beyond the boundaries of the
property, placed thereon without the permission of the owner, commonly known as graffiti.
B. Failure To Remove; Enforcement Actions: When the owner of the property refuses or neglects to remove from the exterior of structures upon the
owner's property any permanent display of a prohibited sign in compliance with the regulations of this Code, the Village may take the following
enforcement actions.
C. Notice To Owner: The Village shall send notice by certified mail return receipt requested to the owner of the property if on file with the Village Clerk and
the person in whose name the general taxes for the last preceding year were paid and by regular mail to each business licensed by the Village Clerk
on that property of the violation of this Section and for its abatement within twenty one (21) days from the postmark of said notice.
D. Abatement By Village; Assessment Of Costs: If the owner does not abate the violation during the notice period, the Village Manager or his designee
may proceed to abate such violation keeping an account of the expenses of the abatement which shall include an administrative fee of the greater of
twenty five dollars ($25.00) or ten percent (10%) of the cost of abatement. All expenses, including interest at the rate of ten percent (10%) per year,
shall be charged to and paid by such owner.
If the owner authorizes the Village to remove the prohibited sign and pays the Village for such expenses within thirty (30) days of its removal, the
Village shall not add the administrative fee to the expenses for abatement.
E. Notice Of Lien: The expenses for abatement shall become a lien upon the property affected superior to all subsequent liens and encumbrances except
tax liens, if within sixty (60) days after such expense is incurred, the Village files notice of lien in the office of the recorder in the county in which such
real estate is located. The notice shall consist of a sworn statement setting out a description of the real estate, the amount of money representing the
expenses incurred or payable for the service and the date or dates when such costs and expense was incurred by the Village. However, the lien shall
not be valid as to any purchaser whose rights in and to such real estate have arisen subsequent to the abatement and prior to the filing of such notice,
and the lien shall not be valid as to any mortgage, judgment creditor or other lienor whose rights in and to such real estate arose prior to the filing of
such notice.
F. Release Of Lien: Upon payment of the expenses by the owner of or persons interested in such property after notice of lien has been filed, the lien shall
be released by the Village and the release may be filed of record as in the case of filing notice of lien. The lien may be enforced at any time by a
proceeding to foreclose as in the case of mortgages or mechanics liens. (Ord. 1994-52, 10-6-1994)
4-3-26: RETAIL THEFT:
A. Offense Of Retail Theft: A person commits the offense of retail theft when he or she knowingly:
1. Takes possession of, carries away, transfers or causes to be carried away or transferred, any merchandise displayed, held, stored or offered for sale
in a retail mercantile establishment with the intention of retaining such merchandise or with the intention of depriving the merchant permanently of the
possession, use or benefit of such merchandise without paying the full retail value of such merchandise; or
2. Alters, transfers, or removes any label, price tag, marking, indicia of value or any other markings which aid in determining value fixed to any
merchandise displayed, held, stored or offered for sale, in a retail mercantile establishment and attempts to purchase such merchandise personally
or in consort with another at less than the full retail value with the intention of depriving the merchant of the full retail value of such merchandise; or
3. Transfers any merchandise displayed, held, stored or offered for sale, in a retail mercantile establishment from the container in or on which such
merchandise is displayed to any other container with the intention of depriving the merchant of the full retail value of such merchandise; or
4. Removes a shopping cart from the premises of a retail mercantile establishment without the consent of the merchant given at the time of such
removal with the intention of depriving the merchant permanently of the possession, use or benefit of such cart.
B. Presumptions: If any person:
1. Conceals upon his or her person or among his or her belongings, unpurchased merchandise displayed, held, stored or offered for sale in a retail
mercantile establishment; and
2. Removes that merchandise beyond the last known station for receiving payments for that merchandise in that retail mercantile establishment;
such person shall be presumed to have possessed, carried away or transferred such merchandise with the intention of retaining it or with the
intention of depriving the merchant permanently of the possession, use or benefit of such merchandise without paying the full retail value of such
merchandise.
C. Detention: Any merchant who has reasonable grounds to believe that a person has committed retail theft may detain such person, on or off the
premises of a retail mercantile establishment, in a reasonable manner and for a reasonable length of time for all or any of the following purposes:
1. To request identification;
2. To verify such identification;
3. To make reasonable inquiry as to whether such person has in his possession unpurchased merchandise and, to make reasonable investigation of
the ownership of such merchandise;
4. To inform a peace officer of the detention of the person and surrender that person to the custody of a peace officer;
5. In the case of a minor, to inform a peace officer, the parents, guardian or other private person interested in the welfare of that minor of this detention
and to surrender custody of such minor to such person.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 153/498
A merchant may make a detention as permitted herein off the premises of a retail mercantile establishment only if such detention is pursuant to an
immediate pursuit of such person.
A merchant shall be deemed to have reasonable grounds to make a detention for the purposes of this section if the merchant detains a person
because such person has in his possession either a theft detection shielding device or a theft detection device remover.
D. Affirmative Defense: A detention as permitted in this section does not constitute an arrest or an unlawful restraint, nor shall it render the merchant liable
to the person so detained.
E. Penalty: Retail theft of property, the full retail value of which does not exceed fifty dollars ($50.00), shall be punishable by a fine of not more than one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and/or a period of community service. (Ord. 1995-43, 7-20-1995)
4-3-27: THEFT:
A. Definitions: The following words shall be defined as follows:
OBTAIN: 1. In relation to property, to bring about a transfer of interest or possession, whether to the offender or to another, and
2. In relation to labor or services, to secure the performance thereof.
OBTAINS OR EXERTS CONTROL: Over property, including, but not limited to, the taking, carrying away, or the sale, conveyance, or transfer of title
to, or interest in, or possession of property.
OWNER: A person, other than the offender, who has possession of or any other interest in the property involved, even though such interest or
possession is unlawful, and without whose consent the offender has no authority to exert control over the property.
PERMANENT DEPRIVATION: Deprive the owner permanently of the beneficial use of the property.
PROPERTY: Anything of value, including, but not limited to: money, commercial instruments, admission or transportation tickets, labor, or services,
or otherwise of value to the owner; things growing on, affixed to, or found on land, or part of or affixed to any building; electricity, gas and water;
telecommunications services; birds, animals and fish, which ordinarily are kept in a state of confinement; food and drink; samples, documents.
STOLEN PROPERTY: Property over which control has been obtained by theft.
B. Committing Theft: A person commits the offense of theft when he/she knowingly:
1. Obtains or exerts unauthorized control over property of the owner; or
2. Obtains by deception control over property of the owner; or
3. Obtains by threat control over property of the owner; or
4. Obtains control over stolen property knowing the property to have been stolen or under such circumstances as would reasonably induce him to
believe that the property was stolen; and
a. Intends to deprive the owner permanently of the use or benefit of the property.
b. Knowingly uses, conceals or abandons the property in such manner as to deprive the owner permanently of such use or benefit.
c. Uses, conceals, or abandons the property knowing such use, concealment or abandonment probably will deprive the owner permanently of such
use or benefit.
C. Theft By Means Of Threat Or Deception: A person commits the offense of theft when he/she obtains the temporary use of property, labor or services of
another which are available only for hire, by means of threat or deception or knowing that such use is without the consent of the person providing the
property, labor or services. (Ord. 2010-15, 8-5-2010)
4-3-28: DRUGS AND DRUG PARAPHERNALIA:
A. Definitions: As used in this section, unless the context otherwise requires:
CANNABIS: Shall have the same meaning ascribed to it in this section as in section 3 of the "cannabis control act"1, and that definition is expressly
adopted and incorporated herein by specific reference.
CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE: Shall have the same meaning ascribed to it in this section as in section 102 of the "Illinois controlled substances act"2,
and that definition is expressly adopted and incorporated herein by specific reference.
DELIVER OR DELIVERY: The actual, constructive or attempted transfer of possession, with or without consideration, whether or not there is an
agency relationship.
DRUG PARAPHERNALIA: All equipment, products and materials of any kind, other than methamphetamine manufacturing materials as defined in
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 154/498
section 10 of the methamphetamine control and community protection act3, which are intended to be used unlawfully in planting, propagating,
cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging,
repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing into the human body cannabis or a controlled
substance in violation of the "Illinois cannabis control act" or the "Illinois controlled substances act". Drug paraphernalia includes, but is not limited to:
1. Kits intended to be used unlawfully in manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing or preparing cannabis or a controlled
substance;
2. Isomerization devices intended to be used unlawfully in increasing the potency of any species of plant which is cannabis or a controlled
substance;
3. Testing equipment intended to be used unlawfully in a private home for identifying or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of
cannabis or controlled substances;
4. Diluents and adulterants intended to be used unlawfully for cutting cannabis or a controlled substance by private persons;
5. Objects primarily intended to be used unlawfully in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing cannabis, cocaine, hashish, or hashish oil into
the human body including, where applicable, the following items:
a. Water pipes;
b. Carburetion tubes and devices;
c. Smoking and carburetion masks;
d. Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials;
e. Carburetor pipes;
f. Electric pipes;
g. Air driven pipes;
h. Chillums;
i. Bongs;
j. Ice pipes or chillers.
6. Any item whose purpose as announced or described by the seller or possessor is for use in violation of this section.
B. Sale, Delivery To Or Possession Of Drug Paraphernalia; Penalty; Public Nuisance:
1. It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly possess an item of drug paraphernalia with the intent to use it in ingesting, inhaling or otherwise
introducing cannabis or a controlled substance into the human body, or for the purpose of preparing cannabis or a controlled substance for that use.
The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to persons legally authorized to possess hypodermic syringes or needles under the hypodermic
syringes and needles act.
In determining intent under this section the court, administrative hearing officer or other trier of fact shall take into consideration the proximity of the
cannabis or controlled substance to the drug paraphernalia or the presence of cannabis or controlled substance on or in the drug paraphernalia.
2. It shall be unlawful for any person to offer for sale, sell, or deliver for any commercial consideration any item of drug paraphernalia.
3. Any store, place, or premises from which or in which any item of drug paraphernalia is kept for sale, offered for sale, sold, or delivered for any
commercial consideration is hereby declared to be a public nuisance.
The village attorney, upon direction of the village president and board of trustees, may commence an action in the circuit court of Cook County to
abate the public nuisance as described herein.
C. Exceptions; Determination: This section shall not apply to:
1. Items marketed for use in the preparation, compounding, packaging, labeling, or other use of cannabis or a controlled substance as an incident to
lawful research, teaching, or chemical analysis and not for sale; or
2. Items marketed for, or historically and customarily used in connection with the planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing,
compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting,
ingesting, or inhaling of tobacco or any other lawful substance.
3. Items exempt under this subsection C include, but are not limited to, garden hoes, rakes, sickles, baggies, tobacco pipes, and cigarette rolling
papers.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 155/498
4. Items listed in the definition of "drug paraphernalia", in subsection A of this section which are marketed for decorative purposes, when such items
have been rendered completely inoperable or incapable of being used for any illicit purpose prohibited by this section, state or federal law.
5. In determining whether or not a particular item is exempt under this subsection, the trier of fact should consider, in addition to all other logically
relevant factors, the following:
a. The general, usual, customary, and historical use to which the item involved has been put;
b. Expert evidence concerning the ordinary or customary use of the item and the effect of any peculiarity in the design or engineering of the device
upon its functioning;
c. Any written instructions accompanying the delivery of the item concerning the purposes or uses to which the item can or may be put;
d. Any oral instructions provided by the seller of the item at the time and place of sale or commercial delivery;
e. Any national or local advertising, concerning the design, purpose or use of the item involved, and the entire context in which such advertising
occurs;
f. The manner, place and circumstances in which the item was displayed for sale, as well as any item or items displayed for sale or otherwise
exhibited upon the premises where the sale was made;
g. Whether the owner or anyone in control of the object is a legitimate supplier of like or related items to the community, such as a licensed distributor
or dealer of tobacco products;
h. The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object in the community.
i. All reasonable and common sense inferences shall be drawn in favor of the legitimacy of any transaction or item suspect under the provisions of
this section.
D. Possession, Use Or Delivery Of Cannabis; Exceptions:
1. It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to possess, use or deliver any substance containing cannabis. This paragraph shall apply only to
possession, use or delivery of such substance containing cannabis in an amount not exceeding thirty grams (30 g). An amount of any substance
containing cannabis in excess of thirty grams (30 g) shall be prosecuted under the provisions of the Illinois criminal code.
2. This subsection D shall not apply to persons authorized to possess, use or deliver cannabis in those amounts and under those circumstances
permitted by the compassionate use of medical cannabis pilot program act4.
E. Seizure And Forfeiture: Any drug paraphernalia or substance containing cannabis that is the subject of a violation of this section shall be subject to
seizure and subject to forfeiture upon a finding of guilty or finding of liable of any person for a violation of this section. Upon appropriate order of court
or administrative hearing officer said drug paraphernalia and/or substance containing cannabis shall be destroyed.
F. Penalty: Any person found to have violated any of the provisions of this section shall be fined in an amount not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more
than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense. (Ord. 2014-24, 9-18-2014)
Chapter 4
WEAPONS CONTROL REGULATIONS
4-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
DEADLY WEAPON: A firearm as hereinabove defined, and including but not limited to knives, axes, hatchets, swords, blackjacks, slingshots, razors, tear
gas, bombs or any object containing noxious liquid, gas or substances.
FIREARM: A pistol, revolver, gun, rifle, shotgun, and small arms of a size and character that may be concealed upon or about the person. (1994 Code)
4-4-2: POSSESSION:
It shall be unlawful to possess firearms and/or ammunition without a lawful firearm owner's identification card. (1994 Code)
4-4-3: PROHIBITION:
It is unlawful to carry, possess, sell or in any way dispossess, loan or to give to any person any deadly weapon or to carry or to possess with the intent to
use the same against another person. (1994 Code)
4-4-4: SALE TO MINORS:
It shall be unlawful to sell or deliver to or procure for any minor under the age of eighteen (18) years any air gun, air pistol, spring gun or spring pistol or
other device which is calculated or intended to propel or project a bullet, pellet, arrow or similar projectile. (1994 Code)
4-4-5: DEFACING IDENTIFICATION MARKS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 156/498
No person shall change, alter, remove or obliterate the name of the make, model, manufacturer's number or other mark of identification on any firearm.
Possession of any firearm upon which any such mark shall have been changed, altered, removed or obliterated shall be prima facie evidence that the
possessor has changed, altered, removed of obliterated the same. (1994 Code)
4-4-6: CARRYING OR DISCHARGING FIREARMS, WEAPONS:
A. Concealed Firearms: No person shall carry concealed on or about his person a pistol, revolver or other firearm. This provision does not apply, however,
to the following officers while engaged in the discharge of their official duties: sheriffs, coroners, constables, policemen or other duly constituted peace
officers; nor to the following employees or agents while engaged in the discharge of the duties of their employment: conductors, baggagemen,
messengers, drivers, watchmen, special agents and police employed by railroad or express companies and persons lawfully summoned by an official
to assist in making arrests or preserving the peace while so engaged in assisting such officer.
B. Concealed Weapons: It shall be unlawful to carry any concealed weapons in the Village without having first secured a license to carry such concealed
weapons under the laws of this State.
C. Discharge Of Firearms: It shall be unlawful to discharge any firearms or air gun in the Village; provided, that this subsection shall not be construed to
prohibit any officer of the law to discharge a firearm in the performance of his duty; nor to any citizen to discharge a firearm when lawfully defending his
person or property. (1994 Code)
4-4-7: CARRYING FIREARMS IN MOTOR VEHICLES:
No person shall carry in a motor vehicle any firearm unless otherwise so authorized. (1994 Code)
4-4-8: FIREARMS IN HOME OR PLACE OF BUSINESS:
The provisions of this Chapter shall not be construed to deprive any citizen of the right to keep in his home or place of business any firearm reasonably
necessary for the protection thereof. (1994 Code)
4-4-9: CONFISCATION OF WEAPONS:
Any deadly weapon or firearm duly adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to have been possessed, worn or carried by any person in violation of
any provision of this Chaptershall be forfeited to the Village and shall be so adjudged as part of the judgment and penalty for any violation wherein a
deadly weapon or firearm shall have been discovered and taken. (1994 Code)
4-4-10: PARENTAL OR ADULT RESPONSIBILITY:
A. Possession By Minor Prohibited: It is declared unlawful for any parent, legal guardian or other person eighteen (18) years of age or older to wilfully,
knowingly or recklessly permit any minor under the age of eighteen (18) years to possess or to come into unsupervised possession of any of the
following items:
1. Bowie, switchblade, ballistic knives or other edged weapons as defined by 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/24-1(a)(1);
2. Metallic knuckles;
3. Martial arts weaponry, including, but not limited to nunchakus and throwing stars;
4. Arrows designed for firing from a bow or crossbow device;
5. Stun gun or taser;
6. Any device or attachment of any kind designed, used or intended for use in silencing the report of a firearm;
7. Machine gun as defined by 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/24-1;
8. Any bomb, bombshell, grenade, bottle or other container containing an explosive substance of over one-fourth (1/4) ounce for like purposes, such as,
but not limited to black powder bombs, molotov cocktails, pipe bombs or artillery projectiles;
9. Firearms, or the ammunition therefor, as defined by 430 Illinois Compiled Statutes 65/1.1;
10. Fireworks, as defined by 425 Illinois Compiled Statutes 30/2.
B. Definitions:
KNOWINGLY: To have a general knowledge of, or reason to know, or a belief or ground for belief which warrants further inquiry or inspection.
RECKLESSLY: To act in a manner or under circumstances such as evince disregard of, or indifference to, consequences involving danger to the
property, life or safety of others.
UNSUPERVISED: A lack of visual or oral oversight coupledwith lack of sufficient proximity to obtain immediate control over the item or minor.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 157/498
WILFUL: Proceeding from a conscious and voluntary intentional motion of the will.
C. Exceptions: It shall not be a violation to this Section if a minor in possession of a firearm holds a valid hunting license or FOID card pursuant to 430
Illinois Compiled Statutes 65/1.1 and 65/2 et seq., neither the minor, nor the person to be charged is otherwise in violation of any law related to the sale
or possession of weapons, including, but not limited to: 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/24-3.1(a)(1), 5/24-3(a) or 5/24-3.3, and the minor is engaged in
hunting, supervised target shooting, or the otherwise legal transportation of a firearm for such purposes. (Ord. 1994-28, 7-7-1994)
4-4-11: PENALTY:
Any person violating the provisions of this Chapter shall be punished by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00). (Ord. 1994-28, 7-7-1994)
Chapter 5
MINORS
4-5-1: CURFEW HOURS FOR MINORS:
A. Definitions: As used in this section, the following words shall be defined as follows:
BODILY INJURY: Injury that harms or creates a substantial risk of harm to one's person or that causes death, disfigurement, loss or impairment of
the function of any bodily member or organ.
CURFEW HOURS: 1. Between one minute after twelve o'clock (12:01) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. on Saturday;
2. Between one minute after twelve o'clock (12:01) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. on Sunday; and
3. Eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. on Sunday to Thursday inclusive and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. the following day/morning.
CUSTODIAN: A person who has attained the age of twenty one (21) years and who is authorized by a parent or guardian to have the care and
custody of a minor.
EMERGENCY: Any unforeseen circumstance or combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for such immediate action as is
necessary to protect a person from imminent threat of bodily injury, loss of life or to protect property from substantial damage. The term includes, but
is not limited to, a fire, natural disaster, an automobile accident, medical emergency, or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent bodily
injury, loss of life or loss of property.
ESTABLISHMENT: Any privately owned place of business operated for a profit to which the public is invited, including, but not limited to, any
restaurant, retail establishment, eatery, place of amusement or entertainment.
GUARDIAN: 1. A person who, by court order, is designated guardian of the person of a minor; or
2. A public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by a court of competent jurisdiction.
MINOR: Any person under seventeen (17) years of age.
OPERATOR: Any individual, firm, association, partnership, or corporation operating, managing, or conducting any establishment. The term includes
the members or partners of an association or partnership and the officers of a corporation.
PARENT: A person who is a natural parent, adoptive parent, or stepparent of a minor.
PUBLIC PLACE: Any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access, including, but not limited to, streets, highways, public
ways and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transport facilities, shops, parks, places of entertainment or
amusement, arenas, stadiums, and restaurants.
REMAIN: 1. To linger or stay; or
2. Fail to leave the premises of an establishment when requested to do so by a police officer or the owner, operator, or other person in control of
the establishment.
B. Offenses: It shall be unlawful for:
1. A minor to remain in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the village during curfew hours; or
2. A parent, guardian or custodian to knowingly permit, or by insufficient control allow, the minor to remain in any public place or on the premises of any
establishment within the village during curfew hours; or
3. The owner, operator, or any employee of an establishment to knowingly allow a minor to remain upon the premises of the establishment during
curfew hours.
C. Defenses:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 158/498
1. It shall be a defense to prosecution under subsection B of this section that the minor was:
a. Accompanied by the minor's parent, guardian or custodian;
b. In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;
c. Engaged in an employment activity in which such minor may lawfully engage under the laws of the state of Illinois, or traveling to or returning
home from the employment activity, without any unnecessary detour or stop;
d. Involved in an emergency;
e. On the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence, that of a guardian or custodian, or abutting the residence of a next door neighbor if the neighbor
does not object to the minor's presence;
f. Attending an official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the village of Streamwood, a civic
organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor, or going to or returning home from, without any detour or stop, an
official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the village of Streamwood, a civic organization, or
another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor;
g. Exercising first amendment rights protected by the United States constitution or article 1, sections 3, 4 and 5 of the constitution of the state of
Illinois, or both, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the right of assembly; or
h. Married or previously married or has been declared an emancipated minor in accordance with the Illinois Compiled Statutes.
2. It is a defense to prosecution under subsection B of this section that the owner, operator, or employee of an establishment promptly notified the
police department that a minor was present on the premises of the establishment during curfew hours and the minor refused when first requested to
leave the premises.
D. Enforcement: Prior to taking any enforcement action under this section, a police officer shall inquire as to the apparent offender's age and reason for
being in the public place. No citation shall be issued and no arrest shall be made under this section unless the officer reasonably believes that an
offense has occurred and that, based on any response of the minor and all other circumstances known to the officer at the time, no defense as set forth
in subsection C of this section exists.
E. Penalties: Any person who violates a provision of this section shall be fined in an amount not to exceed seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). (Ord.
2004-32, 5-20-2004)
4-5-2: PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY; FAILURE TO RESTRAIN MINORS FROM ACTS OF VANDALISM:
A. Definitions: As used in this section, unless the context otherwise requires, the terms specified shall have the meanings ascribed to them:
LEGAL GUARDIAN: A person appointed guardian or given custody of a minor by a circuit court of the state, but does not include a person appointed
guardian or given custody of a minor under the juvenile court act.
MINOR: A person who is above the age of eleven (11) years, but not yet nineteen (19) years of age.
ORDINARY PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY AND CONTROL: Shall be deemed to be that parental responsibility and control which would ordinarily be
exercised by reasonable parents or guardians under similar circumstances.
PROPERTY: Shall include any real estate including improvements thereon and any tangible personalty.
B. Parental Responsibility: The parent or legal guardian of an unemancipated minor residing with such parent or legal guardian shall exercise ordinary and
reasonable parental responsibility to prevent said minor from causing injury to any person or property through wilful or malicious acts. The parent or
legal guardian of an unemancipated minor residing with said parent or legal guardian shall be presumed to have violated this section, upon the
occurrence of the events described in subsections B1, B2 and B3 of this section:
1. An unemancipated minor residing with said parent or legal guardian shall either be adjudicated to be in violation of any ordinance, law or statute
prohibiting wilful and malicious acts causing injury to a person or property, or shall have incurred nonjudicial sanctions from another official agency
resulting from an admission of guilt or violation of any ordinance, law or statute prohibiting wilful and malicious acts causing injury to a person or
property; and
2. That notice of said adjudication or nonjudicial sanction shall have been mailed by the village to the parent or legal guardian; and
3. That within one year of the mailing of the notice set forth in subsection B2 of this section, said minor commits another offense which results in an
adjudication or nonjudicial sanction as described in subsection B1 of this section.
C. Restitution: Any municipal corporation, county, township, village or any other political subdivision or department of the state or any person, partnership,
corporation, association or any incorporated or unincorporated religious, education or charitable organization is entitled to full restitution for injuries
caused to its person or property by an unemancipated minor from any person convicted of any violation of the provisions of this section because of the
actions of said unemancipated minor, but no recovery shall exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and, further provided, that nothing in this section
shall be deemed to limit or alter the common law or statutory rights of any injured party. (1994 Code)
D. Penalties: Any person convicted of a violation of the provisions of this section shall be fined no less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense and, in addition to the fine, the court shall find and fix the amount of restitution to be paid (subject to the
limitation of subsection C of this section and direct the manner of payment, subject to the limitation imposed by subsection C of this section). (Ord.
1998-7, 1-22-1998)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 159/498
4-5-3: OFFENSES RELATING TO CHILDREN:
A. Exhibition Of Children; Endangering Life Or Health:
1. No person having the care, custody or control of any child under the age of fourteen (14) years shall cause or permit any such child to be exhibited,
used or employed, or shall apprentice or let out or otherwise dispose of any such child for any obscene, indecent or immoral purpose, exhibition or
practice whatsoever; nor shall any such person cause or permit any such child to be in or about any business, exhibition or vocation which is
injurious to the health or dangerous to the life or limb of such child, or cause, procure or encourage any such child to engage therein, nor shall any
such person wilfully cause or permit any child to be placed in any situation in which its life or health may be endangered.
2. It shall also be unlawful for any person to sell, give, furnish or offer to sell, give or furnish any cigars, cigarettes, cigarette papers or wrappers, or
tobacco products or tobacco in any form to anyone under eighteen (18) years of age, except upon the written order of a parent or guardian of such
minor.
3. It shall also be unlawful for any person to take, receive, hire, employ, use, exhibit or have in his custody any child under the age of fourteen (14)
years for the purpose of employing such child in the manner expressly prohibited in this subsection.
B. Cruelty To Children: Any person who is guilty of cruelty to any child under the age of fourteen (14) by cruelly beating, torturing, overworking, mutilating
or causing or knowingly allowing the same to be done; or by unnecessarily failing to provide any child in his charge or custody with proper food, drink,
shelter or raiment; or by abandoning any child; or by wilfully or unnecessarily exposing any child to the inclemency of the weather, by wilfully or
unnecessarily in any manner injuring any child in health or limb shall be punished as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code.
C. Children On Streets At Nighttime: It shall be unlawful for any parent, guardian or other person having the legal custody of a minor child under the age of
twelve (12) years, to knowingly permit such child to be upon the public streets, or other public grounds of the village alone and without an adult
attendant after sunset and before sunrise.
D. Enticing Minors To Enter Vehicle: It shall be unlawful for any person to entice, influence or persuade any minor, except any minor in his charge or
custody, to enter a vehicle under any conditions in this village. (1994 Code)
4-5-4: TRUANCY PROHIBITED:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person between the ages of seven (7) years and seventeen (17) years (unless the child has already graduated from high
school), or for any person registered in any of grades 1 through 12 and who is enrolled in any public, private or parochial school, to be absent from
school whether or not that person is at his or her own home or at the home of another or present in any public place, building, street, or assembly in the
village of Streamwood, other than school, while school is in session during the regular school term, unless he or she is:
1. Traveling to or from school by the most direct route;
2. Accompanied by a parent, legal guardian, or school official;
3. Engaged in approved school related activities;
4. Engaged in lawful employment, provided that the school board of the public school district in which the child resides has recommended the
employment and has certified the facts concerning such employment;
5. Physically or mentally unable to attend school and such disability has been certified in accordance with section 5/26-1(2) of the Illinois school code1;
or
6. Otherwise absent from school for valid cause. "Valid cause" shall be defined as illness, observance of a religious holiday or service, death in the
immediate family, family emergency, such other situation beyond the control of the student as determined by the board of education, or such other
circumstances which cause reasonable concern to the parent or legal guardian for the safety or health of the student.
B. Any police officer who witnesses a person whom the officer reasonably believes to be in violation of this section may stop and detain the person for the
purpose of verifying the person's identity, age, school enrollment and authority to be absent from school. The police officer shall immediately inform the
person of the reason for the detention and that he or she will be released upon verification of authorization to be absent from school. Other than to
transport the student to school or to his/her parent or legal guardian, the person shall not be removed from the scene of the investigatory stop unless
he or she refuses to provide the officer with the necessary information. If the officer determines that the person is in violation of this section, he shall, if
practical, transport the offender to school authorities or to the child's parent or legal guardian.
C. Any officer who receives a report from any school attendance officer or other school official that a student is absent from school without notice of
absenteeism having been given to the school shall investigate the nature of the absenteeism. Upon completion of the investigation, the student and/or
parent, guardian or custodian, as the case may be, shall be cited for a violation of this section unless it is determined that said absence is a result of
any reason set forth in subsections A1 through A6 of this section.
D. Any person over the age of thirteen (13) years violating the provisions of this section shall be fined in an amount not to exceed seventy five dollars
($75.00) for a first offense and an amount not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each subsequent offense. If the violator is under the age of
thirteen (13) years, the parent, guardian or custodian of the truant shall be subject to the imposition of the fine(s) as hereinabove set forth. In addition to
a fine, the violator or parent, guardian or custodian of a violator under the age of thirteen (13) years may be ordered to perform a reasonable period of
community service. (Ord. 2010-15, 8-5-2010)
4-5-5: POSSESSION OF ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 160/498
It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of twenty one (21) years to consume, possess, purchase or accept delivery of alcoholic liquor. The
possession and dispensing or consumption by a person under twenty one (21) years of age of alcoholic liquor in the performance of a religious service or
ceremony, or the consumption by a person under twenty one (21) years of age under the direct supervision and approval of the parents or parent of those
persons standing in loco parentis of such person under twenty one (21) years of age in the privacy of a home is not prohibited by this section. (1994 Code)
4-5-6: HARBORING OF RUNAWAYS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly provide aid, transportation or shelter, without the knowledge and consent of the parents, of an
unemancipated minor. It shall also be unlawful to fail to notify the local law enforcement authorities of the minor's name or whereabouts when a missing
person report has been filed with the local law enforcement agency. (1994 Code)
4-5-7: SAFE SCHOOL ZONES:
It is unlawful for any person to distribute on any public sidewalk, street or way, unsolicited material of any kind within one hundred feet (100') of the
entrance or exit of any elementary school property between the hours of seven forty five o'clock (7:45) A.M. to eight forty o'clock (8:40) A.M. and two
o'clock (2:00) P.M. to three o'clock (3:00) P.M.; junior high or middle school between the hours of eight forty o'clock (8:40) A.M. to nine o'clock (9:00) A.M.
and three ten o'clock (3:10) P.M. to three thirty o'clock (3:30) P.M.; or high school between the hours of seven thirty o'clock (7:30) A.M. to seven forty five
o'clock (7:45) A.M. and two fifty five o'clock (2:55) P.M. to three ten o'clock (3:10) P.M. on days in which classes are in session. (Ord. 1994-17, 4-21-1994)
4-5-8: POSSESSION OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS/ELECTRONIC CIGARETTES/LIQUID NICOTINE:
It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to consume, possess, purchase or accept delivery of electronic cigarettes, liquid
nicotine, cigarettes, cigars or tobacco products in any form. (Ord. 2014-22, 9-4-2014)
4-5-9: PENALTY:
A. Unless otherwise provided herein, any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined as set forth in section 1-4-1 of this code. A separate
offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
B. Any person under the age of eighteen (18) years accused of a violation of section 4-5-8 of this chapter, for which a court appearance is not required,
may settle and compromise that violation by paying to the village the fine of twenty five dollars ($25.00) within ten (10) days from the date the alleged
violation occurred or by paying to the village the sum of forty dollars ($40.00) subsequent to said ten (10) day period and prior to thirty (30) days
thereafter. Such settlement shall be made by delivering the violator's copy of the ticket and cash, a check or a money order made payable to the village
at 301 E. Irving Park Road, Streamwood. If the violator fails to pay the fine as provided in this subsection prior to the thirtieth day after the issuance of
the citation, then the violator shall be subject to the penalty provisions set forth in section 1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 1998-52, 9-24-1998)
Chapter 6
FAIR HOUSING
(Rep. by Ord. 2000-18, 4-6-2000)
Chapter 7
BURGLAR AND HOLD-UP ALARM SYSTEM
4-7-1: SHORT TITLE:
This Chapter may be cited and shall be known as the BURGLAR AND HOLD-UP ALARM SYSTEMS CHAPTER. (1994 Code)
4-7-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings given herein. When not inconsistent
with the context, words used in the present tense include the future. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory or discretionary.
ALARM SYSTEM: An assembly of equipment and devices or a single device such as a solid state unit which plugs directly into a one hundred ten (110)
volt alternating current (AC) line, arranged to signal the presence of a hazard requiring urgent attention and to which police are intended to respond. Fire
alarm systems and alarm systems which monitor temperature, smoke, humidity or any other condition not directly related to the detection of an
unauthorized intrusion into a premises or an attempted robbery at a premises are specifically excluded from the provisions of this Chapter.
ALARM USER OR USER: Any person on whose premises an alarm system is maintained within the Village except for alarm systems on motor vehicles or
proprietary systems. Excluded from this definition and from the coverage of this Chapter are online station personnel and persons who use alarm systems
to alert or signal persons within the premises in which the alarm system is located of an attempted unauthorized intrusion or hold-up attempt. If such a
system, however, employs an audible signal emitting sounds or a flashing light or beacon designed to signal persons outside the premises, such system
shall be within the definition of "alarm system", as that term is used in this Chapter, and shall be subject to this Chapter.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 161/498
AUTOMATIC DIALING SERVICE: An alarm system which automatically sends over public telephone lines, by direct connection or otherwise, a prerecorded
message or coded signal indicating the existence of the emergency situation the alarm system is designed to detect.
CENTRAL STATION: An office to which remote alarm and supervisory signaling devices are connected, where operators supervise circuits or where
guards are maintained continuously to investigate signals.
COMMUNICATIONS CONSOLE: The instrumentation or an alarm console at the receiving terminal of a signal line which, through both visual and audible
signals, indicates activation of an alarm system at a particular location, or which indicates line trouble.
DIRECT CONNECT: An alarm system which has the capability of transmitting system signals to and receiving them at the Streamwood Police Department
communication center.
FALSE ALARM: A. The activation of an alarm system through mechanical failure, malfunction, improper installation, or negligence of the user or of his
employees or agents of an alarm system; or
B. Any signal or oral communication transmitted to the Police Department requesting, or expecting, or resulting in a response on the part of the Police
Department when in fact there has been no unauthorized intrusion or attempted unauthorized intrusion into a premises and no attempted robbery or
burglary at a premises; or
C. Excluded from this definition are activations of alarm systems caused by power failures, hurricanes, tornados, earthquakes, and similar conditions.
INTERCONNECT: To connect an alarm system to a voicegrade telephone line, either directly or through a mechanical device that uses a standard
telephone, for the purpose of using the telephone line to transmit an emergency message upon the activation of the alarm system.
POLICE CHIEF: The Chief of Police of the Village or his designated representative.
POLICE OR POLICE DEPARTMENT: The Village Police Department, or any authorized agent thereof.
PUBLIC NUISANCE: Anything which annoys, injures, or endangers the comfort, repose, health, or safety of a considerable number of persons or of any
community or neighborhood. (1994 Code)
4-7-3: ADMINISTRATIVE RULES:
The Police Chief may promulgate such rules as may be necessary for the implementation of this Chapter. (1994 Code)
4-7-4: INTERCONNECTION TO POLICE DEPARTMENT:
Automatic dialing devices may not be connected to telephone numbers at the Police Department. (1994 Code)
4-7-5: INTERMEDIARY SERVICES:
Any person using an automatic dialing device may have the device interconnected to a telephone line transmitting directly into:
A. A central station;
B. An answering service; or
C. Any privately-owned or privately-operated facility or terminal. (1994 Code)
4-7-6: DIRECT COMMUNICATIONS TO POLICE DEPARTMENT:
A. Alarm systems may be connected directly to the communications console in the Police Department.
B. In accordance with normal bidding practices in effect in the Village, the Village Manager shall have the authority to request bids from alarm companies
in order to furnish, at no cost to the Village, a communications console and necessary telephone lines which are compatible to the receipt of alarm
signals from alarm systems whose lines are connected to the Police Department. Each of the bids shall set forth specifications with respect to the
communications console. Such services shall be set forth in the form of a written contract between the alarm company and each alarm user. The
provisions of this subsection relate solely to the aforementioned communications console, connections to said console by alarm users, and fees and
charges related to the installation and maintenance of the console. Any alarm user may contract with any alarm company of his choice for the sale,
installation, maintenance and servicing of the alarm system to be installed on his premises.
C. The alarm user, or the alarm business contracting for servicing the alarm user's system, shall be responsible for obtaining the leased telephone line
between the alarm user's premises and the alarm receiving equipment at the Police Department and for furnishing the appropriate interface equipment,
if required, in order to provide an input signal which is compatible with the receiving equipment used tooperate the communications console.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 162/498
D. The provisions of Section 4-7-9 of this Chapter concerning false alarms shall apply to all alarm users or persons having direct connect systems. (1994
Code)
4-7-7: CONTROL OF SIGNALS EMITTED BY ALARM SYSTEMS:
A. Every alarm user shall submit to the Police Chief the names and telephone numbers of at least two (2) persons who can be reached at any time, day or
night, and who are authorized to respond to an emergency signal transmitted by an alarm system, and who can open the premises wherein the alarm
system is installed.
B. All alarm systems directly connected to the police station may be equipped with a test device which will give a ten (10) second delay or longer prior to
alarm system activation in order to warn the alarm user of an open alarm circuit.
C. All alarm systems installed after the effective date of this Chapter which use an audible horn or bell shall be equipped with a device that will shut off
such horn or bell within twenty (20) minutes after activation of the alarm system.
D. Any alarm system emitting a continuous and uninterrupted signal for more than thirty (30) minutes which cannot be shut off or otherwise curtailed due to
the absence or unavailability of the alarm user or those persons designated by him under subsection A of this Section, and which disturbs the peace,
comfort, or repose of a community, a neighborhood, or a considerable number of persons where the alarm is located, shall constitute a public nuisance.
Upon receiving complaints regarding such a continuous and uninterrupted signal, the Police Chief shall endeavor to contact the alarm user, or
members of his immediate family, or those persons designated by the alarm user in subsection A of this Section in an effort to abate the nuisance. The
Police Chief shall cause to be recorded the names and addresses of all complainants and the time each complaint was made. In the event the Police
Chief is unable to contact the alarm user or if the aforementioned persons cannot or will not curtail the audible signal being emitted by the alarm
system, the Police Chief shall take reasonable steps to abate the nuisance. (1994 Code)
4-7-8: TESTING OF EQUIPMENT:
No alarm system designed to transmit emergency messages directly to the Police Department shall be worked on, tested, or demonstrated without first
obtaining permission from the Police Chief. Permission is not required to test or demonstrate alarm devices not transmitting emergency messagesdirectly
to the Police Department. An unauthorized test constitutes a false alarm. (1994 Code)
4-7-9: FALSE ALARMS:
A. When emergency messages are received by the Police Department that evidence false alarms, the Police Chief shall take such action as may be
appropriate under subsections B through E of this Section, and, when so required by the terms of the aforementioned subsections, order that use of an
alarm system be discontinued.
B. After the Police Department has recorded three (3) separate false alarms within the calendar year from an alarm system, the Police Chief shall notify
the alarm user, in person, by telephone, or in writing, of such fact and require the said user to submit, within fifteen (15) days after receipt of such
notice, a report describing efforts to discover and eliminate the cause or causes of the false alarms. If said user, on the basis of absence from the
Village, or any other reasonable basis, request an extension of time for filing the report, the Police Chief may extend the fifteen (15) day period for a
reasonable time. If the user fails to submit such report within fifteen (15) days or within a reasonable extension period, the Police Chief shall order that
use of the alarm system be discontinued. Any such discontinuance shall be effectuated within fifteen (15) days from the date of receipt of the Police
Chief's order.
C. In the event that the Police Chief determines that a report submitted in accord with subsection B of this Section is unsatisfactory, or that the alarm user
has failed to show by the report that he has taken or will take reasonable steps to eliminate or reduce false alarms, then the Police Chief shall order
that use of the alarm system be discontinued as in subsection B of this Section.
D. In the event that the Police Department records five (5) false alarms within the calendar year from an alarm system, the Police Chief may order that the
user of the alarm system discontinue use of the alarm for the calendar year, but for not more than six (6) months from the date the alarm was
disconnected. In the event that the Police Department records eight (8) false alarms within the calendar year from an alarm system, the Police Chief
shall order that the user of the alarm system discontinue use of the alarm system for not less than six (6) months from the date the alarm was
disconnected, nor more than twelve (12) months.
E. Any user of an alarm system which transmits false alarms shall be assessed an administrative fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00) for each false alarm in
excess of three (3) occurring within the calendar year. All fees assessed hereunder shall be paid to the Village for deposit in the General Fund. Upon
failure of the user of an alarm system to pay two (2)consecutive fees assessed hereunder within thirty (30) days of assessment, the Police Chief shall
order that the user discontinue use of the alarm system in accordance with subsection B of this Section.
F. Any user of an alarm system who has, in accord with this Section, been ordered by the Police Chief to discontinue use of an alarm system may appeal
the order of discontinuance to the Village Manager. Notice of appeal shall be filed with the Village Clerk within ten (10) days of the date of the order of
discontinuance. Thereafter the Village Manager shall consider the merits of the appeal, and in connection therewith shall have evidence presented by
all interested persons. After hearing such evidence, the Village Manager may affirm, vacate, or modify the order of discontinuance. (1994 Code)
4-7-10: PENALTIES:
A. The following acts and omissions shall constitute violations of this Chapter punishable by a fine not exceeding fifty dollars ($50.00):
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 163/498
1. Failure to obey an order of the Police Chief to discontinue use of an alarm system, after exhaustion of the right of appeal;
2. Interconnection of an automatic dialing device to any telephone numbers at the Police Department;
3. Failure to pay two (2) or more consecutive administrative fees assessed under this Chapter within thirty (30) days from the date of the assessment;
4. Failure to comply with the requirements of subsections 4-7-7A through D of this Chapter.
B. Each day during which the aforesaid violations continue shall constitute a separate offense. (1994 Code)
Chapter 8
NORTHWEST CENTRAL 9-1-1 SYSTEM
4-8-1: INTERGOVERNMENTAL COOPERATION AGREEMENT:
The Village hereby approves and enters into the intergovernmental cooperation agreement with the Villages of Arlington Heights, Buffalo Grove, Elk Grove
Village, Mount Prospect, Palatine, and Prospect Heights and any other municipalities as shall from time to time elect to participate in the Joint Emergency
Telephone System Agency, designated as the Northwest Central 9-1-1 System, pursuant to section 15.4 of the Act, a true and correct copy of said
agreement, marked Exhibit A, is attached to Ordinance 1997-10 on file in the office of the Village Clerk, and made a part of this Chapter by reference.
(Ord. 1997-10, 3-6-1997)
4-8-2: SYSTEM AND BYLAWS ADOPTED:
The 9-1-1 system bylaws are hereby approved and adopted, a true and correct copy of which, marked Exhibit B, are attached to Ordinance 1997-10 on file
in the office of the Village Clerk, and made a part of this Chapter by reference. (Ord. 1997-10, 3-6-1997)
4-8-3: DISPOSITION OF SURCHARGE REVENUE:
All surcharge revenue collected pursuant to Resolution 1989-37 shall be remitted by the affected telecommunications carrier(s) to the 9-1-1 system. (Ord.
1997-10, 3-6-1997)
4-8-4: TERMS FOR MEMBERSHIP ADOPTED:
The terms and conditions for membership in the 9-1-1 system, marked Exhibit C, attached to Ordinance 1997-10 on file in the office of the Village Clerk,
are hereby approved and adopted and made a part of this Chapter by reference. (Ord. 1997-10, 3-6-1997)
4-8-5: VILLAGE REPRESENTATIVE:
The Village Manager is hereby designated to be the Village representative on the 9-1-1 System Board of Directors. (Ord.1997-10, 3-6-1997)
Chapter 9
EMERGENCY ENERGY PLAN
4-9-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires:
CONTROL AREA: An electrical system bounded by interconnection (tie line) metering and telemetry. It controls generation directly to maintain its
interchange schedule with other control areas and contributes to frequency regulation of the interconnection.
CONTROL AREA EMERGENCY: Means that control area is at risk of having to shed firm load, having taken or committed to take all feasible mitigating
action short of shedding firm load and firm sales.
CONTROLLED ROTATING INTERRUPTION OF ELECTRICAL SERVICE: The implementation of a plan to curtail electric service to firm load customers
for a short period of time and rotating this curtailment of electric service through different areas within the electric utility's service territory in a situation
where the demand has exceeded or is at significant risk of exceeding the supply of electricity available to the electric utility. The action of an electric utility
to interrupt or curtail electric service to a customer participating in or taking service under an interruptible or curtailable rate is not included in this definition
of a "controlled rotating interruption of electric service".
ELECTRIC UTILITY COMPANY OR ELECTRIC UTILITY: Any person or entity engaged in the business of distributing, transmitting, or otherwise delivering
electricity, regardless of its source, for use or consumption within the Village. This term shall not include any person or entity that delivers electricity to
fewer than fifty (50) customers within the Village.
EMERGENCY ENERGY PLAN: The portions of the emergency load conservation procedures, which immediately precede and include the controlled
rotating interruption of electrical service to firm load customers within the Village. The emergency energy plan shall include the following steps:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 164/498
A. A request for emergency help from neighboring utilities;
B. A declaration of a control area emergency;
C. A public appeal for voluntary curtailment of electricity use; and
D. Implementation of the plan for controlled rotating interruptions of electrical service.
EMERGENCY LOAD CONSERVATION PROCEDURES: A planned course of action developed by an electric utility company to be implemented in
emergency situations when the demand for electricity exceeds, or is at significant risk of exceeding, the supply of electricity available to the electric utility.
(Ord. 1999-21, 6-3-1999)
4-9-2: SUBMITTAL:
A. Every electric utility company must have adopted an emergency energy plan no later than thirty (30) days after the effective date of this Chapter, or
within thirty (30) days after becoming an electric utility company, whichever is later. Every such electric utility company shall submit to the Chief of
Police an emergency energy plan adopted by the company no later than thirty (30) days after the effective date of this Chapter, or within twenty four
(24) hours of the time the plan is adopted, whichever is later. The electric utility company shall be required to examine and update as needed its
emergency energy plan at least annually. The electric utility company shall notify the Chief of Police in writing of any material revisions to its plan and
the rationale for said revisions within five (5) business days of the time said revisions are made.
B. The emergency energy plan shall include, at a minimum, information detailing:
1. Circumstances that would require the implementation of the emergency energy plan;
2. Stages of the emergency energy plan;
3. The approximate geographic limits of each outage area provided for in the emergency energy plan;
4. The approximate number of customers within each outage area provided for in the emergency energy plan;
5. The police facilities, fire stations, hospitals, nursing homes, schools, daycare centers, senior citizen centers, community health centers, dialysis
centers, community mental health centers, correctional facilities, storm water and wastewater treatment or pumping facilities, and water
pumpingstations that have been identified by the Village and persons on life-support systems that are known to the company, and that could be
affected by controlled rotating interruptions of electric service under the emergency energy plan; and
6. The anticipated sequence and duration of intentional interruptions of electric service to each outage area under the emergency energy plan. (Ord.
1999-21, 6-3-1999)
4-9-3: REVIEW:
A. Upon submittal of the emergency energy plan to the Village, the Village shall review the emergency energy plan in order to determine if the emergency
energy plan is complete and to assure appropriate coordination with public health and safety agencies. The Village may reject the emergency energy
plan if it does not contain all the information required under subsection 4-9-2B of this Chapter, in which case the Village shall notify the electric utility
company in writing of said rejection and the reasons therefor. The electric utility company shall thereafter submit a complete emergency energy plan to
the Village no later than thirty (30) days after such notice is sent by the Village.
B. The Village and the electric utility shall work cooperatively to:
1. Identify customers and facilities for which a controlled rotating interruption of electric service would require heightened response by Village public
health and safety agencies,
2. Mitigate the potential impact of the plan on public health and safety, and
3. Mitigate the potential impact of the plan on the duties of the Village's public health and safety agencies. (Ord. 1999-21, 6-3-1999)
4-9-4: IMPLEMENTATION:
A. Whenever an electric utility company determines that it may be necessary to implement a controlled rotating interruption of electrical service due to the
demand for electricity exceeding, or being at significant risk of exceeding, the supply of electricity available to the electric utility company, the electric
utility company shall do the following:
1. Take appropriate action in preparation for implementing a controlled rotating interruption of electric service and notify the appropriate electric utility
company personnel, and
2. Notify the Chief of Police that the electric utility company will be implementing its emergency energy plan. Thenotification shall be made pursuant to
a notification procedure approved by the Chief of Police. The Chief of Police may waive the notice requirement to accommodate exigent
circumstances.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 165/498
B. Subsequent to providing the notice as required above, an electric utility company shall reasonably and separately advise the designated Village officials
when it implements each of the steps of the emergency energy plan. Such steps shall include the following:
1. A request for emergency help from neighboring utilities;
2. A declaration of a control area emergency;
3. A public appeal for voluntary curtailment of electricity use.
C. The electric utility company shall give a separate notice to the Chief of Police, immediately upon the determination that there will be a controlled rotating
interruption of electric service pursuant to the emergency energy plan. The notification shall include the areas to be interrupted; the sequence and
estimated duration of the service outage for each area; and the affected feeders and number of affected customers in each area. Whenever practical,
the notification shall be made at least two (2) hours prior to the time of the outages, and in no case shall the notification be made less than thirty (30)
minutes prior to the outages, if the company is aware that controlled rotating interruptions may be required.
D. Notification required by this Section shall be in addition to any notification requirements set forth in any applicable franchise agreement or franchise
ordinance, or as may be required by applicable Federal or State law or regulation. (Ord. 1999-21, 6-3-1999)
4-9-5: VIOLATIONS; ENFORCEMENT:
Any electric utility company that knowingly violates this Chapter or any rules promulgated hereunder shall be subject to a fine of not less than two
thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) and not more than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) for each offense. Each day that a violation continues shall
constitute a separate and distinct offense.
The Village may apply to any court of competent jurisdiction for an injunction or order to compel the other party to comply with the provisions of this
Chapter. (Ord. 1999-21, 6-3-1999)
4-9-6: CONSTRUCTION:
Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to preclude orinterfere with the implementation by an electric utility company of measures necessary to assure
the provision of adequate, efficient, reliable and environmentally safe service, as required by the Illinois Public Utilities Act1. Nothing set forth in this
Chapter shall be deemed to modify the terms of any existing franchise agreement or franchise ordinance otherwise applicable to any electric utility
company, or to excuse any performance required by such agreement or ordinance, or to limit any authority that may be exercised pursuant to such
agreement or ordinance, or to limit any remedy that may be available under such agreement or ordinance. (Ord. 1999-21, 6-3-1999)
4-9-7: SEVERABILITY:
Should any section, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase or word of this Chapter be declared invalid or unconstitutional by a court or agency of competent
jurisdiction, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining words, phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs or sections of this
Chapter, since the same would have been enacted by the Board of Trustees without the incorporation in this Chapter of any such invalid or
unconstitutional word, phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. (Ord. 1999-21, 6-3-1999)
Title 5
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
Chapter 1
GENERAL TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
5-1-1: ILLINOIS VEHICLE CODE ADOPTED:
There is hereby adopted by the Village of Streamwood and made a part of this Code and incorporated herein by reference for the purpose of regulating
and controlling traffic on the streets within the Village the Illinois Vehicle Code, being 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-100 et seq.; together with all
amendments thereto that may from time to time be adopted. (Ord. 2017-23, 9-21-2017)
5-1-2: SPEED RESTRICTIONS:
A. It shall be unlawful to drive any motor vehicle on any street not under the jurisdiction of the Illinois State Department of Public Works and Buildings or
the County, in an urban district within the Village at a speed in excess of twenty five (25) miles per hour.
Provided, that if the President and Board of Trustees, by ordinance or resolution, set other limits as provided by statute after an engineering or traffic
survey, then such limits shall govern the rate of speed on the streets indicated in such ordinances. The Chief of Police shall post appropriate signs
showing such speed limits.
Provided further, that the speed of all vehicles of the second division, as defined by statute having two (2) or more solid tires shall not exceed ten (10)
miles per hour.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 166/498
B. The fact that the speed of a vehicle does not exceed the applicable maximum speed limit does not relieve the driver from the duty to decrease speed
when approaching and crossing an intersection, when approaching and going around a curve, when approaching a hillcrest, when traveling upon any
narrow or winding roadway or when special hazards exist with respect to pedestrians or other traffic by reason of weather or highway conditions; and
speed shall be decreased as may be necessary to avoid colliding with any person or vehicle on or entering the highway in compliance with legal
requirements and the duty of all persons to use due care.
C. It shall be unlawful to drive any vehicle on any street or highway within the Village under the jurisdiction of the State Department of Public Works and
Buildings, or of the County, at a speed exceeding that lawfully set for such streets.
D. It shall be unlawful to drive any motor vehicle on the following streets in excess of the speed shown: (1994 Code)
Alexander Avenue 25 miles per hour
Club Tree Drive 20 miles per hour
East Oltendorf Road 25 miles per hour
Garden Circle 25 miles per hour
Greenmeadows Boulevard 25 miles per hour
Hastings Mill Road 25 miles per hour
Huntington Drive 25 miles per hour
Lacy Avenue 25 miles per hour
McKool Avenue 25 miles per hour
Meadow Lane 25 miles per hour
Miller Avenue 25 miles per hour
North Oltendorf Road 25 miles per hour
North Park Boulevard 25 miles per hour
Old Church Road 35 miles per hour
Park Boulevard from Irving Park
Road to Schaumburg Road
25 miles per hour
Parkside Circle 25 miles per hour
Plymouth Drive 25 miles per hour
Ridge Circle 25 miles per hour
Somerset Drive 25 miles per hour
South Oltendorf Road 25 miles per hour
Streamwood Boulevard 25 miles per hour
Sunnydale Boulevard 25 miles per hour
Tall Tree 20 miles per hour
Tanglewood Drive 25 miles per hour
Timber Trail 25 miles per hour
Valley Lane 25 miles per hour
Walnut Drive 25 miles per hour
Williamsburg Road 25 miles per hour
Woodland Heights Boulevard 25 miles per hour
(1994 Code; amd. Ord. 2013-22, 6-20-2013)
E. No person shall drive a motor vehicle at a speed in excess of twenty (20) miles per hour while passing a school zone or while traveling upon any public
thoroughfare on or across which children pass going to and from school during school days when schoolchildren are present. Appropriate signs shall
be posted to indicate this restriction.
F. No person shall drive a motor vehicle at a speed in excess of fifteen (15) miles per hour within the village hall complex which presently encompasses
that property located south of Irving Park Road with the common address of 301 E. Irving Park Road. (1994 Code)
5-1-3: TRUCKS PROHIBITED ON CERTAIN STREETS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 167/498
It shall be unlawful to drive any truck, except for the purpose of making a delivery and then for one block on any street so designated and properly
signposted. (1994 Code)
5-1-4: LIMITED LOAD STREETS:
It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle on any residential street in the village, being any street located in a residentially zoned district as established by
the zoning ordinance of the village, when the gross weight of the vehicle exceeds five (5) tons. Where lower limits are imposed by village ordinance and
signs indicating such limitations are posted, it shall be unlawful to operate a vehicle in excess of such weight on such street, except for the purpose of
making delivery or picking up a load, in which case such vehicle may be driven on such street for not more than the minimum distance necessary for the
purpose.
This section shall not apply to the following streets which shall be regulated by weight limits applicable from 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/15-111: (1994
Code)
Bonded Parkway
Bourbon Parkway
Brandy Parkway
Burgundy Parkway
Buttitta Drive; from Barrington Road to Phoenix Lake Avenue
Francis Drive
North Avenue; from Lake Street to Prospect Avenue
Park Avenue; from Irving Park Road to Cambridge Avenue
Park Avenue; from Lake Street to Roma Jean Parkway
Phoenix Lane Avenue; from Yorkshire Drive to Buttitta Drive
Ramblewood Drive
Roma Jean Parkway
Sangra Court
Yorkshire Drive
(Ord. 2005-56, 11-17-2005)
5-1-5: TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS, PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this title, where there is no other provision to the contrary, shall be fined as set forth in section 1-4-1 of this code.
(1994 Code)
5-1-6: SOUND AMPLIFICATION DEVICES:
A. No driver or owner of any motor vehicle within the village shall operate or permit operation of any sound amplification system which can be heard
outside the vehicle from seventy five (75) or more feet when the vehicle is being operated upon a street, highway or roadway unless such system is
being operated to request assistance or warn of a hazardous situation. This section does not apply to authorized emergency vehicles.
B. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be issued a compliance warning citation and shall be fined twenty five dollars ($25.00) for the
first such violation.
C. Any person convicted of a second violation of the provisions of this section shall be fined up to two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for such second
violation.
D. Any person convicted of a third or subsequent violation of the provisions of this section shall be fined up to seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). The
motor vehicle used in such third or subsequent violation may be subject to seizure and impoundment at the discretion of the police officer, and subject
to a supervisor's approval. The owner or driver of the impounded vehicle shall be liable for the fees for the towing and storage of the vehicle in addition
to the fine imposed for conviction of the third or subsequent violation of this section. Such impoundment shall be further subject to the provisions of
subsections D1 through D4 of this section.
1. Whenever a police officer has probable cause to believe that a vehicle is subject to seizure and impoundment pursuant to this section, the police
officer shall provide for the towing of the vehicle to a facility controlled by the village or its agents. When the vehicle is towed, the police officer shall
notify the person who is found to be in control of the vehicle at the time of the alleged violations, if there is such a person, of the fact of the seizure
and of the vehicle owner's right to request a preliminary hearing to be conducted under this section.
2. Whenever the owner of a vehicle seized pursuant to this section requests a preliminary hearing within twelve (12) hours after the seizure, a deputy
police chief of the village or his designee shall conduct such preliminary hearing within twenty four (24) hours after the seizure, excluding Sundays
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 168/498
and holidays. All interested persons shall be given a reasonable opportunity to be heard at the preliminary hearing. The formal rules of evidence will
not apply at the hearing. If, after the hearing, the deputy police chief or his designee determines that there is probable cause to believe that the
vehicle was used in the violation of subsection A of this section he shall order the continued impoundment of the vehicle as provided in this section
unless the owner of the vehicle posts with the village a cash bond in the amount of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) plus fees for towing and
storing the vehicle. If the deputy police chief or his designee determines that there is no such probable cause, the vehicle will be returned without
penalty or other fees.
3. Within ten (10) days after a vehicle is seized and impounded pursuant to this section, the village shall notify by personal service or by certified mail,
return receipt requested, the owner of record of the date, time and location of a hearing that will be conducted pursuant to this section. The hearing
shall be scheduled and held, unless continued by order of the court or hearing officer, no later than thirty (30) days after the vehicle was seized. All
interested persons shall be given a reasonable opportunity to be heard at the hearing. If after a hearing, it is determined by a preponderance of
evidence that the vehicle was used in the commission of any of the violations described in subsection A of this section the vehicle shall continue to
be impounded until the owner pays a penalty of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) plus fees for towing and storage of the vehicle. The penalty and
fees shall be a debt due and owing the village. However, if a cash bond has been posted the bond shall be applied to the penalty. If it is determined
at a hearing that the vehicle was not used in such a violation, the vehicle or cash bond shall be returned without penalty or other fees. The
determination made at the hearing shall be a final administrative decision. Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, whenever a person
with a lien of record against a vehicle impounded under this section has commenced foreclosure proceedings, possession of the vehicle shall be
given to that person if he agrees in writing to refund to the village the net proceeds of any foreclosure sale, less any amount necessary to pay all lien
holders of record, up to the total amount of penalties imposed under this subsection D.
4. Any motor vehicle that is not reclaimed within thirty (30) days after the expiration of the time during which the owner of record may seek judicial
review of the village's action under this section, or the time at which a final judgment is rendered in favor of the village, or the time a final
administrative decision is rendered against an owner of record who is in default, may be disposed of as an unclaimed vehicle as provided by law.
(Ord. 2003-31, 5-15-2003)
5-1-7: OPERATION OF NEIGHBORHOOD ELECTRIC VEHICLES ON STREETS, ROADS AND HIGHWAYS:
A. As used in this section, "neighborhood electric vehicle" means a self-propelled, electronically powered four (4) wheeled motor vehicle which is capable
of attaining in one mile a speed of more than twenty (20) miles per hour, but not more than twenty five (25) miles per hour, and which conforms to
federal regulations under title 49 CFR part 571.500.
B. Except as otherwise provided in this section, it is unlawful for any person to drive or operate a neighborhood electric vehicle upon any street, highway,
or roadway not under jurisdiction of the village of Streamwood. A neighborhood electric vehicle may be operated only on village streets where the
posted speed limit is thirty five (35) miles per hour or less. This subsection does not prohibit a neighborhood electric vehicle from crossing a road or
street at an intersection where the road or street has a posted speed limit of more than thirty five (35) miles per hour.
C. A person may not operate a neighborhood electric vehicle upon any street, highway, or roadway in this state unless he or she has a valid Illinois driver's
license issued in his or her name by the secretary of state.
D. Except as otherwise provided in subsection E of this section, no person operating a neighborhood electric vehicle shall make a direct crossing upon or
across any highway under the jurisdiction of the state, toll road, interstate highway, or controlled access highway in this state.
E. A person may make a direct crossing at an intersection controlled by a traffic light or four-way stop sign upon or across a highway under the jurisdiction
of the state if the speed limit on the highway is thirty five (35) miles per hour or less at the place of crossing.
F. No neighborhood electric vehicle may be operated on a roadway unless, at a minimum, it has the following: brakes, a steering apparatus, tires, a
rearview mirror, red reflectorized warning devices in the front and rear, a slow moving emblem (as required of other vehicles in section 12-709 of the
Illinois vehicle code) on the rear of the neighborhood electric vehicle, a headlight that emits a white light visible from a distance of five hundred feet
(500') to the front, a tail lamp that emits a red light visible from at least one hundred feet (100') from the rear, brake lights, and turn signals. When
operated on a roadway, a neighborhood electric vehicle shall have its headlight and tail lamps lighted as required by section 12-201 of the Illinois
vehicle code.
G. A person who drives or is in actual physical control of a neighborhood electric vehicle on a roadway while under the influence is subject to sections 11-
500 through 11-502 of the Illinois vehicle code.
H. A person who owns, operates or is in actual physical control of a neighborhood electric vehicle is subject to all provisions of the Illinois vehicle code,
625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5 et seq. (Ord. 2008-15, 6-5-2008)
Chapter 2
PENALTIES, CITATIONS AND VIOLATIONS
5-2-1: ALTERNATIVE PENALTIES, COMPLIANCE WARNING TICKETS:
Any person, pursuant to the issuance of a compliance warning ticket, who is accused of a violation of certain sections of the Streamwood Municipal Code
as hereinafter described in Section 5-2-2 of this Chapter, except a traffic offense for which a court appearance is required pursuant to paragraph 551 of the
Illinois Practice Rules, may settle and compromise that ticket by paying to the Village a fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00) within ten (10) days from the
date such alleged violation was committed or by paying to the Village the sum of forty dollars ($40.00) subsequent to said ten (10) day period and prior to
thirty (30) days thereafter. (1994 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 169/498
5-2-2: ISSUANCE OF COMPLIANCE WARNING CITATIONS:
The issuance of compliance warning citations shall be as a courtesy in lieu of instituting a prosecution in court for the alleged offense. If the person
accused of the violation does not settle the claim, a uniform traffic complaint or notice to appear will be issued for that violation and otherwise that person
shall be subject to the general penalties set forth in Section 5-1-5 of this Title. (1994 Code)
5-2-3: VIOLATIONS, PROCEDURES:
The following violations of the Illinois Compiled Statutes, chapter 625, act 5, the Illinois Vehicle Code, already adopted in its entirety in Section 5-1-1 of this
Title shall be subject to the procedures described herein:
3-112 Failure to transfer title
3-401 No valid registration
3-413(f) Operation of vehicle with expired registration plates or sticker
3-416 Failure to notify the Secretary of State of a change of address/name, Registration
3-701 No valid registration
5-202(e) Failure to display "tow-truck" plate (towed vehicle)
6-101 No valid driver's license (expired less than 6 months)
6-116 Failure to notify the Secretary of State of a change of name/address (drivers license)
6-303 Driving with a suspended license - administrative suspensions for emission control violations only
11-1401 Unattended motor vehicle left illegally
11-
1403(c)
Illegal handlebars on a motorcycle
11-1404 Riding a motorcycle without special equipment
11-1405 No passenger footrests on a motorcycle
11-1406 Drivers view or driving mechanism obstructed
11-1413 Depositing injurious material on the roadway
12-201(a)
Driving without a lighted headlamp (motorcycle)
12-201(b)
Driving without lights when required, no taillights, or only one taillight
12-201(c)
No rear registration plate light
12-202 Insufficient clearance, identification or side marker lights
12-210 Failure to dim headlights
12-211 Improper Lighting - Only one headlight
12-401 Use of illegal tires (studded)
12-405(c)
Use of unsafe tire (bald)
12-503(a)
Obstructed windshield or front side windows
12-503(c)
Obstructed rear window
12-503(e)
Defective windshield, side, and/or rear window
12-601 Defective horn
12-602 Defective muffler, loud or no muffler
12-603 No seat belts
12-603.1 Failure to wear a properly adjusted and fastened seat/safety belt, (driver and front seat passenger); specifically excludes violations of the
child restraint act
12-604 Television in a motor vehicle
12-606(a)
No sign or name attached to each side of a tow truck
12-606(b)
Required equipment - broom, shovel, trash can, fire extinguisher
12-606(c)
Failure to remove debris, or spread oil absorbing material on the roadway
12-607.1 Unlawful frame or flood height
12-608(a)
No bumper, or unlawful bumper height
12-610 Wearing a stereo headset while driving
13-111 No valid safety test
15-105 Improper projecting load - first division vehicle
15-106 Loose protruding member - all vehicles
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 170/498
(1994 Code)
Chapter 3
VEHICLE PARKING REGULATIONS
5-3-1: NO PARKING PLACES:
It shall be unlawful at any time to permit any vehicle to stand in any of the following places, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in
compliance with the directions of a policeman or traffic control device:
A. In any intersection.
B. In a crosswalk.
C. Upon any bridge or viaduct, or in any subway or tunnel or the approach thereto.
D. Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within thirty feet (30') of a point of the curb immediately opposite the end of a safety zone.
E. Within thirty feet (30') of a traffic signal, beacon or sign on the approaching side.
F. Within fifteen feet (15') of any intersection or crosswalk.
G. At any place where the standing of a vehicle will reduce the usable width of the roadway for moving traffic to less than eighteen feet (18').
H. Within fifteen feet (15') of a fire hydrant.
I. At any place where the vehicle would block the use of a driveway.
J. Within fifty feet (50') of the nearest rail of a railroad grade crossing.
K. Within twenty feet (20') of the driveway entrance to any fire department station and on the side of the street opposite the entrance to any such station
within seventy five feet (75') of such entrance when properly signposted.
L. From March 1 through November 30, parking shall not be permitted on any sidewalk or parkway; provided, that this section shall not apply to vehicles
standing on residential driveways between the hours of nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. Sunday through Thursday, and between
nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. and nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. Friday and Saturday. This subsection shall not apply to vehicles standing on residential driveways
between December 1 and February 28.
All parking in residential driveways shall be parallel to the flow of the driveway between the principal structure and the curb. Exception: During the
above stated dates and time frames, vehicles may be parked parallel to the street on the driveway apron if the apron is a minimum of sixteen feet (16')
wide. If the vehicle is parked parallel to the street, it may not block the sidewalk or impede the passage of traffic in the street. Parking stall striping is
expressly prohibited in single-family residential areas.
M. At any place where official signs prohibit parking.
N. On any industrial street, and, in addition thereto, it shall be unlawful to load or unload any vehicle on any industrial street.
O. At any of the following areas:
1. Sunset Circle from Ridge Circle to Hect Road, both sides.
2. Nippert Drive from Arnold Avenue south a distance of four hundred twenty feet (420'), on the west side.
3. Nippert Drive from Arnold Avenue south a distance of sixty feet (60'), on the east side.
4. Arnold Avenue from Nippert Drive west a distance of two hundred twenty five feet (225'), on the south side.
5. From the intersection of Route 20 (Lake Street) and Club Tree Drive, north, to the intersection of Club Tree Drive and Old Oak on both east and west
sides of Club Tree Drive.
6. From the intersection of Club Tree Drive and the access throat to Quincy and Rowley Courts, east to Rowley Court on both the north and south
sides of the access throat.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 171/498
7. From the intersection of Club Tree Drive and Old Oak, east to the intersection of Old Oak and Medford Court and around the turnaround bulb, east
on the south side.
8. From the intersection of Old Oak and the access throat of Norwood Court, south to Norwood Court, on both the east and west sides of the access
throat.
9. From the intersection of Old Oak and the access throat of Medford Court, west to Medford Court, on both the north and south sides of the access
throat.
10. From the intersection of Club Tree Drive and the access throat of Lynnwood Court, west to Lynnwood Court, on both the north and south sides of
the access throat.
11. From the intersection of Club Tree Drive and East Valley Lane, west to Kingston Court, on the north side and around the turnaround bulb, east on
the south side.
12. From the intersection of Club Tree Drive and the access throat of Kingston Court, west to Kingston Court on both the north and south sides of the
access throat.
13. From the intersection of East Valley Lane and the access throat of Jamestown Court, north to Jamestown Court, on both the east and west sides of
the access throat.
14. The service drive in front of 5011 South Valley Lane on both the east and west sides of the service drive.
15. The service drive in front of 5021 South Valley Lane on both the east and west sides of the service drive.
16. From 5030 South Valley Lane through 5042 South Valley Lane.
17. From the intersection of Bartlett Road and Tall Tree Road, east to the intersection of Tall Tree Road and Duxbury Court, on both the north and
south sides of Tall Tree Road.
18. From the intersection of Tall Tree Road and the access throat of Duxbury Court, north to Duxbury Court on both the east and west sides of the
access throat.
19. From the intersection of Tall Tree Road and the access throat of Essex Court, east to Essex Court on both the north and south sides of the access
throat.
20. From the intersection of Tall Tree Road and the access throat of Falmouth Court, east to Falmouth Court, on both the north and south sides of the
access throat.
21. From the intersection of Tall Tree Road and the access throat of Greenwood Court, east to Greenwood Court on both the north and south sides of
the access throat.
22. From the intersection of Tall Tree Road and the access throat of Ashton Court, west to Ashton Court, on both the north and south sides of the
access throat.
23. From the intersection of Tall Tree Road and the access throat of Bristol Court, west to Bristol Court on both the north and south sides of the access
throat.
24. From the intersection of Tall Tree Road and the access throat of Bristol Court, south around the turnaround bulb to the intersection of Tall Tree
Road and the access throat of Greenwood Court.
25. From the intersection of Tall Tree Road and the access throat of Colony Court, south to Colony Court on both the east and west sides of the access
throat.
26. From the intersection of Tall Tree Road and the access throat of Hampton Court, east to Hampton Court on both the north and south sides of the
access throat.
27. On the south side of Evans Court, between Park Boulevard and the east boundary of the library.
28. On the north side of Library Lane from Park Boulevard to the east boundary of the library.
29. On the east side of Park Boulevard between Library Lane and Evans Court.
30. On the east and west sides of Sunnydale Boulevard for a distance of one hundred feet (100') north and south of its intersection with Meadow Lane.
31. On the south and west sides of Tall Tree Road from the intersection of Bartlett Road to the intersection with Ashton Court.
32. From the intersection of Bourbon Parkway and Barrington Road west two hundred fifty feet (250') on both the north and south sides of Bourbon
Parkway.
33. On the east and west sides of West Greenmeadows from the intersection of Old Church Road north for a distance of one hundred twenty feet
(120').
34. On the west side of McKool Avenue from the intersection of Miller Avenue north for a distance of one hundred fifty five feet (155').
35. On the north side of Miller Avenue from the intersection of McKool Avenue west for a distance of two hundred ten feet (210').
36. On the west side and east side of Ridge Circle from the intersection of Schaumburg Road South for a distance of one hundred feet (100').
37. On the north side of Schaumburg Road from the intersection of Ridge Circle to the intersection of Bartlett Road.
38. On the south side of Schaumburg Road from four hundred forty five feet (445') east of its intersection with Park Boulevard to its intersection with
Victoria Lane.
39. On both the east and west sides of Madison Drive.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 172/498
40. On the south side of Streamwood Boulevard from its intersection with Madison Drive east to its intersection with Polk Court.
41. On the west side of McKool Avenue from its intersection with Tinnerella Avenue south to a point one hundred twenty feet (120') south of that
intersection.
42. On both the east and west sides of Frances Drive.
P. On any surface other than an improved surface where parking is not otherwise prohibited. For purposes of this subsection, an improved surface shall be
any paved surface or any lawfully existing crushed stone surface. (Ord. 1992-58, 9-17-1992; amd. Ord. 1993-66, 11-4-1993; 1994 Code; Ord. 2004-35,
6-3-2004, eff. 7-1-2005; Ord. 2006-21, 4-20-2006; Ord. 2009-30, 11-19-2009)
5-3-2: TOWING CARS AWAY:
The police department and all members thereof assigned to traffic duty are hereby authorized to remove and tow away or have removed and towed away
by commercial towing service, any car or other vehicle illegally parked in any place where such parked vehicle creates or constitutes a traffic hazard,
blocks the use of a fire hydrant or obstructs or may obstruct the movement of any emergency vehicle; or any vehicle which has been parked in any public
street or other public place for a period of twenty four (24) consecutive hours.
Cars so towed away shall be stored on any village property or in a public garage or parking lot and shall be restored to the owner or operator thereof after
payment of the expense incurred by the village in removing and storing such vehicles. (1994 Code)
5-3-3: PRESUMPTION OF LIABILITY:
The fact that an automobile which is illegally parked is registered in the name of a person shall be considered primafacie proof that such person was in
control of the automobile at the time of such parking. (1994 Code)
5-3-4: SNOW REMOVAL; PARKING DURING, OBSTRUCTION OF:
A. Parking During Snow Removal: It shall be unlawful to park or cause to be parked any vehicle on any public street within the corporate limits of the
village at any time within a twenty four (24) hour period after an accumulation of two inches (2") or more of snow. Said restriction shall continue beyond
the twenty four (24) hour period until all snow removal operations by the village are completed.
Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to prevent the parking of vehicles once snow removal operations have been completed from curb to curb
on that portion of a public street located between two (2) intersecting streets or an intersecting street and a right of way, waterway or other similar
barrier.
B. Towing Of Vehicles: The police department of the village and all members thereof are hereby authorized to remove and tow away or cause the removal
and towing by a commercial towing service of any vehicle parked in violation of this section in accordance with the applicable Illinois Compiled Statutes
governing towing of vehicles and to notify the owner of such vehicle removed of its location as soon as is reasonably possible in accordance with police
department procedures established therefor.
C. Obstruction Of Snow Removal: It shall be unlawful to:
1. Plow or otherwise remove accumulated snow from a private parking lot and deposit same on a village street or right of way.
2. Plow snow from a private driveway and/or sidewalk and deposit same on a village street in such a manner so as to obstruct the street or to decrease
the drivable width of any such street.
3. Obstruct, harass, prevent or otherwise interfere with any employee of the village engaged in snow removal operations or to obstruct, cause damage
to or otherwise interfere with any village owned or leased vehicle used in conjunction with snow removal operations. (1994 Code)
D. Penalty: Any person convicted of a violation of any provision of this section shall be fined as set forth in section 1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 1998-7, 1-22-
1998)
5-3-5: PARKING AT CURB:
No vehicle shall be parked with the left side of such vehiclenext to the curb, except on one-way streets, and it shall be unlawful to stand or park any vehicle
in a street other than parallel with the curb and with the two (2) right wheels of the vehicle within twelve inches (12") of the regularly established curb line,
except that upon those streets that have been marked for angle parking, vehicles shall be parked at the angle to the curb indicated by such marks. (1994
Code)
5-3-6: VEHICLES FOR SALE:
It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle upon any street for the purpose of displaying it for sale. (1994 Code)
5-3-7: ALL NIGHT PARKING:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 173/498
A. No person shall park any vehicle between the hours of one o'clock (1:00) A.M. and five o'clock (5:00) A.M. of any day on any street in the village, unless
an overnight parking permit has been issued. Overnight parking permits shall be issued with the following restrictions:
1. Each dwelling unit within the village shall be allowed a maximum of five (5) overnight parking permits within a calendar year.
2. Each permit shall be valid for a maximum of three (3) nights. A parking permit shall be issued and in effect for those nights evidencing the granting of
permission for parking between one o'clock (1:00) A.M. and five o'clock (5:00) A.M.
3. The permit shall be visible from the driver's side window of the vehicle in question.
4. Parking permits will be issued by the police department after completion of an application and proof of residency by the applicant. Verification of
vehicle sticker issuance at the address in question will also be required.
5. No overnight parking permit shall be issued where a recreational vehicle prohibits the legal off street parking, unless a valid permit has been issued
by the community development director for the off street parking of said recreational vehicle.
B. In multi-family areas, where legal, off street parking is proven to be limited, permit parking may be allowed on the street when authorized by the police
chief and the community development director. Prior to issuing neighborhood parking passes, the association's parking policy and enforcement shall be
reviewed for compliance. A separate neighborhood parking sticker will be issued, with the annual vehicle sticker, for each vehicle as requested in these
areas. Parking on the designated street areas will be on a first come, first serve basis and restricted to one side of the street where indicatedby
neighborhood permit parking signs. (Ord. 2004-35, 6-3-2004, eff. 7-1-2005)
5-3-8: PARKING IN ALLEYS:
No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten feet (10') of the width of the
roadway for free movement of vehicular traffic, and no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within an alley in such a position as to block the driveway
entrance to any abutting property. (1994 Code)
5-3-9: RESTRICTED FIRE LANE PARKING:
It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, stand or park any vehicle or to otherwise occupy or block any space designated by an official sign as a fire lane
or to park within fifteen feet (15') of a fire plug in a public parking lot or to block or park so as to obstruct the primary or main access lane to or from a
building. Any owner or occupant of premises adjoining a fire lane, fire plug or access lane who allows such stopping, standing or parking shall also be
guilty of a violation of this section. (1994 Code)
5-3-10: FIRE LANES DESIGNATED:
A. Prohibition: It shall be illegal for any person to park any motor vehicle or obstruct in any fashion a designated fire lane.
B. Designated Fire Lanes: The following areas in the village are hereby designated as fire lanes:
All driveway entrances into parking areas off McKool, Miller, Tinnerella, Short and Hayward, in what is commonly known as the Woodland Heights East
subdivision.
From 724 through 716 Barrington Road, lane to extend east 16 feet out from front face of buildings.
From 716 through 724 Barrington Road, lane to extend west 27 feet out from rear face of buildings.
From 1547 through 1531 Brandy Parkway, lane to extend south 27 feet out from rear face of buildings.
Between 1541 and 1539 Brandy Parkway from the intersection of the access drive between 1541 and 1539 and Brandy Parkway, south to a point 27
feet from rear face of buildings.
Between 1535 and 1533 Brandy Parkway from theintersection of the access drive between 1535 and 1533 and Brandy Parkway, south to a point 27
feet from rear face of buildings.
Between 1531 and 1529 Brandy Parkway from the intersection of the access drive on the west side of 1531 and Brandy Parkway, south to a point 27
feet from rear face of buildings.
Between 1546 and 1544 Brandy Parkway from the intersection of the access drive between 1546 and 1544 and Brandy Parkway, north to a point 37
feet from rear face of buildings.
Between 1538 and 1536 Brandy Parkway from the intersection of the access drive between 1538 and 1536 and Brandy Parkway north to a point 37
feet from rear face of buildings.
From 1550 through 1528 Brandy Parkway, lane to extend north 37 feet out from rear face of buildings.
From 724 through 702 Bonded Parkway, lane to extend east 16 feet out from front face of buildings.
From 724 through 702 Bonded Parkway, lane to extend west 27 feet out from rear face of buildings.
From the intersection of the access drive on the south side of 724 Bonded and Bonded Parkway west to a point 27 feet from rear face of buildings.
From the intersection of the access drive between 702 and 700 Bonded and Bonded Parkway, west to the rear of the property line.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 174/498
From 700 through 678 Bonded Parkway, lane to extend east 27 feet from front face of buildings.
From 700 through 698 Bonded Parkway, lane to extend west 23 feet from rear face of buildings.
From the intersection of the access drive on the north side of 698 Bonded and Bonded Parkway west to the rear property line.
From 1549 through 1537 Burgundy Parkway, lane to extend south 27 feet from rear face of buildings.
From 1533 through 1531 Burgundy Parkway, lane to extend south 27 feet from rear face of buildings.
Behind 1535 Burgundy Parkway from rear face of building south to property line and extending 20 feet east and west from fenced area.
From 1549 through 1545 Burgundy Parkway, lane to extend north 16 feet from front face of buildings.
From the intersection of the access drive on the east side of 1549 Burgundy and Burgundy Parkway south to a point 27 feet from the rear face of the
buildings.
From the intersection of the access drive between 1541 and 1539 Burgundy and Burgundy Parkway south to a point 27 feet from the rear face of the
buildings.
From the intersection of the access drive between 1533 and 1531 Burgundy and Burgundy Parkway south to a point 27 feet from rear face of buildings.
From 1532 through 1544 Burgundy Parkway, lane to extend north 27 feet from rear face of buildings.
From the intersection of the access drive between 1544 and 1542 Burgundy and Burgundy Parkway north to a point 27 feet from rear face of buildings.
From the intersection of the access drive between 1536 and 1534 Burgundy and Burgundy Parkway north to a point 27 feet from rear face of buildings.
From the intersection of the access drive on the west side of 1532 Burgundy and Burgundy Parkway north to a point 27 feet from the rear face of
buildings.
From the intersection of the access drive on the east side of 1538 Bourbon and Bourbon Parkway north to the rear property line, lane to extend 16 feet
east from side of buildings.
Provide a lane 20 feet wide, 22 feet out from the north, east and south sides of the building at 672 Barrington Road.
Provide a lane 20 feet wide from the intersection of the access drive at southwest corner of the building and Bourbon Parkway north to a point 40 feet
from northwest corner of building at 672 Barrington Road.
From the intersection of the access drives on the north and south sides of 670 Bonded Parkway and Bonded Parkway west to a point 27 feet from rear
face of buildings.
C. Fire Lane Diagrams: The diagrams of certain fire lane areas are made a part thereof, as shown on the following pages.
D. Fire Department Authority: The village fire department may designate fire lanes as it deems necessary for the efficient and effective use of fire
apparatus. (1994 Code)
E. Penalty: Any person violating the provisions of thissection shall be fined as set forth in section 1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 1998-7, 1-22-1998)
5-3-11: UNAUTHORIZED USE OF PARKING PLACES RESERVED FOR PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES; AUTHORIZED
PARKING FOR PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES:
A. Any motor vehicle having an identification card on display in its windshield (which identification card declares the possessor thereof to be a
handicapped person and which card has been issued by any of the townships of the state of Illinois) or a motor vehicle bearing registration plates
issued to a physically handicapped person pursuant to 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3-616 or to a disabled veteran pursuant to Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/3-609 of the Illinois vehicle code, effective July 1, 1970, as amended, is exempt from any statute of the state of Illinois or any ordinance of
the village imposing time limitations on parking in a business district; but otherwise is subject to the laws which prohibit parking in "no stopping" and "no
standing" zones in front of or near fire hydrants, driveways, public building entrances and exits, bus stops and loading areas, and is prohibited from
parking where the motor vehicle constitutes a traffic hazard and the motor vehicle must be moved at the instruction and request of the police
department to a location designated by such officer.
B. Parking privileges granted by this section are strictly limited to the person to whom the aforedescribed identification card and/or special registration
plates were issued and to qualified operators acting under his express direction while the disabled person is present.
C. It shall be unlawful to stand, stop or park any motor vehicle which is not properly displaying registration plates or decals issued to a person with
disabilities, as defined by section 1-1590.1, pursuant to sections 3-616, 11-1301.1 or 11-1301.2, or to a disabled veteran pursuant to section 3-609 of
the Illinois vehicle act1, as evidence that the vehicle is operated by or for a person with disabilities or disabled veteran, in any parking place, including
any private or public off street parking facility, specifically reserved, by the posting of an official sign as designated under section 11-301 of the Illinois
vehicle code, for motor vehicles displaying such registration plates. It shall be further unlawful to stand, stop or park any motor vehicle in a designated
access aisle adjacent to any parking place specifically reserved for persons with disabilities, by the posting of an official sign as designated under
section 11-301, for motor vehicles displaying such registration plates. The official parking decal or device must be displayed by either hanging the decal
or device from the rearview mirror or placing it on thedashboard of the vehicle in clear view. Any motor vehicle properly displaying a disability license
plate or a parking decal or device containing the international symbol of access issued to persons with disabilities by any local authority, state, district,
territory or foreign country shall be recognized by the village as valid and that vehicle shall receive the same parking privileges as residents of the state
of Illinois.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 175/498
D. An individual with a vehicle displaying disability license plates or a parking decal or device issued to a qualified person with a disability under sections 3-
616, 11-1301.1 or 11-1301.2 of the Illinois vehicle code, or to a disabled veteran under section 3-609 of the Illinois vehicle code shall be in further
violation of this section if: the person using the authorized holder of the disability license plate or parking decal or device or is not transporting the
authorized holder of the disability license plate or parking decal or device to exercise any privileges granted through the disability license plate or
parking decals or devices under this code or the Illinois vehicle code.
E. Any person or local authority owning or operating any public or private off street parking facility may, after notifying the Streamwood police, remove or
cause to be removed to the nearest garage or other place of safety any vehicle parked within a stall or space reserved for use by a person with
disabilities which does not display person with disabilities registration plates or a special decal or device as required under this section.
F. Any person found guilty of violating the provisions of subsection C of this section shall be fined not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) nor more
than three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00) for each offense, in addition to any costs or charges connected with the removal or storage of any motor
vehicle removed or stored pursuant to 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-1301.3 of the Illinois vehicle code. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, it
shall not be a defense to a charge under this section that either the sign posted or the intended accessible parking place does to comply with the
technical requirements of section 11-301 of the Illinois vehicle code, Illinois department of transportation regulations, or this section if a reasonable
person would be made aware by the sign or notice on or near the parking place that the place is reserved for a person with disabilities.
G. Any person found liable or guilty of violating the provisions of subsection D of this section shall be fined no less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for
each offense.
H. As used in this section, "authorized holder" means an individual issued a disability license plate under section 3-616, an individual issued a parking
decal or issued a disabled veteran's license plate under section 3-609 of the Illinois vehicle code. (Ord. 2006-11, 3-16-2006)
5-3-12: RESTRICTED PARKING:
It shall be unlawful to permit any vehicle to stop, stand or park in any of the following areas under the following restrictions, except when necessary to
avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a policeman or traffic control device:
A. Ridge Circle from Streamwood Boulevard to Sunset Circle from the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. to nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. and two o'clock (2:00)
P.M. to three o'clock (3:00) P.M. on any day that Ridge Circle School is in session.
B. On the south side of Schaumburg Road from the west side of its intersection with Bartlett Road to a point four hundred feet (400') west of that
intersection on any day that school is in session. (1994 Code)
C. On that side of the street which contains fire hydrants in any subdivision in which the public improvements have not been accepted from such time as
the curbs have been constructed until such time as the last occupancy permit has been issued for all the premises on any one street or until such time
as determined by the director of community development, whichever is earlier. (1994 Code; amd. Ord. 1995-36, 6-22-1995)
D. Kimberly Lane from the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to three o'clock (3:00) P.M. on any day that Streamwood High School is in session.
E. Tanglewood Drive from its intersection with Walnut Drive west to its intersection with Deerfield Drive from the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to three
o'clock (3:00) P.M. on any day that Streamwood High School is in session.
F. On the west side of Sunnydale Boulevard from the intersection of Meadow and Sunnydale to the intersection of Woodland Heights and Sunnydale,
except for authorized school buses.
G. On the east side of Garden Circle in front of Glenbrook:
1. From the school crosswalk south for a distance of forty feet (40').
2. From the school crosswalk north to the entrance to the school parking lot except for authorized school buses.
H. On the west side of Oltendorf and in front of Oakhill School from the driveway entrance to the parking lot north of the school south to the southerly edge
of the school building except for authorized school buses. (1994 Code)
5-3-13: PARKING OF COMMERCIAL VEHICLES IN DESIGNATED AREAS:
It shall be unlawful at any time to park a commercial vehicle in other than the designated parking spaces for said commercial vehicles on any business
zoned property which has an approved site plan designating specific parking for commercial vehicles except for the loading and unloading of the vehicle.
(1994 Code)
5-3-14: PARKING ON PROPERTY OF ANOTHER:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 176/498
A. It is unlawful for any person to enter upon the land or any part thereof of another with a motor vehicle after receiving, immediately prior to such entry,
notice from the owner or occupant that such entry is forbidden, or to remain upon the land of another after receiving notice from the owner or occupant
to depart.
B. A person has received notice from the owner or occupant, within the meaning of this section, if he has been notified personally either orally or in writing,
or if a printed or written notice forbidding such entry has been conspicuously posted or exhibited at the main entrance to such land or the forbidden part
thereof.
C. The police department is authorized to have said motor vehicle towed and removed to a place of safety, upon complaint of the owner or occupant in
charge of the land that said motor vehicle has unlawfully entered said land.
D. Before the release of said vehicle to the owner, the owner shall cause to be paid to the village all charges incurred in the removal of said vehicle in
accordance with any section regarding semitrailers. (1994 Code)
Chapter 4
STREETS AND SIGNS
5-4-1: ONE-WAY STREETS OR ALLEYS:
It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle on any streets or alleys designated as one-way streets or alleys by village ordinance, in any direction other than
that so designated. (1994 Code; amd. Ord. 2007-11, 3-15-2007)
5-4-2: STOP STREETS:
The driver of a vehicle shall stop in obedience to a stop sign at an intersection where a stop sign is erected pursuant to village ordinance, at one or more
entrances thereto, and shall proceed cautiously, yielding to the vehicles not so obliged to stop which are within the intersection or approaching so close as
to constitute an immediate hazard, unless traffic at such intersection is controlled by a police officer on duty, in which event the directions of the police
officer shall be complied with.
The following intersections are hereby designated as stop intersections:
Street Stops At Notes
Abbeywood Circle N. Park Blvd. north and south
Abbington Court Oak Ridge Drive
Acadia Court Blue Ridge Drive
Acorn Drive East Avenue
Hazelnut Drive
Adams Court W. Streamwood Blvd.
Alexander Avenue Irving Park Road
Lacy Avenue
Alexander Court Alexander Avenue
Allegheny Court Blue Ridge Drive
Andover Court S. Park Blvd.
Arnold Avenue Alexander Avenue
Nippert Drive east and west
S. Park Blvd.
Arrowwood Court Williamsburg Drive
Arthur Court Jefferson Lane
Ascot Lane Sutton Road
W. Schaumburg Road
Ascot Lane - unnamed courts Ascot Lane 10 total
Ash Court East Avenue
Aspen Court East Avenue
Augusta Drive Emerald Drive
W. Schaumburg Road
Azalea Circle East Avenue
Seton Place
Banbury Court Oak Ridge Drive
Bayberry Court East Avenue
Beebe Court S. Park Blvd.
Berkshire Court Oak Ridge Drive
Beverly Lane S. Bartlett Road north and south
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 177/498
Big Oaks Road S. Bartlett Road
Timber Trail
Black Hill Drive Blue Ridge Drive
Yellowstone Drive
Blue Ridge Drive Irving Park Road
Bluestem Court Madison Drive
Borris Circle N. Park Blvd. north and south
Boxwood Court Williamsburg Drive
Brandy Parkway Barrington Road
Briarwood Bartlett Road east and west
Brittany Drive W. Irving Park Road
Winchester Drive
Brook Drive Garden Circle
N. Park Blvd.
Brookstone Court Brookstone Drive
Brookstone Drive Whispering Drive
Brunswick Court S. Park Blvd.
Buchanan Lane Garfield Lane
Jefferson Lane
Buckskin Lane Schaumburg Road
Burgundy Parkway Barrington Road
Butternut Lane East Avenue
Buttitta Road East Avenue
Cahill Road Center Road
Tanglewood Drive
Cambridge Avenue S. Bartlett Road
S. Park Blvd.
Canton Lane Kensington Drive east and west
Carey Lane N. Oltendorf Road
Carlson Arnold Avenue
Carlson Drive Alexander Avenue
Carolann Drive N. Oltendorf Road
Somerset Drive
Castlewood Drive Irving Park Road
Center Schaumburg Road
Chaucer Lane Chrisman Drive
E. Shag Bark Lane
Chrisman Drive N. Oltendorf Road
Clairidge Court Williamsburg Drive
Clearwater Court Brookstone Drive
Clematis Drive East Avenue
Club Tree Drive Lake Street
Old Oak Lane
Colonial Court W. Irving Park Road
Coolidge Court W. Streamwood Blvd.
Cottonwood Drive Irving Park Road
Wildflower Way
Creekside Court Whispering Drive
Cypress Drive Bartlett Road
Dana Lane Abbeywood Circle
Somerset Drive
Dartmouth Court Oak Ridge Drive
Dato Drive W. Greenmeadows Blvd.
Dato Lane S. Greenmeadows Blvd.
David Drive N. Greenmeadows Blvd.
S. Greenmeadows Blvd.
Debbie Lane Old Church Road
S. Greenmeadows Blvd.
Deerfield Walnut Drive
Dogwood Drive Hastings Mill Road
Williamsburg Drive
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 178/498
Dorchester Court Oak Ridge Drive
Dover Court Kensington Drive
Driftwood Court Williamsburg Drive
Dunbar Court S. Park Blvd.
E. Kennedy Drive N. Greenmeadows Blvd.
S. Greenmeadows Blvd.
E. Shag Bark Lane Gant Circle
N. Oltendorf Road east and west
N. Park Blvd.
E. Streamwood Blvd. East Avenue
Ridge Circle east and west
S. Oltendorf Road east and west
S. Park Blvd.
S. Park Blvd. west
East Avenue Buttitta Road
Egan Drive W. Greenmeadows Blvd. north and south
Elderberry Lane Old Lake Street
Eliasek Court W. Greenmeadows Blvd.
Elizabeth Drive Lake Street
Yellowstone Drive
Emerald Drive Sutton Road
English Oak Lane Cottonwood Drive east and west
Wildflower Way east and west
Evans Court S. Park Blvd.
Evergreen Drive Merryoaks Road
Fallstone Drive E. Schaumburg Road
Fernwood Court Hastings Mill Road
Filbert Drive East Avenue
East Avenue north and south
Fillmore Lane Jackson Lane
Jefferson Lane
Fir Court East Avenue
Foxboro Court Oak Ridge Drive
Francis Drive Buttitta Road
Ramblewood Drive north and south
Franklin Court N. Oltendorf Road
Frederick Avenue Lacy Avenue
Nippert Drive
Freeman Avenue Nippert Drive
S. Park Blvd.
Fulton Drive W. Irving Park Road
Gant Circle E. Shag Bark Lane
N. Park Blvd. north and south
N. Park Blvd. west
Garden Circle Bode Road east and west
Garfield Lane Jefferson Lane
Washington Avenue
Glendale Court Garden Circle
Green Court N. Greenmeadows Blvd.
Green Knoll Lane Bode Road
Quaker Hollow Lane
Gregg Court N. Greenmeadows Blvd.
Greystone Court Hastings Mill Road
Grow Lane Bartlett Road
Gulf Keys Road Sutton Road
Hackberry Drive East Avenue
Westgate Terrace
Harrison Lane McKinley Lane north and south
Hartwood Drive Southwood Circle
Harvest Drive Merryoaks Road
Hastings Mill Road Williamsburg Drive
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 179/498
Heather Lane Garden Circle
Heine Drive Judy Lane
S. Greenmeadows Blvd.
Heritage Lane W. Briarwood Drive
High Point Lane Oak Ridge Drive
Sutton Road
Hillside Drive Ridge Circle
S. Park Blvd.
Hise Court N. Greenmeadows Blvd.
Hoover Court W. Streamwood Blvd.
Huntington Drive Bode Road
Somerset Drive
Innsbrook Drive Bartlett Road
Fulton Drive
Iris Drive E. Streamwood Blvd.
East Avenue
Ivy Court East Avenue
Jackson Lane Garfield Lane
Jefferson Lane
Jefferson Court Jefferson Lane
Jefferson Lane Bartlett Road
W. Streamwood Blvd.
Jill Lane S. Greenmeadows Blvd.
Joyce Lane W. Streamwood Blvd.
Judy Lane N. Greenmeadows Blvd.
Juniper Circle East Avenue north and south
Juniper Court East Avenue
Kensington Court Ascot Lane
Kensington Drive Ascot Lane
King Drive East Avenue
Kings Canyon Drive Black Hill Drive
Kosan Circle W. Greenmeadows Blvd. north and south
Krause Avenue Alexander Avenue east and west
Nippert Drive east and west
S. Park Blvd.
Lacy Avenue S. Park Blvd.
Lancastor Court Fulton Drive
Larkspur Lane Sutton Road
Larsen Avenue Alexander Avenue
LaSalle Road Fulton Drive
S. Bartlett Road
Laurel Oaks Drive Sutton Road
Lexington Court Williamsburg Drive
Library Lane Nippert Drive
S. Park Blvd.
Linda Lane W. Streamwood Blvd.
Linden Lane Sycamore
Lisa Lane W. Streamwood Blvd.
Little Creek Drive Schaumburg Road
Locksley Drive Cambridge Avenue
Magnolia Drive Sutton Road
Manchester Court Ascot Lane
Manor Drive S. Park Blvd.
Maple Drive Linden
S. Park Blvd.
Marion Lane N. Oltendorf Road north and south
Mark Lane Bode Road
N. Greenmeadows Blvd.
Mayfield Drive Hillside Drive
McCabe Drive Schaumburg Road
McKinley Lane Jefferson Lane
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 180/498
Meadow Lane S. Park Blvd.
Sunnydale Blvd.
Meredith Lane Cambridge Avenue
Merry Oaks Irving Park Road
Merryoaks Road Old Lake Street
Middlebury Court Williamsburg Drive
Monarch Drive Monarch Drive
Monroe Court Jefferson Lane
Moore Avenue Alexander Avenue
Moraine Drive W. Schaumburg Road
Mulberry Lane S. Park Blvd.
Myrtle Lane W. Streamwood Blvd.
N. Greenmeadows Blvd. Barrington Road
N. Kennedy Drive N. Greenmeadows Blvd.
N. Oltendorf Road Bode Road
Somerset Drive
N. Park Blvd. Bode Road
N. Victoria Lane E. Schaumburg Road
N. Park Blvd.
N. Walnut Court W. Schaumburg Road
Nettle Lane English Oak Lane
Wildflower Way
Newberry Drive E. Streamwood Blvd.
Nippert Drive Arnold Avenue north and south
Lacy Avenue
Oak Knoll Court Williamsburg Drive
Oak Meadow Court Williamsburg Drive
Oak Ridge Drive Oak Ridge Drive
W. Irving Park Road
Oakland Drive S. Park Blvd.
Oakmont Court Williamsburg Drive
Old Church Road W. Greenmeadows Blvd.
Old Lake Street Lake Street east and west
Old Oak Lane Club Tree Drive
Oltendorf Road Bartlett Road
Schaumburg Road north and south
Oriole Drive Hartwood Drive
Meadow Lane north and south
S. Park Blvd.
Sunnydale Blvd.
Sunnydale Blvd. east and west
Osprey Court W. Irving Park Road
Parkwood Drive Southwood Circle
Woodland Heights Blvd.
Patricia Parkway Myrtle Lane
Pembroke Court Kensington Drive
Pepperidge Circle East Avenue
Westgate Terrace
Petrie Circle W. Greenmeadows Blvd. east and west
Phillippi Creek Drive Gulf Keys Road
Phoenix Lake Avenue Buttitta Road
Pine Street Bartlett Road
Plum Tree Court Williamsburg Drive
Polk Court W. Streamwood Blvd.
Post Lane Hillside Drive east and west
Prairie Pointe Lane Madison Drive
Sutton Road
Providence Winchester Drive
Quaker Hollow Lane Barrington Road
Rambler Court Woodland Heights Blvd.
Rambler Lane Woodland Heights Blvd.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 181/498
Ramblewood Drive Barrington Road
Francis Drive east and west
Phoenix Lake Avenue
Red Cedar Drive East Avenue north and south
Redwood Court East Avenue
Regency Court Fulton Drive
Ridge Circle E. Streamwood Blvd.
E. Streamwood Blvd. north and south
S. Park Blvd.
Sunset Circle north and south
Waverly
Woodland Heights Blvd. north and south
Ridge Drive Schaumburg Road
Romajean Parkway Lake Street
S. Park Blvd.
Rosewood Drive Rosewood Drive
Schaumburg Road
Russet Lane Park Blvd.
Woodland Heights Blvd.
S. Greenmeadows Blvd. Barrington Road
S. Oltendorf Road E. Streamwood Blvd. north and south
S. Park Blvd. E. Streamwood Blvd. north x 2
E. Streamwood Blvd. south x 2
S. Park Blvd.- unnamed courts S. Park Blvd. 2 total
S. Ridge Court Schaumburg Road
S. Victoria Lane Schaumburg Road
Samuel Samuel
Samuel Court Meredith Lane
Samuel Drive Meredith Lane
S. Bartlett Road
Sandalwood Court Williamsburg Drive
Sandhurst Court Williamsburg Drive
Sangra Court Lake Street
Seneca Court Whispering Drive
Sequoia Court Blue Ridge Drive
Seton Place East Avenue
Ridge Circle east and west
Shag Bark Lane Bartlett Road
Carey Lane
Sheffield Court Kensington Drive
Sherwood Drive Woodland Heights Blvd.
Shirley Avenue Irving Park Road
Sieverwood Court Hastings Mill Road
Somerset Drive Bode Road
N. Bartlett Road
N. Oltendorf Road
Southbury Court Williamsburg Drive
Southwicke Drive Southwicke Drive
Sutton Road
Southwood Circle Woodland Heights Blvd. east and west
Springbrook Court Blue Ridge Drive
Springvalley Lane S. Park Blvd.
Stratford Circle S. Park Blvd. north and south
Suffolk Place S. Park Blvd.
Sumac Drive Meadow Lane north and south
Oriole Drive
Sunnydale Blvd. Meadow Lane north and south
Woodland Heights Blvd.
Sunset Circle E. Streamwood Blvd.
East Avenue
Ridge Circle east and west
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 182/498
Surrey Drive Meadow Lane
Sunnydale Blvd.
Sycamore Avenue Maple
Taft Court W. Streamwood Blvd.
Tall Grass Court Sutton Road
Tall Tree Drive S. Bartlett Road
Tanglewood Drive Center Road
Walnut Drive north and south
Walnut Drive east and west
Teak Lane East Avenue
Thorndale Court Walnut Drive
Tilia Court English Oak Lane
Timber Trail S. Bartlett Road
Schaumburg Road
Tinnerella Avenue Irving Park Road
Trail Ridge Court Schaumburg Road
Truman Court W. Streamwood Blvd.
Truman Lane W. Streamwood Blvd.
Whispering Drive
Tuscany Drive Lake Street
Valley Lane Club Tree Drive
Lake Street
Villa Road E. Streamwood Blvd.
Hillside Drive
Vine Street E. Irving Park Road
Meadow Lane
W. Bittersweet Lane W. Magnolia Drive
W. Blackberry Court W. Magnolia Drive
W. Briarwood Drive S. Bartlett Road
W. Greenmeadows Blvd. Bode Road
Schaumburg Road
N. Greenmeadows Blvd.
S. Greenmeadows Blvd.
W. Greenmeadows Blvd. west
W. Jonquil Court W. Magnolia Drive
W. Kennedy Drive N. Greenmeadows Blvd.
W. Larkspur Lane W. Magnolia Drive
W. Magnolia Drive W. Larkspur Lane
W. Streamwood Blvd. Madison Drive
Walden Trail Bartlett Road
Walnut Drive Center Road east and west
Tanglewood Drive north and south
Timber Trail
W. Schaumburg Road
Warwick Court Hastings Mill Drive
Washington Avenue Jackson Lane
Jefferson Lane
Washington Court Washington Avenue
Waterton Drive W. Schaumburg Road
Waverly Avenue Ridge Circle
Woodland Heights Blvd.
Westgate Terrace Newberry Drive east and west
Weston Court Ascot Lane
Whispering Court Whispering Drive
Whispering Drive Irving Park Road
W. Streamwood Blvd.
Whitehall Court Williamsburg Drive
Whitewood Drive Clematis Drive
East Avenue
Wicker Avenue Sunnydale Blvd.
Wildflower Way Irving Park Road
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 183/498
Schaumburg Road
Williamsburg Drive Bode Road
Barrington Road
Willow Road Hillside Drive
Winchester Drive Brittany Drive
W. Irving Park Road
Windgate Court Garden Circle
Windsor Court Garden Circle
Wisteria Drive Acorn Drive
Hazelnut Drive
Woodbury Court Hastings Mill Road
Woodland Heights Blvd. East Avenue
Ridge Circle east and west
S. Park Blvd.
Woodmar Court Garden Circle
Woodridge Lane S. Park Blvd. east and west
S. Park Blvd. south
Woodview Drive Woodland Heights Blvd.
Yellowstone Drive Elizabeth Drive
Yorkshire Drive Francis Drive
Phoenix Lake Avenue
(Ord. 2007-11, 3-15-2007)
5-4-3: POSTING SIGNS:
Suitable signs, including stop signs, for all through streets, stop streets, one-way streets or alleys, and intersections and any other necessary locations
within the village, shall be posted or caused to be posted by the chief of police and as designated in any recorded subdivision's planned unit development
agreement, in accordance with the provisions of the "Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices" and all appropriate traffic studies. (Ord. 2007-11, 3-15-
2007)
Chapter 5
VEHICLE LICENSES
(Rep. by Ord. 2005-4, 1-20-2005)
Chapter 6
BICYCLE REGULATIONS
5-6-1: TRAFFIC LAWS APPLICABLE:
Every person riding a bicycle upon a roadway shall be granted all the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by
the laws of this State declaring rules of the road applicable to vehicles or by the traffic ordinances of the Village applicable to the driver of a vehicle, except
as to those provisions of law and Village ordinances which by their nature can have no application. (1994 Code)
5-6-2: SPEED OF BICYCLES:
No person shall operate a bicycle at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions existing. (1994 Code)
5-6-3: RIDING BICYCLES ON SIDEWALKS:
A. No person shall ride a bicycle upon a sidewalk within a business district.
B. No person twelve (12) years of age or more shall ride a bicycle upon any sidewalk in any district.
C. Whenever any person is riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk, such person shall yield the right of way to any pedestrian andshall give audible signal before
overtaking and passing such pedestrian. (1994 Code)
5-6-4: RIDING BICYCLES ON STREETS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 184/498
A. Every person operating a bicycle upon a roadway shall ride as near to the right-hand side of the roadway as practicable, and at all times giving the right
of way to other moving vehicles.
B. Persons riding bicycles upon a roadway shall not ride other than single file except on paths or parts of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of
bicycles. (1994 Code)
5-6-5: CLINGING TO MOVING VEHICLES:
Any person riding upon any bicycle, motorcycle, motor-driven cycle, coaster, sled, roller skates or any toy vehicle shall not attach the same or himself to
any moving vehicle upon any roadway. (1994 Code)
5-6-6: CARRYING ARTICLES ON BICYCLES:
No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle or article which prevents the rider from keeping at least one hand upon the handlebars.
(1994 Code)
5-6-7: PARKING:
No person shall park a bicycle upon a street other than upon the roadway against the curb, upon the sidewalk in a rack to support the bicycle, against a
building or at the curb in such manner as to afford the least obstruction to pedestrian traffic. (1994 Code)
5-6-8: LIGHTED LAMPS AND AUDIBLE SIGNALING DEVICES:
A. Every bicycle when in use at nighttime shall be equipped with a headlamp which shall emit a white light visible from a minimum distance of five hundred
feet (500') from the front and with a rear red lamp emitting a red light visible from a distance of at least five hundred feet (500') from the rear.
B. No person shall operate a bicycle equipped with any siren or whistle.
C. Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake which will enable the operator to make the braked wheel skid on dry, level, clean pavement. (1994 Code)
5-6-9: RIDING ON BICYCLES:
A. A person propelling a bicycle shall not ride other than astride a permanent and regular seat attached thereto.
B. No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at one time than the number for which it is designed and equipped. (1994 Code)
5-6-10: OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES:
Any person operating a bicycle shall comply with all official traffic-control signals, signs and other control devices applicable to vehicles, unless otherwise
directed by a police officer. (1994 Code)
5-6-11: BICYCLE REGISTRATION:
5-6-11-1: REGISTRATION REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any resident to operate or use or permit to be operated or used, or rent for use, any two (2) wheel bicycle upon any public highways,
streets, sidewalks, avenues or public places unless otherwise prohibited in the Village without first obtaining therefor a registration certificate from the
Village. (1994 Code)
5-6-11-2: ISSUANCE OF REGISTRATION:
The Chief of Police or his designated agent shall, upon receipt of written application, issue the bicycle registration which shall be effective until the bicycle
is sold, transferred or dismantled. Any such registration when issued shall entitle the person to operate any bicycle for which said registration has been
issued upon all public highways, sidewalks, avenues and public places. (1994 Code)
5-6-11-3: REGISTRATION TAGS:
The Village shall provide registration tags together with registration cards or certificates. Said tags and registration documents shall have numbers
stamped thereon in numerical order. The tags shall be firmly attached to the bicycle frame below the seat facing forward during the valid term of such
registration. (1994 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 185/498
5-6-11-4: REGISTRATION FEES:
There shall be no fee for any bicycle registration hereunder. (1994 Code)
5-6-11-5: TRANSFER OF REGISTRATION:
It shall be the duty of every person residing in the Village who sells or transfers ownership of any two (2) wheeled bicycle to remove and destroy the
registration tag at the time of sale or transfer.
It shall be the duty of the purchaser or transferee, providing they reside within the Village, to apply within five (5) days of the date of transfer or sale for
registration of said bicycle. (1994 Code)
5-6-12: EFFECT OF BICYCLE REGULATIONS:
A. The parent of any child and the guardian of any ward shall not authorize or knowingly permit any such child or ward to violate any of the provisions of
this Chapter applicable to bicycles.
B. The regulations of this Chapter applicable to bicycles shall apply whenever a bicycle is operated upon any street or public sidewalk, avenue or any
public path set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles, subject to those exceptions stated herein. (1994 Code)
5-6-13: ENFORCEMENT OF BICYCLE REGULATIONS:
A. First Offense: Persons violating this Chapter for the first time shall be issued a warning ticket; a letter shall be sent to the parents or guardian of those
offenders under the age of eighteen (18), while those offenders eighteen (18) years of age and older shall receive a letter addressed to their attention.
The letter will state the specific violation that was committed by the offender and shall contain a copy of the warning ticket so issued. It is further
provided that this subsection shall not be construed to prevent the issuance of a written citation to any offender eighteen (18) years of age or older who
commits any violation which endangers life or property.
B. Second Offense: Persons violating this Chapter for the second time shall be issued a written citation. The Village will, however, agree not to prosecute
the offender if he agrees to attend a counseling session with the Police Department Education Officer. The counseling session must be held within two
(2) weeks from the date of citation issuance. Those persons who fail to attend an agreed upon counseling session shall be subject to prosecution on
the original citation.
C. Third Offense: Persons violating this Chapter for the third time shall be issued a written citation and shall be prosecuted. (1994 Code)
5-6-14: PENALTY:
Any person convicted of a violation of any provision of this Chapter shall be punished as provided in Section 1-4-1 of this Code. (1994 Code)
Chapter 7
IMPOUNDMENT OF MOTOR VEHICLES USED IN THE COMMISSION OF CERTAIN
OFFENSES
5-7-1: MOTOR VEHICLE IMPOUNDMENT:
Any motor vehicle operated, used, or in the physical control of any person, with the express or implied permission of the owner or lessee of record (as
registered with the Secretary of State, State of Illinois), within the Village of Streamwood or on a public roadway within the Village of Streamwood during
the commission of or in furtherance of any offense or violation set forth in section 5-7-2 of this chapter shall be subject to impoundment by the Village of
Streamwood, and the owner or lessee of record of said vehicle may be liable to the Village for an administrative fee in the amount of five hundred dollars
($500.00), in addition to any towing and storage fees as hereinafter provided. (Ord. 2017-23, 9-21-2017)
5-7-2: VIOLATIONS OR OFFENSES SUBJECT TO IMPOUNDMENT:
Statute Reference
A.
Operation or use of a motor vehicle while in the commission of or in the attempt to commit an offense for which a motor
vehicle may be seized and forfeited pursuant to section 36-1 of the Illinois Criminal Code of 2012.
720 ILCS 5/36-1 et
seq.
B.
Operating or in physical control of a motor vehicle while driver's license, permit, or privilege to operate a motor vehicle is
suspended or revoked, or similar provision of this Code, excluding a suspension for an emission violation and excluding a
suspension for an unpaid citation whether parking or moving.
625 ILCS 5/6-303;
5-1-1-6-303
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 186/498
C.
Driving under the influence of alcohol, other drug or drugs, intoxicating compound or compounds, or any combination
thereof or similar provision of this Code.
625 ILCS 5/11-501;
5-1-1-11-501
D.
Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission or in the attempt to commit, an offense in violation of section 24-1,
24-1.5, or 24-3.1 of the Illinois Criminal Code of 1961 or the Illinois Criminal Code of 2012.
720 ILCS 5/24-1,
5/24-1.5 or 5/24-
3.1
E.
Possession of a controlled substance. 720 ILCS 570/402
F.
Possession of cannabis in excess of 30 grams. 720 ILCS 550/4
G.
Operation or physical control of a motor vehicle without a valid driver's license or operating a motor vehicle on a public
highway with an expired driver's license if the period of expiration is greater than 1 year or similar provision of this Code.
625 ILCS 5/6-101;
5-1-1-6-101
H.
Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of or in the attempt to commit any misdemeanor or felony offense
in violation of the Illinois Criminal Code of 1961 or the Illinois Criminal Code of 2012 or in furtherance of the commission
of any felony offense as defined by the Illinois Criminal Code.
720 ILCS 5/1-1 et
seq.
I.
Operation of a motor vehicle when an outstanding arrest warrant has been issued by a Circuit Court Clerk in Illinois for
the driver of the vehicle for failure to appear and answer charges for violations of section 6-101, 6-303 or 11-501 of the
Illinois Vehicle Code or similar provision of this Code.
625 ILCS 5/6-101,
5/6-303 or 5/11-
501
J.
Operation or use of a motor vehicle while soliciting, possessing, or attempting to solicit or possess cannabis in excess of
30 grams or a controlled substance as defined by the Cannabis Control Act or the Illinois Controlled Substances Act.
720 ILCS 550/1 et
seq., 720 ILCS
570/100 et seq.
(Ord. 2017-23, 9-21-2017)
5-7-3: EXISTING REGULATIONS NOT ABROGATED:
A. The provisions of this chapter shall be in addition to and shall not replace or otherwise abrogate any existing State or Federal law that relates to the
seizure and/or impoundment of motor vehicles, and any penalty provided herein shall be in addition to any and all penalties that may be assessed or
imposed by a court for violation of any criminal offense or local ordinance violation offense.
B. Any and all fees incurred for towing and/or storage of a vehicle seized under this chapter shall be those approved by the Chief of Police for all towing
companies authorized to tow for the Village. (Ord. 2017-23, 9-21-2017)
5-7-4: EXCEPTIONS:
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply if at the time of the offense the vehicle was stolen and the theft was reported to the appropriate police
authority within twenty four (24) hours after the theft was discovered, or the vehicle was otherwise operated without the knowledge and express or implied
consent of the registered owner or lessee. (Ord. 2017-23, 9-21-2017)
5-7-5: NOTICE; TOWING; RELEASE:
A. Whenever a police officer has probable cause to believe that a vehicle is subject to impoundment pursuant to this chapter and the police officer has
arrested the operator or person in physical control of the vehicle for any of the offenses set forth in section 5-7-2 of this chapter, the police officer shall
provide for the towing of the vehicle to a facility authorized by the Village. Prior to or at the time the vehicle is towed, the Village shall notify or make a
reasonable attempt to notify the owner, lessee or any person identifying himself as the owner or lessee of the vehicle, or any person who is found to be
in physical control of the vehicle at the time of the alleged offense, of the fact of the impoundment and of the vehicle owner's or lessee's right to request
a preliminary vehicle impoundment hearing to be conducted in accordance with subsection 5-7-6A of this chapter and hearing pursuant to subsection
5-7-6B of this chapter. The vehicle shall be impounded pending the completion of the hearing(s) provided for in subsections 5-7-6A and B of this
chapter, unless the owner, lessee or lien holder of record of the vehicle or someone on his/her behalf posts with the Village a cash bond in the amount
of five hundred dollars ($500.00) and pays the towing and storage charges.
B. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection A of this section, the arresting police officer may release the vehicle prior to towing if the vehicle subject to
impoundment was not owned by the person placed under arrest and the registered owner or lessee or some other person legally authorized to possess
the vehicle shall arrive at the scene of the arrest prior to the actual removal or towing of the vehicle and the lawful owner or lessee or person lawfully
entitled to possession of the vehicle possesses a valid operator's license, proof of ownership or registration, proof of liability insurance and would not,
as determined by the arresting police officer, indicate a lack of ability to operate the motor vehicle in a safe manner, or who would otherwise, by
operating the motor vehicle, not be in violation of the Illinois Vehicle Code. If the vehicle subject to impoundment is owned or leased by the person
under arrest, the arresting officer may, prior to the actual removal or towing of the vehicle, release the vehicle to another person with the written
consent of the owner or lessee, provided that such other person possesses a valid operator's license, proof of liability insurance and would not, as
determined by the arresting police officer, indicate a lack of ability to operate the motor vehicle in a safe manner or who would otherwise, by operating
the motor vehicle, not be in violation of the Illinois Vehicle Code. (Ord. 2017-23, 9-21-2017)
5-7-6: HEARINGS:
A. Preliminary Hearing: The owner or lessee of record of a vehicle impounded may contest the impoundment of the vehicle by requesting a preliminary
hearing. A request for a preliminary hearing must be made within twenty four (24) hours of the impoundment. The request shall be deemed filed upon
delivery to the Chief of Police care of the Streamwood Police Department. The preliminary hearing request shall be in writing and the Chief of Police or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 187/498
his designee shall conduct the preliminary hearing within twenty four (24) hours after receipt of the request, excluding Saturdays, Sundays, or Village
holidays, in which case the preliminary hearing shall be heard on the next business day after the request. All interested parties shall be given a
reasonable opportunity to be heard at the preliminary hearing. The formal rules of evidence shall not apply at the hearing, and hearsay evidence shall
be admissible only if it is of the type commonly relied upon by reasonably prudent persons in the conduct of their affairs. If, after the hearing, the Chief
of Police or his designee determines that there is probable cause to believe that the vehicle is subject to impoundment, he/she shall order the
continued impoundment of the vehicle as herein provided, unless the owner, lessee or lien holder of record of the vehicle posts with the Village a cash
bond in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00), and pays any applicable towing and storage fees. If the Chief of Police or his/her designee
determines that there is no such probable cause to believe the vehicle was used or operated during the commission or attempted commission of the
offenses set forth in section 5-7-2 of this chapter, then the vehicle shall be returned to the registered owner or lessee without penalty.
B. Notice; Procedures; Hearing: Within ten (10) days after a vehicle is impounded, the Chief of Police or his designee shall notify the registered owner,
lessee and/or lien holder of record of the impounded vehicle by personal service or first class mail, postage prepaid, of the date, time, and location of
the hearing to be conducted. The owner or lessee may appear at the hearing and enter a determination to contest or not contest the basis of the
impoundment. If the owner or lessee elects not to contest the basis for the impoundment, the matter will be disposed of at that time by entry of an
administrative fee if a factual basis exists for the impoundment. If the owner or lessee elects to contest the basis for the impoundment, a hearing shall
be held immediately, unless continued by order of the Hearing Officer. Continuances shall only be granted for good cause shown. The initial hearing
shall be convened within forty five (45) days after the date of the mailing of the notice. All interested persons shall be given a reasonable opportunity to
be heard at the hearing. At any time prior to the hearing date, the Hearing Officer may, at the request of the registered owner or lessee of the vehicle or
the Village, direct witnesses to appear and give testimony at the hearing. Subpoenas for the production of witnesses and records may be issued upon
request of either party. The formal rules of evidence shall not apply at the hearing, and hearsay evidence shall be admissible only if it is of the type
commonly relied upon by reasonably prudent persons in the conduct of their affairs. If, after the hearing, the Hearing Officer determines by a
preponderance of the evidence that the police officer had probable cause to believe that the vehicle was used or operated or in the physical control of a
person in connection with or during the commission or attempted commission of any offense set forth in section 5-7-2 of this chapter and the operator
of the motor vehicle was arrested for such offense, the Hearing Officer shall enter an order finding the owner or lessee of record of the vehicle civilly
liable to the Village for an administrative fee in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00). The Hearing Officer shall order the vehicle to remain
impounded until the owner, lessee or someone on the owner's or lessee's behalf pays the administrative fee to the Village plus any and all fees to the
towing entity or Village for the towing and storage of the vehicle as the case may be. If, after proper service of notice, the owner or lessee of record fails
to appear at the hearing, the Hearing Officer shall conduct the hearing in absentia and, if appropriate, enter a default order in favor of the Village, a
copy of which default order shall be sent to the registered owner, lessee and/or lien holder of record by first class mail, postage prepaid. If at the
hearing the Hearing Officer finds that no probable cause existed to believe such violation occurred, the Hearing Officer shall order the immediate return
of the vehicle and cash bond, if posted, to the owner, lessee or lienholder of record without assessing any penalty.
C. Official Record: All hearings shall be recorded and said recording shall be the official record of the proceedings. At the conclusion of the hearing, the
Hearing Officer shall issue a decision sustaining or overruling the impoundment. All findings, decisions and orders of the Hearing Officer shall be
reduced to writing, signed by the Hearing Officer and served upon all parties within seven (7) days after the hearing by first class mail, postage prepaid,
or personal service. (Ord. 2017-23, 9-21-2017)
5-7-7: ADMINISTRATIVE FEE:
If an administrative fee is imposed, the fee shall constitute a debt due and owing to the Village of Streamwood. All fees shall be paid into the General
Corporate Fund of the Village of Streamwood. If a cash bond has been posted the bond shall be applied to the fee. Except as may otherwise be provided
in this chapter, all vehicles shall continue to be impounded until the fee is paid to the Village and any applicable towing and storage fees are paid to the
towing entity or Village. If the administrative fee and applicable towing and storage fees are not paid within twenty (20) days after the expiration of time in
which administrative review of the Hearing Officer's determination may be sought if no such action for review has been filed, the vehicle shall be deemed
abandoned and shall be disposed of in accordance with the provisions of article II chapter 4 of the Illinois Vehicle Code1. (Ord. 2017-23, 9-21-2017)
5-7-8: VEHICLE POSSESSION:
Except as may otherwise be provided by law or by order of the Hearing Officer, no owner, lien holder of record, or other person shall be legally entitled to
take possession of an impounded vehicle until the bond, administrative fee and towing and storage fees have been paid. The foregoing notwithstanding,
whenever a person or other entity with a lien of record against an impounded vehicle has commenced foreclosure or repossession proceedings prior to the
date of impoundment, possession of the vehicle shall be given to that person if the lien holder agrees in writing to refund to the Village the amount of the
net proceeds of any foreclosure sale, less any amounts required to pay all lien holders of record, not to exceed the administrative fee, plus the applicable
towing and storage fees. (Ord. 2017-23, 9-21-2017)
5-7-9: HEARING OFFICER:
The Hearing Officer shall be appointed by the Village President of the Village of Streamwood. The Hearing Officer shall be an attorney licensed to practice
law in the State of Illinois for a minimum of three (3) years next preceding the date of his/her appointment. (Ord. 2017-23, 9-21-2017)
5-7-10: DECISION REVIEW:
Any party aggrieved by a final decision of the Hearing Officer may appeal that decision pursuant to the provision of the Illinois Administrative Review Law.
(Ord. 2017-23, 9-21-2017)
5-7-11: FAILURE TO PAY ADMINISTRATIVE FEE:
Unless stayed by a court of competent jurisdiction, any administrative fee which remains unpaid in whole or in part after the expiration of the deadline for
seeking judicial review under the Administrative Review Law may be enforced in the same manner as a judgment entered by a court of competent
jurisdiction. (Ord. 2017-23, 9-21-2017)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 188/498
5-7-12: VILLAGE LIABILITY:
If the Administrative Hearing Officer determines that the Village exceeded its authority in the impoundment of a motor vehicle under the provisions of this
chapter or section 11-208.7 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, the Village shall be liable to the owner or lessee of the improperly impounded motor vehicle for the
cost of vehicle storage and reasonable attorney's fees. (Ord. 2018-20, 8-2-2018)
Chapter 8
AUTOMATED TRAFFIC LAW ENFORCEMENT SYSTEM
5-8-1: ADOPTED:
There is hereby adopted an automated traffic law enforcement system of the village of Streamwood, Cook County, Illinois. (Ord. 2008-18, 7-17-2008)
5-8-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter:
AUTOMATED TRAFFIC LAW ENFORCEMENT SYSTEM: A device(s) located within the village of Streamwood with one or more motor vehicle sensors
working in conjunction with a red light signal to produce recorded images of a motor vehicle entering an intersection against a steady red or flashing red
signal indicating a violation of section 11-306 of the Illinois vehicle code1. The automated traffic law enforcement system shall not be used to enforce
speed limit regulations. The system is designed to obtain a clear recorded image of a violating motor vehicle and its license plate.
RECORDED IMAGES: Images recorded by an automated traffic law enforcement system, on either two (2) or more photographs, two (2) or more
micrographs, two (2) or more electronic images or a video recording showing the motor vehicle, capturing and displaying images of the vehicle violating
traffic control signals, together with at least one clearly recorded image identifying the vehicle's license plate. The recorded image shall also display the
time, date and location of the violation.
VILLAGE: The village of Streamwood, Cook County, Illinois. (Ord. 2008-18, 7-17-2008)
5-8-3: SIGNAGE:
Any intersection equipped with an automated traffic law enforcement system shall have a sign posted which is clearly visible to approaching traffic
indicating that the intersection is being monitored by an automated traffic law enforcement system. (Ord. 2008-18, 7-17-2008)
5-8-4: VIOLATIONS, REVIEW, NOTICE, SERVICE:
When the automated traffic law enforcement system records a motor vehicle entering an intersection in spite of a steady red or flashing red signal
indication, in violation of section 11-306 of the Illinois vehicle code, or similar provisions of section 5-1-1 of this title, the duly appointed village official shall,
for each violation recorded, issue a written notice of the violation to the registered owner or lessee of the vehicle as the alleged violator. The notice shall be
delivered by first class mail, postage prepaid, within thirty (30) days after the Illinois secretary of state notifies the village of the identity of the registered
owner or lessee of the vehicle, but in no event later than ninety (90) days after the violation. Prior to service of a notice of violation, the associated
recorded image shall be reviewed by a technician employed or contracted by the village, who shall inspect the image and determine whether the motor
vehicle violated section 11-306 of the Illinois vehicle code and/or similar provisions of section 5-1-1 of this title, and whether one of the defenses
enumerated hereinafter is visibly applicable upon inspection of the recorded image. Upon determination that the recorded image captures a violation of
one of the foregoing provisions and that no defense applies, the notice of violation shall be served upon the registered vehicle owner in the manner herein
provided. The traffic compliance administrator or other duly appointed official shall retain a copy of all violation notices, recorded images and other
correspondence mailed to the alleged violator. Each notice of violation shall constitute evidence of the facts contained in the notice and is admissible in
any proceeding alleging a violation of the above noted statutory and local ordinance provisions and shall establish prima facie evidence of a violation,
subject to rebuttal on the basis of the defenses established in section 5-8-5 of this chapter. Each notice of violation shall include the following:
A. The name and address of the registered owner or lessee of the vehicle, as indicated by the records of the secretary of state, or, if such information is
outdated or unattainable, then the last known address recorded in a United States post office approved database;
B. The registration number of the motor vehicle involved in the violation;
C. The violation charged, with specific reference to that section of this code or Illinois vehicle code, allegedly violated;
D. The location where the violation occurred;
E. The date and time of the violation;
F. A copy of the recorded images;
G. The amount of the civil penalty imposed under section 5-8-6 of this chapter and the date by which the civil penalty shall be paid if liability for the
violation is not going to be contested;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 189/498
H. A statement that the recorded images are evidence of a violation of a red light signal violation or expired registration;
I. A warning that failure to either pay the civil penalty or request a hearing to contest liability within twenty one (21) days of the mailing of the notice of
violation is an admission of liability and may result in a suspension of the driving privileges of the registered owner or lessee of the vehicle in addition to
other specified penalties for failing to appear at the hearing or pay the fine in advance of the hearing;
J. A statement that the registered owner or lessee of the vehicle may elect to proceed either by paying the fine stated in the notice of violation or by
challenging the charge in an administrative hearing; and
K. The date, time and place of the administrative hearing at which the charge may be contested on its merits, a date that shall be no less than fifteen (15)
nor more than thirty (30) days from the mailing or other service of the notice of violation. (Ord. 2008-18, 7-17-2008)
5-8-5: DEFENSES AVAILABLE:
The following shall be the only defenses available for an alleged violator contesting liability for a violation of a red light signal, which shall be weighed by
the hearing officer and shall only rebut the prima facie case established by the notice of violation insofar as one or more of the following defenses are
established by a preponderance of the evidence:
A. The motor vehicle and/or registration plates were stolen before the violation occurred and were not under the exclusive control of or in the possession of
the owner at the time of the red light signal violation, which defense may be demonstrated through the submission of a certified copy of a report
concerning the stolen motor vehicle or registration plates filed with a law enforcement agency prior to the time of the alleged violation;
B. The driver of the vehicle passed through the intersection in spite of a red light either to yield the right of way to an emergency vehicle, or as part of a
funeral procession; and
C. The driver of the vehicle passed through the intersection in spite of a red light at the direction of a police officer acting within the scope of his duties; or
D. The operator of the vehicle received a uniform traffic violation from a police officer, which citation is determined to be a moving violation reportable to
the Illinois secretary of state. (Ord. 2008-18, 7-17-2008)
5-8-6: PENALTY:
Unless the driver of the motor vehicle in question received a uniform traffic citation from a police officer at the time of the alleged violation, the motor
vehicle owner is subject to a civil penalty not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a proved violation of this chapter, plus an additional penalty of
not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for failure to pay the original penalty or contest the violation at an administrative hearing in a timely manner, if
the motor vehicle is recorded by an automated traffic law enforcement system. Any penalty imposed for a violation of this chapter is a civil penalty and is
not a violation of a traffic regulation governing the movement of motor vehicles and shall not be transmitted to the Illinois secretary of state to be recorded
on the driving record of the vehicle owner. (Ord. 2008-18, 7-17-2008)
5-8-7: HEARING:
A. All contested hearings, whether in person or contested by mail, shall be heard and adjudicated by the village's duly appointed administrative hearing
officer, appointed pursuant to title 1, chapter 17 of this code, who shall, after hearing and/or review of evidence submitted, enter a finding of liable or not
liable as to the offense charged. The provisions, procedures and penalties provided in this chapter shall apply exclusively to the adjudication of alleged
automated red light enforcement violations.
B. The owner of a vehicle being operated in violation of section 11-306 of the Illinois vehicle code or similar provisions of section 5-1-1 of this title may
request a hearing no later than the respond by date on the notice of violation (21 days from the date of issuance of the notice), to challenge the
evidence or set forth an applicable allowable defense. The notice of violation shall constitute evidence of the facts contained in the notice and is
admissible in any proceeding alleging a violation of section 11-306 of the Illinois vehicle code or similar provisions of section 5-1-1 of this title. The
notice of violation shall be prima facie evidence of a violation, subject to rebuttal on the basis of the defenses established in section 5-8-5 of this
chapter.
C. The owner's failure to appear at the hearing shall result in a finding of liability. In the event of a failure to appear, a "findings, decision and order" letter
will be sent to the owner. The owner's failure to pay the fine amount by the date specified in that letter will result in a final determination of liability. (Ord.
2008-18, 7-17-2008)
5-8-8: NOTICE OF DETERMINATION OF LIABILITY:
If the registered owner fails to pay or contest the notice of violation within twenty one (21) days, a notice of determination of liability will be sent to the
owner indicating that a fine in the amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00) is due to the village of Streamwood. The notice will also state that the owner
can petition the village to set aside the determination of liability before it becomes final. If the owner does not pay the one hundred dollars ($100.00) as
specified in the notice, or petition the village to set aside the determination, within twenty one (21) days, a notice of final determination will be sent to the
owner indicating that the owner has exhausted all challenge options and the one hundred dollar ($100.00) fine is a debt due and owing to the village and
must be paid within fourteen (14) days. The owner will also be notified that the failure to pay the one hundred dollar ($100.00) fine within fourteen (14)
days will result in a late fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) added to the original fine. (Ord. 2008-18, 7-17-2008)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 190/498
5-8-9: FINAL DETERMINATION:
A final determination of violation liability shall occur following failure to pay the fine, a failure to request a hearing by the respond by date, after a hearing
officer's determination of violation liability, failure to file a petition to set aside determination of liability in a timely manner and the exhaustion of or failure to
exhaust any administrative review procedures provided by this code or the Illinois administrative review law2. Where a person fails to appear at a hearing
to contest the alleged violation in the time and manner specified in a prior mailed notice, the hearing officer's determination shall become final upon a
failure to pay the amount owed on the date provided in the "findings, decision and order" letter. Appeal from a final determination of liability may be made
to the circuit court of Cook County pursuant to the provisions of the Illinois administrative review act. (Ord. 2008-18, 7-17-2008)
5-8-10: NOTICE OF FINAL DETERMINATION:
A notice of final determination shall be sent following the final determination of liability and after the conclusion of the period for judicial review. The notice
of final determination shall include the following information:
A. A statement that the unpaid fine is a debt due and owing to the village of Streamwood; and
B. A warning that a failure to pay any fine due and owing to the village of Streamwood after a judgment has been entered may result in the suspension of
the person's driver's license for failure to pay fines or penalties for five (5) or more final determinations of liability under this chapter. (Ord. 2008-18, 7-
17-2008)
5-8-11: NONRESIDENTS:
Where the registered owner or lessee of the cited vehicle is not a resident of the village but seeks to contest the merits of the alleged violation, such
person may contest the charges using the same available defenses set forth in section 5-8-5 of this chapter, but rather than attend the administrative
hearing, the nonresident may submit any and all documentary evidence to the ordinance enforcement administrator or other duly appointed official no later
than the hearing date, together with a written statement setting forth with specific reason(s) why they believe that the owner is not liable and that they are
nonresidents of the village of Streamwood. The ordinance enforcement administrator or other duly appointed official shall forward all timely submitted
materials to the hearing officer for review and determination. (Ord. 2008-18, 7-17-2008)
5-8-12: PETITIONS TO SET ASIDE DETERMINATION:
A petition to set aside determination of an automated traffic law violation must be filed with or mailed to the ordinance enforcement administrator or other
duly authorized village official within fourteen (14) days of the date of mailing of the notice of determination of liability. The grounds for the petition are
limited to:
A. The person was not the owner or lessee of the cited vehicle on the date the violation notice was issued; or
B. The person already paid the fine for the violation in question; or
C. Excusable failure to appear at or request a new date for a hearing.
Upon receipt of a timely petition to set aside the determination of liability, the hearing officer shall review the petition to determine if cause has been
shown to set aside the determination. If cause has been shown, the village shall forward the petitioner a new hearing date on which the petitioner must
appear to present his case. The village shall notify the petitioner of the hearing officer's decision to grant a hearing or deny the petition within fourteen
(14) days of the hearing officer's decision. (Ord. 2008-18, 7-17-2008)
5-8-13: NOTICE OF IMPENDING DRIVER'S LICENSE SUSPENSION:
A notice of impending driver's license suspension shall be sent to any person liable for any fine or penalty that remains due and owing on five (5) or more
final determinations of liability for violations of this chapter. The notice of impending driver's license suspension shall state that the failure to pay the fine
owing within forty five (45) days of the notice's date will result in the village of Streamwood notifying the secretary of state of the state of Illinois that the
person is eligible for initiation of suspension proceedings under section 6-306.5 of the Illinois vehicle code3.
The notice of impending driver's license suspension shall be sent by first class mail, postage prepaid, to the address recorded with the secretary of state
or, if any notice to that address is returned as undeliverable, to the last known address recorded in a United States post office approved database. (Ord.
2008-18, 7-17-2008)
5-8-14: DRIVER'S LICENSE SUSPENSION:
The ordinance enforcement administrator, who shall be appointed by the chief of police of the village of Streamwood, or other duly appointed official, by
certified report, may request that the secretary of state suspend the driving privileges of an owner of a registered vehicle who has failed to pay any fine or
penalty due and owing as a result of five (5) final determinations of liability. The report shall be certified and contain the following:
A. The name, last known address of the owner of the vehicle as recorded with the secretary of state, or as provided by the lessor of the cited vehicle at the
time of lease, or as recorded in a United States post office approved database if any notice sent under this chapter is returned as undeliverable, and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 191/498
driver's license number of the person who failed to pay the fine(s) or penalty(ies) and the registration number of any vehicle known to be registered to
such person in another state;
B. The name of the village of Streamwood as making the report; and
C. A statement that a notice of impending driver's license suspension has been sent to the person named in the report at the address recorded with the
secretary of state or at the last address known to the lessor of the cited vehicle at the time of the lease or, if any notice sent under this chapter is
returned as undeliverable at the last known address recorded at a United States post office approved database; the date on which such notice was
sent; and address to which such notice was sent.
The village shall notify the secretary of state whenever a person named in the certified report has paid the previously recorded fine(s) or penalty(ies) or
whenever the village determines that the original report was in error. A certified copy of such notification shall also be given upon request and at no
additional charge to the person named therein. (Ord. 2008-18, 7-17-2008)
5-8-15: CONFIDENTIALITY:
Recorded images made by the automated traffic law enforcement system shall be confidential and shall be made available only to the alleged violator,
governmental agencies and the village of Streamwood police department for purposes of adjudicating violations, statistical or other governmental
purposes. (Ord. 2008-18, 7-17-2008)
Title 6
FIRE PROTECTION
Chapter 1
FIRE DEPARTMENT
6-1-1: CREATION OF DEPARTMENT:
There is hereby created a fire department, an executive department of the village. The fire department shall consist of the fire chief and such other
members of the department as may be authorized from time to time by the president and board of trustees and appointed by the board of police and fire
commissioners. (1994 Code)
6-1-2: DUTIES OF PERSONNEL:
It shall be the function and duty of the fire department and every person thereof to provide emergency medical services, fire prevention activities,
community education activities, and extinguish accidental or destructive fires and to prevent the occurrence or spread of such fires. Any firefighter in
attendance at a fire shall obey the orders of the officer in command at such fire.
A. Compliance With Fire Prevention Regulations: It shall be the duty of all members of the fire department to enforce all the fire prevention regulations of
the village and all other ordinance provisions falling within the competence of the fire department. For this purpose, the members of the fire department
are hereby vested with the usual powers and authority of police officers.
B. Highest Ranking Officer In Charge: The highest ranking on duty officer arriving at the emergency scene first shall take command. The arrival of a chief
officer, when three (3) or more fire department units are activated, requires him/her to assume command of the emergency incident. Higher ranking
officers, who arrive at the scene, may choose to assume command or assume advisor positions.
C. Destruction Of Buildings: When it may be necessary for the protection of other property and to prevent the spread of the conflagration, the officer in
command may cause buildings to be removed, torn down, or destroyed in the best manner possible.
D. Other Duties: All members of the fire department shall perform such other duties as are required of them by this chapter or by such other rules and
regulations of the board of police and fire commissioners now or hereafter in force pertaining in any manner to the fire department. (1994 Code)
6-1-3: FIRE CHIEF; OFFICE CREATED, DUTIES:
A. There is hereby created the office of fire chief. The fire chief shall be appointed by the village manager. (Ord. 2005-24, 6-2-2005)
B. The fire chief shall have the control of the fire department and all fire apparatus belonging to the village. Whenever any fire apparatus needs repair, the
fire chief shall cause the same to be done without delay.
1. Departmental Responsibility, Rule Making Power, General Orders, Policy And Procedures: The fire chief shall be responsible for the training and
conduct of members of the department and may make or prescribe such rules and regulations for the guidance of members of the department as
shall be deemed necessary.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 192/498
2. Oath: Before entering upon the duties of office, the fire chief shall take the oath of office prescribed by statute for municipal officers and shall execute
a bond conditioned as provided by statute with security to be approved by the president and board of trustees in an amount as may be directed by
village ordinance or resolution. (1994 Code)
6-1-3-1: DEPUTY CHIEF:
A. Office Created: There is hereby created the office of deputy chief of the fire department, which officer shall be appointed by the village manager with
recommendations from the fire chief. The position of deputy chief shall rank immediately below the chief of the fire department.
B. Duties: The deputy chief shall:
1. Assume the responsibility for the administration of the fire department in the absence, disability or suspension of the chief.
2. Be an administrative executive officer for the fire department and have supervision of the personnel, operations and fire prevention services. (Ord.
2005-24, 6-2-2005)
6-1-3-2: BATTALION CHIEF:
A. Office Created: There is hereby created the office of battalion chief of the fire department, which officer shall be appointed by the village manager from
recommendations from the fire chief. If a battalion chief shall, at a later date, no longer be battalion chief of the fire department, he shall automatically
revert to and continue his permanent rank held at the time of his/her appointment and such person shall not lose his/her permanent rank by virtue of
such appointment.
The battalion chief shall report to the deputy chief of the fire department and serve under his/her direction. The battalion chief shall have both staff and
line officer responsibilities. As a line officer, duties shall include responding to all alarms of fire and assumption of command in the position of fire
ground commander and have total authority over the fire department operations until relieved by a senior officer.
B. Duties: A battalion chief of the fire department shall:
1. Execute general and special assignments in the planning, administration, coordination, direction, and review of departmental operations and
activities.
2. Serve as a member of the department's management team providing advice and assistance to the fire chief; assist in setting department goals and
in evaluating the extent and nature of their accomplishment.
3. Represent the department in relationships with other governmental officials and members of the public and conduct special assignments at the
direction of senior officers.
4. Perform related work and hours as specified by the senior officers.
5. The staff responsibilities of the battalion chief shall be assigned by the deputy chief of the fire department and shall change from time to time as
designated by the fire chief. (Ord. 2005-24, 6-2-2005)
6-1-4: APPOINTMENT AND COMPENSATION OF PERSONNEL:
All regular employees of the fire department shall be appointed by the board of fire and police commissioners. Such members shall be employees of the
village and shall receive such compensation as is fixed by the president and board of trustees from time to time.
All appointments of personnel shall be for a probationary period of one year. The board of fire and police commissioners may extend the probation upon
recommendation of the fire chief or if employee has not completed requirements of the job. If at the expiration of that time, the applicant, in the opinion of
the board of fire and police commissioners, proves to be fit for the position, he/she shall be permanently certified to the position by the board. If in the
judgment of the board, he/she shall prove unsatisfactory at the expiration of that time, he/she shall be dropped from the service. (1994 Code)
6-1-5: CONDUCT OF PERSONNEL:
A. It shall be the duty of every person of the fire department to conduct himself/herself in a proper and law abiding manner.
B. He/she shall not behave in any manner which is a discredit to the fire department or in any way be guilty of conduct unbecoming a member of the fire
department.
C. He/she shall promptly obey all lawful orders of his/her superiors and maintain his/her uniform, equipment and person in a neat and orderly condition.
D. He/she shall pay his/her debts promptly and not be seen in the company of, or associated with, persons of doubtful or questionable character.
E. He/she shall obey and abide by the rules and regulations promulgated by the fire chief, the village board, and the police and fire commission. (1994
Code)
6-1-6: SUSPENSION OF FIRE PERSONNEL, LIMITATIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 193/498
A suspension may be made with or without pay by the chief, and any person suspended without pay shall not be entitled to pay while so suspended until
he/she shall be returned to duty. (1994 Code)
6-1-7: INSPECTION OF BUILDINGS ON COMPLAINT:
The fire chief or assigned personnel of the fire department, upon the complaint of any person, or having concerns for the safety of the employees or
general public, or deeming it necessary, shall inspect all buildings and premises within the village. Whenever said members shall find any building or other
structure which is especially liable to fire for want of repairs, lack of or insufficient fire escapes, fire alarm apparatus, fire extinguishing equipment, by
reason of use or dilapidated condition, or from any other cause; and which is so situated as to endanger other property or the occupants thereof, and
whenever such officer shall find in any building combustible or explosive matter or flammable conditions dangerous to the safety of such building or the
occupants thereof, they shall order such dangerous conditions or materials to be removed or remedied and such order shall forthwith be complied with by
the owner or occupant of such premises or building. The fire chief or any employee of the fire department may at all reasonable hours enter any building or
premises within the village for the purpose of making any inspection or investigation under the provisions of this chapter as may be deemed necessary to
be made. (1994 Code)
6-1-8: RECORDS:
The fire chief shall keep or cause to be kept a record of all fires and other activities of the fire department and shall file said record in writing with the
president and board of trustees at least annually. (1994 Code)
6-1-9: PAID ON CALL FIREFIGHTERS:
The fire chief may appoint any reputable person as a paid on call firefighter to serve for such term and on such conditions as may be designated by the
terms of such appointment. Paid on call firefighters shall have the same duties while on duty as full time employees of the fire department and shall
receive such compensation as may be provided by the board of trustees. Appointments may be revoked at any time by the village board or the fire chief.
(1994 Code)
6-1-10: STREAMWOOD EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES:
A. Creation: There is hereby created a Streamwood emergency medical services which shall be part of the fire department.
B. Authority: The emergency medical services shall be under the authority of the fire chief and such other officers of the fire department as may be
authorized from time to time by the president and board of trustees. (1994 Code)
C. Duties: It shall be the duty of the emergency medical services to provide and operate an emergency ambulance service for persons becoming injured or
infirm and for the performance of any mutual aid compacts with neighboring municipalities. The emergency ambulance service shall be operated at all
times by qualified personnel trained in accordance with applicable state statutes and shall be utilized only under the following conditions:
1. Only for emergency purposes or as otherwise authorized by the fire chief to assist in the service of the residents of the village of Streamwood.
2. Only within the corporate limits of the village, except for authorized mutual aid response.
3. To transport injured or sick persons for medical care at a facility approved by the Illinois department of public health. (Ord. 2005-24, 6-2-2005)
D. Fees:
1. Residents who have been provided emergency ambulance transport service by the village shall be required to pay a fee to the village, for each
incident, according to the ambulance fee schedule set by the centers for medicare and medicaid services (CMMS), as revised and published
annually.
The village shall accept government or private insurance payments as payment in full for services to persons residing in the village of Streamwood.
2. Nonresidents who have been provided emergency ambulance transport service by the village shall be required to pay a fee to the village, for each
incident, according to the schedule set forth below:
Basic life support (BLS) $625.00
Advanced life support I (ALS I) 725.00
Advanced life support II (ALS II) 975.00
Mileage 10.50 per mile
3. The village shall bill the recipient of ambulance transport services within thirty (30) days of the date of such service. The finance director shall
administer the collection of all fees due pursuant to this subsection D. (Ord. 2011-30, 11-17-2011)
6-1-11: PARAMEDIC:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 194/498
A. There is hereby created in the fire department of the village a position of paramedic which shall be compensated at salary grade as set forth by the
union contract.
B. The primary duties of the paramedic shall be to provide mobile intensive care ambulance coverage as a state certified paramedic and perform other
related duties as described in the job description by the village manager and fire chief.
C. A paramedic must be a state certified paramedic. (1994 Code)
Chapter 2
FIRE PREVENTION CODE
6-2-1: INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE ADOPTED:
For the purpose of establishing the minimum regulations governing the safeguarding of life and property from the hazards of fire and explosion arising from
the storage, handling, and use of hazardous substances, materials and devices; and from conditions hazardous to life or property in the use or occupancy
of buildings or premises; there is hereby adopted the international fire code, 2012, as published by the International Code Council, Inc., which shall be
henceforth known as the international fire code of the village of Streamwood, Illinois, together with all appendices, except such portions thereof as are
hereinafter expressly deleted, modified, or amended.
While the international fire code, 2012, and all appendices have hereinabove been adopted, the exceptions in section 6-2-5 of this chapter (consisting of
certain deletions and changes) shall control wherever the said exceptions are applicable or are in conflict with certain other provisions of said international
fire code, 2012. (Ord. 2015-13, 6-4-2015)
6-2-2: DEPARTMENT OF FIRE PREVENTION:
A. The international fire code shall be enforced by the fire chief or his designee as the code official.
B. Reports of the department of fire prevention shall be made periodically and transmitted to the chief executive officer of the village. Such report shall
contain all proceedings under the international fire code, with such statistics as the fire chief may wish to include therein. (Ord. 2008-4, 2-21-2008)
6-2-3: DEFINITIONS:
A. Wherever the word "municipality" is used in the fire prevention code, it shall be held to mean the village of Streamwood, Illinois.
B. Wherever the term "corporate counsel" is used in the fire prevention code, it shall be held to mean the attorney for the village. (Ord. 2008-4, 2-21-2008)
6-2-4: ESTABLISHMENT OF FIRE ZONES:
Three (3) fire zones are defined and recorded on the fire zone map.
Fire zone one includes the principal business district and closely built commercial and industrial areas.
Fire zone two includes other business, commercial and industrial areas.
Fire zone three includes all residential areas. (Ord. 2008-4, 2-21-2008)
6-2-5: AMENDMENTS TO FIRE CODE:
The international fire code is amended with the following local changes:
Section 101.1 Title. Shall read as follows:
101.1 Title: These regulations shall be known as the fire code of the village of Streamwood, hereinafter referred to as "this code."
Delete section 103.2 in its entirety.
Add section 307.4.1.1 as follows:
A permit shall be obtained from the fire code official in accordance with section 105.6 prior to kindling a bonfire. This section further restricts the
permitting process to owners of the land on which the fire is to be kindled.
Add section 307.4.2.1 as follows:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 195/498
A permit shall be obtained from the fire code official in accordance with section 105.6 prior to kindling a recreational fire. This section further restricts
the permitting process to owners of the land on which the fire is to be kindled.
Section 307.4.3: delete exception.
Add section 307.4.3.1 as follows:
Material To Be Burned: Outdoor fireplaces are limited to burning the following materials:
1. Cut wood (unpainted, unfinished).
2. Manufactured logs.
3. Manufactured non-wood logs specifically made for use in fireplaces.
No other material may be burned in outdoor fireplaces. Pressure treated wood, rubbish, leaves, garbage, and other waste are expressly prohibited.
Add section 307.4.3.2 as follows:
Smoke Generation: The fire in an outdoor fireplace must be maintained in such a manner as to minimize the generation of smoke. Smoke that is a
result of a smoldering or dying fire shall be eliminated. Generation of such smoke is considered a public nuisance punishable by fine.
Add section 307.4.3.2 as follows:
Extinguishing/Safety: All fires in an outdoor fireplace are prohibited during the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight and six o'clock (6:00) A.M.
Fires must be extinguished in such a manner that all air to the fire is cut off or wet down the burning material with water until it is cool to the touch.
All outdoor fireplaces must have a cover, screen, or glass doors to prevent the distribution of hot embers or sparks outside of the firebox.
Outdoor fireplaces shall be attended by an adult at all times. Attendants shall constantly maintain the ability to extinguish the fire such as a portable
fire extinguisher or water hose located on site. Manufacturer's installation, operating, and safety instructions shall be followed.
Add section 307.4.3.3 as follows:
Violations of this ordinance are subject to a minimum fine as set forth in section 1-4-1 of the village code. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
Section 311.2.2: delete exception 1.
Add section 505.2 Building Address:
505.2 Rear Entrance: The rear entrance of all buildings shall have a street address number in compliance with section 505.1.
Exception: Detached one- and two-family dwellings.
505.3 Multiple Doors: Doors located within the exterior perimeter of all buildings that are in addition to the main entrance or main rear entrance shall
be identified with address numbers or other approved designation by the code official.
Exception: Detached one- and two-family dwellings.
Add section 506.1.1 as follows:
Keys Required: Required keys shall include those necessary to access exterior and interior doors and provide entry to all spaces. Keys for fire alarm
panels and fire protection systems. Keys for elevators and electrical equipment. Keys or codes to access security alarms shall not be provided. In
buildings exceeding one story in height, one set of keys shall be provided for each floor.
Add section 506.1.2 as follows:
Key Box Capacity: Key boxes shall be of sufficient size to accommodate the required keys. In buildings containing 1-3 occupancies, the key box shall
have a minimum capacity of 10 keys. In buildings containing 4-10 occupancies, the key box shall have a minimum capacity of 25 keys. In buildings
containing 11 or more occupancies, the key box shall have a minimum capacity of 50 keys.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 196/498
Add section 506.1.2 as follows:
Number Of Key Boxes: In buildings over 50,000 square feet, the fire code official may require multiple key boxes.
Delete section 507.5.1.1 and replace with the following:
507.5.1.1 Hydrant For Standpipe And Automatic Sprinkler Systems: Buildings equipped with a standpipe system or automatic sprinkler system shall
have a fire hydrant within 150 feet (45m) of the fire department connections.
Add section 605.5.5 as follows:
Temporary Use: Extension cords are intended for temporary use not exceeding 30 days. Extension cords not in use shall be removed.
Add subsection 901.4.1.1 System Monitoring And Alarm:
All required fire alarm systems, automatic fire suppression systems and wet standpipe systems shall have supervisory, trouble and fire condition
signals transmitted to the village of Streamwood fire department dispatch center in accordance with NFPA 72, remote station direct connection using
an approved radio transmitter. It is the responsibility of the building owner to maintain this supervision during the required life of the building.
Delete section 901.4.2 and replace with the following:
901.4.2 Non-Required Fire Protection Systems: Any fire protection system or portion thereof not required by this code or the international building
code shall be allowed to be furnished for partial or complete protection provided such installed system meets the applicable requirements of this
code or the international building code, whichever is more restrictive. Removal of existing non-required fire protection system components is subject
the approval of the fire code official.
Delete section 901.6 and replace with the following:
901.6 Inspection, Testing And Maintenance: Fire detection, alarm, and extinguishing systems, mechanical smoke exhaust systems, and smoke and
heat vents shall be maintained in an operative condition at all times, and shall be replaced or repaired when defective. All systems, whether required
or non-required shall be inspected, tested and maintained at least annually by qualified individuals.
Delete section 901.6.2 and replace with the following:
901.6.2 Records: Records of all system inspections, tests, and maintenance shall be maintained on the premises for a minimum of three years and
shall be copied to the fire code official upon completion.
Delete section 904.11.6.2 and replace with the following:
904.11.6.2 Extinguishing System Service: Automatic fire-extinguishing systems shall be serviced at the earlier of every six months and after
activation of the system. Inspection shall be performed by qualified individuals licensed by the Illinois office of state fire marshal, and shall bear a
current inspection tag or label. A certificate of inspection shall be available on the premises, and a copy forwarded to the fire code official upon
completion.
Section 906.1.1: delete exception.
Delete section 906.2.1 and replace with the following:
906.2.1 Servicing Of Portable Fire Extinguishers: All portable fire extinguishers shall be inspected and/or serviced at the earlier of annually or after
each use. Inspection shall be performed by qualified individuals licensed by the Illinois office of state fire marshal. All portable fire extinguishers shall
bear a current inspection tag or label.
Delete section 907.2 and replace with the following:
907.2 Where Required: An approved fire alarm system installed in accordance with the provisions of this code and NFPA 72 shall be provided in new
buildings and structures in accordance with sections 907.2.1 through 907.2.23, but without regard to occupant load or building area thresholds.
Systems shall provide occupant notification in accordance with section 907.5, unless other requirements are provided by another section of this
code.
A minimum of one manual fire alarm box shall be provided in an approved location to initiate a fire alarm signal for fire systems employing automatic
fire detectors or water-flow detection devices. Where other sections of this code allow elimination of fire alarm boxes due to sprinklers, a single fire
alarm box shall be installed.
Monitoring: All fire alarm systems shall have supervisory, trouble, and fire condition signals transmitted directly to the village of Streamwood fire
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 197/498
department dispatch center in accordance with NFPA 72, remote station direct connection using an approved radio transmitter. It is the responsibility
of the building owner to maintain this supervision during the required life of the building.
Existing Systems Connected Directly To The Fire Dispatch Center: All systems that are connected directly to the fire dispatch center by a dedicated
telephone circuit shall be required to convert to an approved radio alarm transmission no later than July 31, 2007.
Exceptions:
1. Occupancy classification A5;
2. Single family occupancies; and
3. Single station detectors required by section 907.2.10
(Ord. 2015-13, 6-4-2015)
Chapter 3
FIRE HYDRANTS
6-3-1: FIRE HYDRANTS:
A. Obstruction Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person, in any manner, to obstruct the use of any fire hydrant or have or place any materials in front
thereof or within ten feet (10') from either side thereof.
B. Removal Of Obstruction: The Fire Chief or any member of the Police or Fire Department shall remove or cause to be removed any and all obstructions
found to be obstructing any fire hydrant or from ten feet (10') from either side of such fire hydrants. Such obstruction shall be moved at the cost and
expense of the owner or claimant of the obstruction.
C. Illegal Use And Tampering: It shall be unlawful for persons, other than members of duly organized operating Volunteer and Regular Fire Departments,
Public Works employees of the Village, or members of the Police Department to use water from any fire hydrant connected with the water supply in the
Village, except for extinguishing fires or unless expressly authorized by the Village Director of Public Works. (1994 Code)
6-3-2: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this Chapter shall be fined as set forth in Section 1-4-1 of this Code; and a separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (1994 Code)
Chapter 4
FIREWORKS
6-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
CHIEF OR FIRE CHIEF: The chief of the village of Streamwood fire department or his duly authorized representative.
CONSUMER FIREWORKS: Those fireworks that must comply with the construction, chemical composition and labeling regulations of the U.S. consumer
products safety commission, as set forth in 16 CFR parts 1500 and 1507, and classified as fireworks UN0336 or UN0337 by the United States department
of transportation under 49 CFR 172.101. "Consumer fireworks" shall not include snake and glowworm pellets; smoke devices; trick noisemakers known as
"party poppers", "booby traps", "snappers", "trick matches", "cigarette loads", and "auto burglar alarms"; sparklers; toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns, or other
devices in which paper or plastic caps containing twenty five hundredths grain or less of explosive compound are used, provided they are so constructed
that the hand cannot come in contact with the cap when in place for the explosion; and toy pistol paper or plastic caps that contain less than twenty
hundredths grain of explosive mixture; the sale and use of which shall be permitted at all times.
CONSUMER FIREWORKS DISPLAY: The detonation, ignition or deflagration of consumer fireworks to produce a visual or audible effect.
DISPLAY FIREWORKS: 1.3G or special effects fireworks, as further defined in the pyrotechnic distributor and operator licensing act1.
FIRE DEPARTMENT: The village of Streamwood fire department.
FIREWORKS: Shall mean and include any combustible or explosive composition, or any substance or combination of substances, or article prepared for
the purpose of producing a visible or an audible effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration or detonation, and shall include "consumer fireworks", and
"display fireworks (1.3G fireworks)", as defined herein.
PERMITTEE: Shall mean and include any person, firm or corporation and/or agent or employee of such person, firm or corporation who has been issued a
permit for supervised displays of fireworks in the village of Streamwood under the terms of this chapter.
PYROTECHNIC DISPLAY: The detonation, ignition, or deflagration of display fireworks or flame effects to produce visual or audible effects of an
exhibitional nature before the public, invitees, or licensees, regardless of whether admission is charged, and as may be further defined in the pyrotechnic
distributor and operator licensing act2. (Ord. 2005-24, 6-2-2005; amd. Ord. 2006-27, 7-20-2006)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 198/498
6-4-2: SALE AND/OR DISCHARGE OF FIREWORKS; PERMITS:
A. Except as hereinafter provided, no person, firm, partnership or corporation shall offer for sale, expose for sale, sell at retail, keep with intent to sell at
retail, use or explode any fireworks, provided that the fire chief may issue permits for supervised pyrotechnic displays of fireworks in the village,
including, but not limited to, fair associations, shopping centers, units of government and other civic organizations, or groups of individuals.
1. Such permits may be issued upon approval of an application submitted to the fire chief and after compliance with all code regulations contained
herein, and the filing of a bond by the applicant as provided hereinafter.
2. Every such display shall be handled by a competent operator, and shall be of such composition, character and so located, discharged or fired as in
the opinion of the fire chief shall not constitute a hazard to property or endanger any person or persons. (Ord. 2006-27, 7-20-2006)
B. Pursuant to such permit having been granted, possession, use and distribution of fireworks for such display shall be lawful for that purpose only; and no
permit granted hereunder shall be transferable.
C. The fire chief, or his designee, is authorized to confiscate, seize, take, remove or cause to be removed at the expense of the owner all stocks of
fireworks or combustibles offered or exposed for sale, stored or held in violation of this chapter. (Ord. 2005-24, 6-2-2005)
D. No consumer fireworks display shall be permitted in the village of Streamwood, unless otherwise conducted as a part of a pyrotechnic display. (Ord.
2006-27, 7-20-2006)
6-4-3: APPLICATION:
A. Application for permit to operate a display of fireworks in conformance with the terms of this chapter shall be made in writing on forms provided by the
chief of the village of Streamwood fire department.
B. Such application shall set forth:
1. The name of the organization sponsoring the display, together with the names of persons actually in charge of the firing of the display.
2. Evidence of financial responsibility.
3. The date and time of day at which the display is to be held.
4. The exact location planned for the display.
5. A description setting forth the age, experience and physical characteristics of the persons who are to do the actual discharging of the fireworks.
6. The number and kinds of fireworks to be discharged.
7. The manner and place of storage of such fireworks prior to the display.
8. A diagram of the grounds on which the display is to be held showing the point at which the fireworks are to be discharged, the location of all
buildings, highways and other lines of communication, the lines behind which the audience will be restrained, and the location of all nearby trees,
overhead wires or other overhead obstructions. (Ord. 2005-24, 6-2-2005)
6-4-4: CONDUCT OF DISPLAY:
A. No permit shall be granted for any display of fireworks where the discharge, failure to fire, faulty firing or fallout of any fireworks or other objects would
endanger persons, buildings, structures, forests or brush, nor in any case where the point at which the fireworks are to be fired is less than two hundred
feet (200') from the nearest permanent building, public highway, railroad or other means of travel or fifty feet (50') from the nearest aboveground
telephone or telegraph line, tree or other overhead obstruction.
All physical arrangements for firing and storage must be approved by the fire chief or his/her designee.
B. Spectators at a display of fireworks shall be restrained behind lines or barriers as designated by the fire department, but in no case less than two
hundred feet (200') from the point at which the fireworks are to be discharged. Only authorized persons and those in actual charge of the display shall
be allowed inside these lines or barriers during the unloading, preparation or firing of fireworks.
C. All fireworks that fire a projectile shall be so set up that the projectile will go into the air as nearly as possible in a vertical direction, provided that they
may be directed in such a manner that the falling residue from the deflagration will fall into a lake or other large body of water where such fireworks are
to be fired beside the said body of water. Furthermore, no firing tube or tubes shall be utilized in rapid succession or in any other manner so as to
cause overheating or instability of such tube or tubes.
D. No fireworks display shall be held during any windstorm in which the wind reaches a velocity of more than twenty (20) miles per hour.
E. All fireworks articles and items at places of display shall be stored in a manner and in a place secure from fire, accidental discharge and theft and in a
manner approved by the fire chief.
F. Fire protection and extinguishing equipment shall be provided as required by the fire chief or his/her designee.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 199/498
G. The person to whom a permit has been issued shall arrange for the detailing of a fire guard consisting of one member of the fire department or such
larger number of members as may be deemed necessary by the fire chief.
1. The fire chief may require such fire guard to be at the site as soon as the fireworks are delivered to the site and such fire guard may be required to
remain at such site by the said fire chief until after the conclusion of the display and removal of all remaining fireworks and/or debris from the said
site.
2. The expense for such fire guard shall be paid by the permittee. (Ord. 2005-24, 6-2-2005)
H. There shall be at all times no fewer than two (2) licensed pyrotechnic operators of the display constantly on duty during the discharge. (Ord. 2006-27, 7-
20-2006)
I. Any fireworks that remain unfired after the display is concluded shall be immediately disposed of or removed in a manner which is safe for the particular
type of fireworks.
1. The debris from the discharged fireworks shall be properly disposed of by the operator before he leaves the premises.
2. The operator, upon the conclusion of the display, shall make a complete and thorough search for any unfired fireworks or pieces which have failed to
fire or function and shall dispose of them in a safe manner.
3. Such search shall be instituted at the earliest possible time following the conclusion of the display, but in no event later than the first two (2) hours of
daylight which follow.
J. Upon failure of a permittee to comply with any regulationcontained in this section, the fire chief and/or the fire guard at the scene are hereby authorized
to seize, take, remove or cause to be removed all or any stock of fireworks or combustibles and/or to terminate any display upon observing such
violation. (Ord. 2005-24, 6-2-2005)
6-4-5: QUALIFICATIONS OF OPERATORS:
The person in actual charge of firing of the fireworks in a display, as well as his/her assistant, shall be able bodied, at least twenty one (21) years of age,
capable of reading, writing, speaking and understanding the English language and otherwise competent for the task, and shall be a lead pyrotechnic
operator licensed by the office of the state fire marshal. (Ord. 2006-27, 7-20-2006)
6-4-6: NITROGLYCERIN, TNT:
It shall be unlawful to keep or store any nitroglycerin or the explosive commonly known as TNT in the village in any quantities, excepting for medicinal or
laboratory purposes and for such purpose no more than one-fourth (1/4) of a pound shall be stored in any one building or premises. (Ord. 2005-24, 6-2-
2005)
6-4-7: PENALTY:
Unless otherwise provided herein, any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a
fine as set forth in section 1-4-1 of this code. If any violation be continuing, each day's violation shall be deemed a separate violation. (Ord. 2005-24, 6-2-
2005)
Chapter 5
NATIONAL BOARD INSPECTION CODE
6-5-1: CODE ADOPTED:
There is hereby adopted the National Board Inspection Code (NBIC-2017) published by the National Board of Boilers and Pressure Vessel Inspectors
(NBBI), (the "Code"), except such portions or sections thereof as are hereinafter expressly deleted, modified or amended. (Ord. 2017-24, 9-21-2017)
6-5-2: AMENDMENTS TO CODE:
A. NB12-304, Supplement S3.4
Rooms or areas where carbon dioxide storage vessel(s) are located indoors or in enclosed or below grade outdoor locations and rooms with carbon
dioxide tubing or piping derived from liquid carbon dioxide vessels shall be provided with a gas detection and alarm system for general area monitoring
that is capable of detecting and notifying building occupants of a CO2 gas release. Alarms will be designed to activate a low level pre-alarm at 1.5%
concentration of CO2 and a full high alarm at 3% concentration of CO2 (which is the OSHA & ACGIH 15 minute and NIOSH 10 minute Short Term
Exposure Limit for CO2.) These systems are not designed for employee personal exposure monitoring. Gas detection systems shall be installed and
tested in accordance with manufacturer's installation instructions and the following requirements:
a) Activation of the gas detection system shall activate an audible alarm within the room or area in which the carbon dioxide storage vessel, tubing or
piping is located.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 200/498
b) Audible alarms shall also be placed at the entrance(s) to the room or area where the carbon dioxide storage vessel, tubing or piping or fill box is
located to notify anyone who might try to enter the area of a potential problem.
(Ord. 2017-24, 9-21-2017)
Title 7
PUBLIC HEALTH AND SANITATION
Chapter 1
NUISANCES
7-1-1: NUISANCES DEFINED, PROHIBITED:
It shall be the duty of all owners, agents, occupants or persons in possession of property, either real or personal, within the territorial limits of the Village to
abate any nuisance as directed by the Village. The following acts, conduct and conditions are hereby declared and defined to be "nuisances", and when
committed, performed and permitted to exist by any person within the territorial limits of the Village, are hereby declared to be unlawful and prohibited:
(Ord. 2000-5, 2-3-2000)
A. Any act or offense which is a nuisance according to the common law of the State, or declared or defined to be a nuisance by the ordinances of the
Village or the statutes of the State. In addition, the officials of the Village shall be authorized to abate any nuisance which, while not specifically defined
within this Chapter, shall constitute the unreasonable, unwarrantable, or unlawful use by a person of property, real or personal, or from his own
improper, indecent or unlawful personal conduct which works in obstruction or injury to a right of another, or of the public, and produces such material
annoyance, inconvenience, discomfort or hurt that the law will presume an actionable nuisance. Nuisances may be abated which are public or which
are both public and private in nature.
B. Any thing, act, occupation or use of property, premises, equipment or structure adversely affecting the health, welfare and safety of individuals or of the
public.
C. Any act or omission, occupation and use of property, equipment or structure of any kind which shall annoy, injure or endanger the safety, health,
welfare, comfort or repose of the public.
D. Any act or omission, occupation and use of property, equipment or structure which shall in any way threaten the life or the use of property of individuals
or of the public.
E. All buildings, walls and other structures which have been damaged or neglected by fire, decay or otherwise so as to constitute a menace to the health,
welfare or safety of individuals or of the public.
F. To cause or suffer the carcass of any animal, or any offal, filth or noxious substance to be collected, deposited or to remain in any place under his
ownership or control to the injury of others.
G. To throw or deposit any offal or any other offensive matter or the carcass of any dead animal in any watercourse, lake, pond, spring, well or common
sewer, street or public highway.
H. To corrupt or render unwholesome or impure, the water of any spring, river, stream, pond or lake to the injury of others.
I. To obstruct or encroach upon public highways, private ways, streets, alleys, commons and landing places.
J. To erect, or continue to use any building or other place for the exercise of any trade, employment or manufacture, which, by occasioning noxious fumes,
offensive smells, or otherwise is offensive or dangerous to the health of individuals or of the public.
K. To advertise wares or occupation by painting notices of the same on or affixing them to fences, walls, windows, building exteriors, utility poles or on
hydrants, other public or private property or on rocks, or other natural objects, without the consent of the owner, or if in the highway right of way or other
public place, the permission of the Village authorities.
L. To harass, intimidate or threaten any person who is about to sell or lease or has sold or leased a residence or other real property or is about to buy or
lease or has bought or leased a residence or other real property, when the harassment, intimidation or threat relates to a person's attempt to sell, buy
or lease a residence or other real property, or refers to a person's sale, purchase or lease of a residence or other real property.
M. To dump, abandon, deposit, dismantle or burn upon any public property or right of way, highway, park, street or parkway anywhere in the village, any
trash, garbage, ashes, junk, junked or wrecked automobiles or parts thereof, or miscellaneous waste.
N. To store, keep or maintain outside of a closed building, any junk parts, machinery or equipment not in an operable condition or motor vehicle not in an
operable condition where such inoperable motor vehicle is a detriment to life, safety, health or peaceful enjoyment of the property of surrounding
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 201/498
landowners; provided however, that this provision shall not apply to a properly licensed junkyard or other permitted outdoor storage use which is in full
compliance with all the ordinances of the village governing the same.
O. To own, maintain or keep a dwelling unit unfit for human habitation, or dangerous or detrimental to life, safety or health because of lack of repair,
defects in the plumbing system, lighting or ventilation, the existence of contagious diseases or unsanitary conditions likely to cause sickness among
persons residing in said premises or residing in the proximity thereof.
P. All infestations of flies, fleas, roaches, lice, ticks, rats, mice, fly maggots and mosquitoes and mosquito larvae. (1994 Code)
Q. To store, keep or maintain outside of a garage or accessory structure, an inoperable motor vehicle. An "inoperable motor vehicle" shall be defined for
purposes of this chapter as any motor vehicle which is and has been incapable of being driven under its own motor power for a period of at least seven
(7) days, for reasons including, but not limited to, the engine, wheels or other parts having been removed, altered, or damaged or other events which
have otherwise caused such motor vehicle to be incapable of being driven under its own motor power. In addition, an inoperable motor vehicle shall be
any vehicle which has been cited a minimum of two (2) times within a thirty (30) day period for failure to display a valid state registration tag. However,
the definition of an "inoperable motor vehicle" shall not include a motor vehicle which is located on the premises of a place of business engaged in the
wrecking or junking of motor vehicles which is properly licensed by the village. (Ord. 2000-5, 2-3-2000; amd. Ord. 2005-4, 1-20-2005; Ord. 2010-12, 7-
15-2010)
7-1-2: NOTICE OF NONSUMMARY ABATEMENT:
Except where otherwise provided by the ordinances of the village, the police chief, fire chief, director of community development, director of public works,
or their agents may serve or cause to be served a notice, in writing, upon the owner, agent, occupant or person in possession, charge or control of any lot,
building or premises or item of personalty in or upon which any nuisance exists, requiring them, or either or all of them, to abate the same within a
specified reasonable time, in such manner as the notice shall direct. (1994 Code; amd. Ord. 1995-36, 6-22-1995)
7-1-3: NONSUMMARY ABATEMENT:
If the person so served and notified does not abate the nuisance within seven (7) days of receipt of said notice of nonsummary abatement, the corporate
authorities of the village may proceed to abate the nuisance by any and all means allowable by law, including, without limiting the generality thereof, the
following:
A. Seeking to impose a monetary penalty as defined by section 7-1-5 of this chapter by instituting an ordinance enforcement action.
B. Seeking to enjoin the continuation of the nuisance by the filing of a lawsuit in a court of competent jurisdiction.
C. Seeking to remove an inoperable motor vehicle from the property by the filing of a lawsuit in a court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 2000-5, 2-3-2000)
7-1-4: SUMMARY ABATEMENT:
Whenever, in the opinion of one of the village officers designated in section 7-1-2 of this chapter, the maintenance or continuation of a nuisance creates an
imminent threat of serious injury to persons or serious damage to person or real or personal property, or if the nuisance can be abated summarily without
or with only minor damage to the items or premises which are creating the nuisance, and the continuation of a nuisance poses a substantial threat of injury
to persons or property or a substantial interference with the quiet enjoyment of life normally present in the community, such officer shall proceed to abate
such nuisance; provided, further, that whenever the owner, occupant, agent or person in possession, charge or control of the real or personal property
which has become a nuisance is unknown or cannot readily be found, such officer may proceed to abate such nuisance without notice. Where the
abatement of the nuisance requires continuing acts by the corporate authorities beyond the initial summary abatement and any other additional emergency
abatements, it shall seek abatement of such nuisance on a permanent basis through judicial process as soon as reasonably practicable. (1994 Code)
7-1-5: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be fined as set forth in section 1-4-1 of this code; and a separate offense
shall be deemed committed on each day that said violation is allowed to exist. (Ord. 1998-4, 1-8-1998)
Chapter 2
PLANTS AND WEEDS
7-2-1: HEIGHT OF WEEDS LIMITED:
It shall be unlawful for any owner, lessee or occupant, or any agent, servant, representative or employee of any such owner, lessee or occupant, having
control of any lot of ground, or any part of a lot of ground, situated in the Village, to allow or maintain on any such lot any growth of grass or weeds to a
height of over six inches (6"). (1994 Code)
7-2-2: REMOVAL OF CERTAIN WEEDS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 202/498
It shall be the duty of every owner or occupant of a lot of ground, or the agent or other party having control thereof, to remove all Canada thistles,
ragweeds, jimpson, burdock, cocklebur or other noxious weeds of like kind. Such weeds are hereby declared to be a nuisance. (1994 Code)
7-2-3: ABATEMENT, NOTICE:
It shall be the duty of the Director of Community Development to serve or cause to be served a notice upon the owner or occupant of any premises on
which weeds or plants are permitted to grow in violation of the provisions of this Chapter, and to demand the abatement of the nuisance within ten (10)
days. (1994 Code; amd. Ord. 1995-36, 6-22-1995)
7-2-4: ABATEMENT BY VILLAGE, CHARGES:
If the person so served does not abate the nuisance with ten (10) days after such notice, the Village may proceed to abate such nuisance, keeping an
account of the expense of the abatement, and such expense shall be charged to and paid by such owner or occupant. (1994 Code)
7-2-5: LIEN UPON PREMISES:
A. Lien Claim: Charges for weed cutting shall be a lien upon the premises as provided by statute. Whenever a bill for weedcutting remains unpaid sixty
(60) days after it has been rendered, the Village Clerk may file with the County Recorder of Deeds a statement of lien claim. The statement shall
contain the legal description of the premises served, the amount of the unpaid bill and a notice that the Village claims a lien for this amount.
B. Rendition Of Bill: Notice of the bill for weed cutting shall be mailed to the owner of the premises.
C. Failure To Record: The failure of the Clerk to record such lien claim or to mail such notice or the failure of the owner to receive such notice shall not
affect the right to foreclose the lien for unpaid bills for weed cuttings, as provided for in the following subsection.
D. Foreclosure Of Lien: Property subject to a lien for unpaid weed cutting charges shall be sold for nonpayment of the same and the proceeds of such sale
shall be applied to pay the charges, after deducting costs, as is the case in the foreclosure of statutory liens. Such foreclosures shall be by bill in equity
in the name of the Village.
The Attorney for the Village is hereby authorized and directed to institute such proceedings, in the name of the Village, in any court having jurisdiction
over such matters, against any property for which a bill for weed cutting has remained unpaid sixty (60) days after it has been rendered. (1994 Code)
7-2-6: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this Chapter shall be fined as set forth in Section 1-4-1 of this Code; and a separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day during or on which such nuisance continues unabated after ten (10) days from receipt of notice. (1994 Code)
Chapter 3
JUNK STORAGE
7-3-1: DEFINITION:
"Junk", "trash" and "refuse" are defined herein to include any and all waste matter, whether reusable or not, which is offensive to the public health, safety
or to the aesthetics of the neighborhood, and is specifically intended to include, but not be limited to, worn out, wrecked and/or abandoned automobiles,
trucks, tractors, machinery of any kind, and parts thereof, old ice boxes, refrigerators and stoves. (1994 Code)
7-3-2: JUNK STORAGE DECLARED A NUISANCE:
Storing of junk, trash and refuse on private property within the Village where such storage is not authorized under the terms of the Zoning Ordinance of the
Village and in any manner not permitted by said Zoning Ordinance is hereby declared a nuisance. (1994 Code)
7-3-3: NOTICE OF VIOLATION:
Any policeman or inspector of the Building Department or Health Department of the Village, or their agents, upon observing any violation of this Chapter,
shall issue a notice directed to the owner of record or occupant of the property on which said nuisance occurs or to both. Said notice shall describe the
violation and shall establish the reasonable time limit for the abatement thereof by such owner or occupant, which time shall be not less than two (2) days
nor more than ten (10) days after service of such notice. (1994 Code)
7-3-4: RECORD OF NOTICE:
Any policeman or inspector of the Building Department or Health Department, or their agents, shall serve the notice herein provided for upon the owner or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 203/498
occupant of the property where such nuisance exists, or upon both of them, and shall, upon his return, make a copy of such notice, showing the time of
service, the person upon whom served or the manner in whichsuch notice was served. (1994 Code)
7-3-5: FAILURE TO ABATE:
In the event the owner or occupant of the property where such nuisance exists has failed within the prescribed time to abate such nuisance, the Village
shall then file a complaint charging a violation of this Chapter with the Circuit Court of Cook County, Illinois, charging violation of this Chapter and
demanding that the owner of the property or the occupant thereof, or both, be punished as herein provided. (1994 Code)
7-3-6: PENALTY:
Any property owner or any occupant of property who allows such storage in violation of this Chapter, on the property owned or occupied by him shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine as set forth in Section 1-4-1 of this Code; and any person who shall neglect to abate and remove such
nuisance after notice thereof as provided in Section 7-3-3 of this Chapter shall, for each twenty four (24) hours thereafter during which said nuisance
continues, be subject to a like penalty as that originally incurred. (1994 Code)
Chapter 4
REFUSE AND WASTE DISPOSAL
7-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall apply to the interpretation and enforcement of this Chapter:
PERSON: Shall include the owner, occupant or lessee of any premises, and firm, corporation or organization of any kind.
PREMISES: Any house, residence building, flat, apartment, dwelling place or place of abode, commercial or industrial establishment, office building, hotel,
church, school, hospital, club building or meeting hall.
WASTE: Any or all material as agreed upon for collection by the refuse removal service:
A. Residential Areas: Materials to be collected shall include the following:
1. All kitchen wastes including cans, bottles, household food, accumulation of animal food and vegetable matter attendant on the preparation, use,
cooking and serving of foods.
2. General household trash and refuse, including ashes, empty cartons, crates, boxes, wrapping materials, newspapers and magazines when
securely and neatly bound in convenient size bundles, cloth materials, empty cans, discarded toys, discarded clothing and similar materials.
3. Discarded furniture including beds, springs, mattresses, overstuffed furniture and other furniture, appliances, bicycles, sleds, swing sets, tools and
comparable items.
4. Yard refuse materials, including leaves, grass clippings, weeds, Christmas trees, bushes, brush clippings and branch clippings (when securely
bound in bundles not exceeding 4 feet in length).
Materials to be collected will not include: earth, sod, rocks, concrete, refuse from remodeling or construction of homes, and trees or parts thereof
(with the exception of small branches bundled as provided in subsection A4 above). This does not exclude small amounts of earth and sod when
placed in cans and not exceeding twenty five percent (25%) of the capacity of the can. Building materials resulting from "do-it-yourself" projects not
exceeding one cubic yard in capacity will be collected when placed at the curb in a neat and orderly manner.
B. Commercial, Industrial Waste: Any or all nonusable materials (solid or liquid), as agreed upon with the refuse removal service, shall be placed in
approved containers and disposed of at least weekly or more often commensurate with the business. Liquid wastes shall not be placed in trash
containers, but shall be stored in separate containers and disposed of by a service equipped to dispose of such waste.
Liquid waste, such as oil, sludge or other type petroleum products, including distillates, paints or chemicals, shall at no time be allowed to enter the
sanitary or storm sewer system of the Village, nor shall such waste be disposed of on the ground so as to cause potential pollution of surface or
underground water within or which flows within the Village.
WASTE CONTAINER: A. Residential:
1. Single-Family Dwellings And Multiple-Family Dwellings With Individual Owner/Occupier Disposal Service: The term "waste container" as used
herein for residences shall mean a container of noncorrodible material with close fitting cover, rodent and fly proof, of the type commonly sold as a
garbage can, of a suitable gauge and construction to ensure durability and with suitable handles on the can and lid, of a capacity of not less than
ten (10) gallons and not more than as approved by the contract refuse collection company. Sealed impervious bags may be used as containers to
place refuse at the curb on days of collection.
2. Multiple-Family Dwellings With Common Collection Service: The term "waste container" as used herein shall mean containers of noncorrodible
material with close fitting covers, rodent and fly proof, of the type and not to exceed in size the container supplied by the contract hauler and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 204/498
emptied mechanically into a "packer type" vehicle. Containers that do not meet the above criteria shall be considered in violation of this Chapter.
B. Institutional, Commercial, Industrial: The term "waste container" as used herein for businesses shall mean containers of noncorrodible material with
close fitting covers, rodent and fly proof, of the type and not to exceed in size the container supplied by the contract hauler and emptied mechanically
into a "packer type" vehicle. Containers that do not meet the above criteria shall be considered in violation of this Chapter.
WASTE DISPOSAL FIRM: Any person or firm entered into contract or licensed with the Village. (1994 Code)
7-4-2: ADMINISTRATION:
A. Whenever directed by the provisions of this Chapter, the Superintendent of the Health Department shall carry out such directions and perform such
duties as provided thereby, unless the Village President and Board of Trustees shall designate some other officer to perform such duties. The term
"Superintendent of the Health Department" as used in this Chapter, shall refer to such officer or other officer as designated from time to time by the
Village Manager.
B. All matters relating to or affecting the accumulation, collection, removal or disposal of waste, unless specifically otherwise assigned, shall be subject to
and under the supervision of the Superintendent of the Health Department.
C. The occupancy of any premises for residential, commercial or industrial purposes shall be prima facie evidence that waste is being produced and
accumulated on such premises. (1994 Code)
7-4-3: WASTE ACCUMULATION AND STORAGE:
A. Accumulation Of Waste Prohibited: Waste shall be removed from the premises at least weekly and every person shall keep his premises at all times
free and clean from same. No person shall permit any garbage or rubbish to accumulate within the Village unless the same shall be suitably enclosed
in waste containers, filled to a weight no greater than what one person can lift, and no person shall permit any yard refuse to accumulate within the
Village unless it is suitably placed or enclosed in containers or any type of disposable container of a capacity not to exceed thirty (30) gallons, except
that light hedge clippings and tree branches not more than four feet (4') in length will be tied in bundles. Every person shall cause all garbage, rubbish
or yard refuse produced in or on such premises to be properly bundled or placed in such waste containers as soon as practicable after same is
produced. It shall be unlawful to dispose of or place any waste in any street or other public place in the Village, except as otherwise permitted by this
Chapter.
B. Waste Containers Required, Placing And Maintenance:
1. A sufficient number of waste containers for a weekly accumulation or normal waste shall be provided and at all times maintained in good order and
repair by the owner, lessee or head of household of any premises in the Village.
2. All waste containers shall be as previously defined and no other type of container shall be acceptable. Filthy, leaking or defective receptacles shall
be cleaned, repaired or replaced by the owner, lessee or head of the household of the premises served, and at his expense. All containers shall be
kept clean and disinfected with an antiseptic solution as often as necessary to maintain them in a sanitary condition. Evidence of neglect of these
requirements or unsafe containers shall be determined by the Department of Health.
3. Containers not mounted on wheels shall be stored on an easily cleanable impervious surface. Containers mounted on wheels shall be specifically
designed for use with collection vehicles.
C. Contents Of Containers: It shall be the duty of the owner, lessee or head of the household of any premises to cause all garbage produced on the
premises to be thoroughly drained of all surplus liquid, securely wrapped or bagged in paper or packed in a covered box or carton of such dimensions
as will permit its free passage into and out of the waste container, and finally deposited, after such wrapping or bagging, in such waste container as
soon as practicable after the same is produced thereon. Garbage and rubbish shall be securely wrapped or bound in such a manner as may be
necessary to prevent the scattering of same, and shall be deposited in a waste container as prescribed herein. It shall further be the duty of every
owner, lessee or head of the household of any premises to cause all yard refuse to be properly placed in containers or bundled.
D. Location Of Waste Containers: It shall be the duty of every owner, lessee or head of the household of any premises to place waste containers on the
ground or above ground level at an accessible, convenient outdoor location; provided, that refuse containers do not create an aesthetic nuisance to an
adjoining neighbor or the neighborhood.
E. Placement For Pickup Of Garbage: All garbage and rubbish shall be placed at the curb for pickup no sooner than five o'clock (5:00) P.M. on the day
preceding the day of pickup and containers shall be removed from said curb by nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. on the day of the regularly schedule pickup. In
case of a holiday falling on a regularly scheduled pickup day, this subsection shall apply on the following day.
F. Sunken Type Garbage Containers: Effective with the date hereof, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain a sunken type garbage container on any
premises within the Village.
G. Fencing: In all commercial and industrial areas, garbage areas shall be fenced with a solid type fencing not less than five feet (5') in height and the
height of said fence shall exceed by no more than twelve inches (12") the height of the garbage containers. Said fencing shall be of a solid type and
shall entirely enclose the garbage container.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 205/498
H. Discarded Personal Property: It shall be illegal for any person to discard or have on his premises or set out for refuse collection any television set or
refrigerator or freezer until the television picture tube has been removed and destroyed from said television set and until the doors on any refrigerator
or freezer have been removed.
Any person violating any provision of this subsection shall be subject to a penalty as set forth in Section 1-4-1 of this Code; and each day that the
violation continues shall subject such person to an additional penalty as set forth therein. (1994 Code)
7-4-4: COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL OF WASTE:
A. Times Of Collection: All garbage, rubbish and yard refuse shall be called for and disposed of at least once per week by a waste disposal firm duly
contracted with or licensed by the Village. The waste disposal firm will not call for waste at the residence of any person as defined herein before seven
o'clock (7:00) A.M. or after seven o'clock (7:00) P.M.
B. Special Collections; Bulky Wastes: All bulky wastes, construction and demolition wastes, and special wastes not resulting from the performance of work
within the Village by a building or other construction contractor shall require a special collection within one week of the time the waste is produced on
the premises. Building and other construction contractors shall remove bulky wastes, construction and demolition wastes, and special wastes resulting
from the performance of work within the village as frequently as necessary to maintain sanitary conditions, but at least once per week, employing either
their own equipment and employees or a waste disposal firm which either is duly licensed by the village or conforms to the standards set forth herein.
C. Dumping Within Village: No waste shall be dumped, scattered or buried within the village limits. (1994 Code)
D. Open Burning: The open burning of leaves, branches, trunks and roots of trees, bushes and shrubs, rubbish, waste, garbage, paper, carbonaceous
materials or any other combustible materials on any public or private property within the village is unlawful and prohibited; provided however, that this
shall not apply to the burning of wood in outdoor fireplaces, or noncommercial cooking of food in grills nor to the incineration of refuse in a device
approved by the pollution control board of the state unless otherwise authorized by the fire chief or his/her designee or by other provision of this code.
(Ord. 2015-13, 6-4-2015)
E. Shredding; Disposal Through Pipes: Garbage and other combustible wastes may be disposed of by grinding or by shredding such waste finely and
disposing of such waste through pipes leading to a public sanitary sewer; provided, that all garbage or combustible matter so disposed of in such pipes
shall have been ground or shredded to such a degree that all particles are carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in the sewers into
which same is deposited.
F. Inspection: All waste containers and methods of disposal shall be subject to inspection and approval by the superintendent of the health department.
G. Multi-Family Dwellings: All occupants in a multiple-family dwelling consisting of more than two (2) dwelling units wherein single-family type disposal
service is utilized shall utilize only the type of waste container described in this chapter for use by single-family residences.
H. Dumping; Permission Required: Neither yard waste nor construction waste or debris of any kind or fill material shall be placed on any premises
including parkways, ponds, waterways, streets, public parks, public property or any private property, including private dumpsters, unless written
permission of the owner of such premises is obtained. (1994 Code)
7-4-5: COLLECTION OF RECYCLABLE MATERIALS:
A. Collection By Contractor: The village's authorized contractor shall collect and remove all recyclable materials (i.e., newspapers, glass, metal cans and
such other materials designated by the village to be collected) from those residential properties participating in the village recycling program. The
contractor shall pick up such recyclable materials without regard to quantity; provided, that the materials are properly placed for collection in the village
approved containers along with their regular garbage pick up. The contractor shall be responsible for sorting and preparing such recyclable materials
for sale and for maintaining the recycling processing center.
B. Containers: The village shall own, and contractor shall distribute, one recycling container made of rigid plastic construction to each residential property
in the recycling program area for collecting recyclables. Title to such recycling containers shall remain with the village and it shall be unlawful for any
firm, person or corporation to collect, remove or pick up any such recycling containers from any residential property participating in the village recycling
program, unless such person is licensed as the exclusive recycling contractor for the village.
C. Times For Collection: All recyclable items shall be placed at the curb in recyclable containers, by the resident, prior to seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. of the
day scheduled for regular garbage pick up, and in no case before five o'clock (5:00) P.M. on the preceding evening. Such recyclable containers shall be
retrieved by nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. on the day of pick up by the resident.
D. Contractor License Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to collect, obtain, possess or pick up any recyclable item(s) placed for collection at any
residence participating in the village's recycling program, unless such person is licensed as the exclusive recycling contractor for the village. (1994
Code)
7-4-6: SANITATION REQUIREMENTS:
No person shall transport waste, or cause waste to be transported over the streets or other public ways in the village unless such waste being transported
is entirely and securely covered. Garbage shall not be transported over or along the streets of the village or other public property thereof except in a
leakproof compaction type body commonly referred to as a "packer type" refuse body approved by the superintendent of the health department. Such
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 206/498
equipment shall be cleaned frequently enough to prevent nuisance and insect breeding and shall be maintained in good condition, repair and appearance.
The waste disposal firm shall immediately clean up any waste that he may have caused to spill on private premises, parkways, streets, alleys or other
public places, in a neat workmanlike manner and shall replace, at his expense, containers or other property which may be seriously damaged by
carelessness of his employees. (1994 Code)
7-4-7: DIRT AND SOIL REMOVAL:
A. Village Consent Required: It shall be unlawful for anyone to remove or cause to be removed from within the village limits to anywhere outside the village
limits, any soil, dirt or other similar fill, except by express consent of the president and board of trustees of the village.
B. Dumping Of Fill: Deposits of dirt, soil or other fill shall be made in designated areas between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and eight o'clock
(8:00) P.M. of the same day.
C. Exclusion: This section shall not apply to the usual and customary removal of refuse, garbage and offal from the village.
D. Penalty: Any person violating any provision of this section shall be fined as set forth in section 1-4-1 of this code; and a separate offense shall be
deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (1994 Code)
7-4-8: NOTICE TO REMOVE GARBAGE:
Garbage and debris must be removed from the property within ten (10) days after written notice of violation has been issued. In cases where it is
considered an extreme hazard to public health, the garbage and debris must be removed within seventy two (72) hours after written notice has been
issued. If garbage and debris is not removed within the time specified, the village may, at its discretion, remove or authorize another to do so, and an
appropriate fee will be collected from the violator. If the cost for removal of garbage and/or debris is not paid within a reasonable time, a notice of lien may
be placed by the village against the person's property. (1994 Code)
7-4-9: REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF LICENSE:
In the event a waste disposal firm violates any provision of this code, the village shall have the right, in addition to enforcing the penalties otherwise
provided, to revoke or suspend the license of such waste disposal firm. (1994 Code)
7-4-10: PENALTY:
Unless otherwise provided herein, any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall
be fined as set forth in section 1-4-1 of this code for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed for each day that a violation is permitted
to exist. (Ord. 1998-4, 1-8-1998)
Chapter 5
POLLUTION CONTROL REGULATIONS
7-5-1: TITLE:
This Chapter shall be known, cited and referred to as THE VILLAGE OF STREAMWOOD POLLUTION CONTROL ORDINANCE. (1994 Code)
7-5-2: DEFINITIONS:
AIR CONTAMINANT: Particulate matter, dust, fumes, gas, mist, smoke or vapor, or any combination thereof.
AIR CONTAMINANT SOURCE: Any and all sources of emission of air contaminants, whether privately or publicly owned or operated. Without limiting the
generality of the foregoing, this term includes all types of business, commercial and industrial plants, works, shops and stores, and heating and power
plants and stations, buildings and other structures of all types, including single- and multiple-family residences, apartments, houses, office buildings,
hotels, restaurants, schools, hospitals, automobiles, trucks, tractors, buses and other motor vehicles, garages and vending and service locations and
stations, railroad locomotives, ships, boats and other water-borne craft, portable fuel burning equipment, incinerators and all types, indoor and outdoor,
refuse dumps and piles, and all stack and other chimney outlets from any of the foregoing.
AIR POLLUTION: Emissions present in the outdoor atmosphere of one or more air contaminants in sufficient quantities and of such characteristics and
duration as to be injurious to human, plant or animal life or to property, or which unreasonablyinterfere with the enjoyment of life and property.
AIR QUALITY STANDARD: Ambient air quality goal established for the purpose of protecting public health and welfare.
COMBUSTIBLE REFUSE: Any solid or liquid combustible waste material containing carbon in a free or combined state.
EMISSION STANDARD: That level of air contaminant emitted from an air contaminant source which is established by authority.
EQUIPMENT: Any fuel burning, refuse burning, combustion process devices or apparatus used for the burning of fuel or combustible material from which
the products of combustion are emitted. Also this shall include apparatus which generates heat and may emit products of combustion; and manufacturing,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 207/498
chemical, metallurgical or mechanical processes which may emit air contaminants.
ORGANIC MATERIALS: Chemical compounds of carbon excluding carbon monoxide, carbon dioxide, carbonic acid, metallic carbides, metallic carbonates
and ammonium carbonate.
ORGANIC SOLVENT: Organic materials which are liquids at standard atmospheric conditions and which are used as dissolvers, viscosity reducers,
cleaning agents, diluents or thinners.
PERSON: Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, political subdivision, State
agency, or any other legal entity, or their legal representative, agent or assign.
PHOTOCHEMICALLY REACTIVE SOLVENT: Any solvent with an aggregate of more than twenty percent (20%) of its total volume composed of chemical
compounds classified below or which exceeds any of the following individual percentage composition limitations, referred to the total volume of solvent:
A. A combination of hydrocarbons, alcohols, aldehydes, esters, ethers or ketones having an olefinic or cyclo-olefinic type of unsaturation: five percent
(5%);
B. A combination of aromatic compounds with eight (8) or more atoms to the molecule except ethylbenzene: eight percent (8%);
C. A combination of ethylbenzene, ketones having branches hydrocarbon structures, trichloroethylene or toluene: twenty percent (20%).
RINGELMANN CHART: The chart which is described in the U.S. Bureau of Mines Information Circular 7718, and on which areillustrated graduated shades
of gray to black for use in estimating the light obscuring power of smoke. (1994 Code)
7-5-3: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT:
A. Designation Of Pollution Control Officer: The Village Manager is hereby authorized to designate the Pollution Control Officer and enforcing officers, who
shall exercise the duties set forth in this Chapter.
B. Duties Of Pollution Control Officer:
1. To supervise the execution of all laws, ordinances, rules and regulations pertaining to environmental pollution;
2. To institute necessary proceedings to prosecute violations of this Chapter and compel the prevention and abatement of environmental contaminants,
and nuisances arising therefrom;
3. To examine and approve the plans of pollution control devices proposed, installed, constructed, reconstructed, repaired or added to, in any building,
location or on any premises within the boundaries of the Village;
4. To cause inspections to be made of pollution control devices;
5. To investigate complaints, make observations of contaminant conditions and take the necessary and proper action to abate nuisances therefrom;
6. To advise, consult and cooperate with other governmental agencies in the furtherance of the purposes of this Chapter;
7. To collect, publish and disseminate appropriate educational literature and other information to the public for the purpose of advising of the necessity,
purpose and methods of pollution prevention;
8. To issue all permits, certificates, notices or other matters required under the provisions of this Chapter; and to notify all persons concerned of any
decision he may render and to provide such persons with an opportunity to be heard;
9. To enlist the cooperation of civic, technical, scientific and educational groups, societies and organizations in respect to the reduction and abatement
of air contaminants;
10. To cause to be instituted in the court legal proceedings by the Village Attorney to compel compliance with any order or determination entered on
recommendation of the Pollution Control Officer and Pollution Committee.
C. Right Of Entry:
1. In the discharge of his duties, the Pollution Control Officer or his authorized inspectors shall have the authority to enter, at any reasonable hour, any
building, structure or premises within the incorporated area of the Village to enforce the provisions of this Chapter.
2. The assistance and cooperation of health, police, legal and other officers shall be available to the Pollution Control Officer as required in the
performance of his duties. (1994 Code)
7-5-4: APPEALS TO VILLAGE MANAGER:
A. Appeal To Village Manager: The Village Manager shall have the duty and power to hear and determine appeals for decisions and orders of the Pollution
Control Officer and to confirm, vary or reverse any such decision or order.
B. Time Limit; Notice: Any person aggrieved and complaining of an order or decision of the Pollution Control Officer may take an appeal to the Village
Manager within twenty (20) days of said order, decision or ruling complained of, by filing with the Pollution Control Officer and the Village Clerk written
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 208/498
notice that he/she intends to appeal such order, decision or ruling, and in said notice shall give a name and address where notices can be served upon
him.
C. Fix Time For Hearing; Notice; Fee: The Pollution Control Officer, upon receipt of said notice of appeal, shall forthwith transmit to the Village Manager all
papers and documents constituting the record upon which his decision, order or ruling was based. The Village Manager shall fix a reasonable time for
the hearing of the appeal and give due notice thereof by mail to the parties in interest and decide said appeal within a reasonable time. Said notice of
appeal shall act as a stay of any decision, ruling or order until either approved, modified or set aside by the Village Manager. A fee of ten dollars
($10.00) shall be paid to the Treasurer of the Village at the time the notice of appeal is filed with the Clerk of the Village.
D. Notify Parties Of Decision: The Village Manager shall forthwith by certified mail notify all parties of its decision, as well as all members of the Pollution
Committee. (1994 Code)
7-5-5: PERMITS AND PLANS:
A. Application For Installation Permit: No person shall construct, install or alter any fuel-burning, combustion or process equipment or any equipment
pertaining thereto for use within the incorporated areas of the Village until an application including suitable plans and specifications of the equipment
and structures or buildings used in connectiontherewith has been filed in duplicate by the person or his agent in the office of, and has been approved
by, the Pollution Control Officer and an installation permit has been issued by the Building Inspector for such construction, installation or alteration.
B. Plans And Specifications: The above mentioned plans and specifications shall show the form and dimension of the fuel-burning, combustion, or process
equipment, more particularly the proposed boiler, furnace, fuel burner stack, ducts, drains and sewer connections together with the description and
dimensions of the building or part thereof in which such equipment is to be located. The character of the fuel to be used, the minimum quantity of such
fuel to be burned per hour, the character and concentration of liquid wastes, the operating requirements, and the use to be made of the equipment shall
be stated.
C. Examine Application: Whenever an application in conformity with this Chapter is filed with the Pollution Control Officer, he shall thereupon examine and
either approve or reject same; and in the event of approval, he shall notify the Building Inspector to issue the permit.
D. Exceptions: Subsection A hereof shall not apply:
1. In the case of routine maintenance work or minor alterations or repairs which do not adversely affect the production, emission or discharge of smoke,
dust, fly-ash, soot, fumes, solid or gaseous product of combustion, solid or liquid waste products;
2. In the case of an emergency repair where serious consequences would otherwise result. Provided, that application for the necessary installation
permit is filed, otherwise, in accordance with this Section on the first business day following commencement of the repair work.
E. Proof Of Responsibility Bond: If the proposed plans and specifications submitted pursuant to subsection A hereof are not sufficiently complete, in the
judgment of the Pollution Control Officer, to show that the equipment or device for which such plans and specifications were submitted can consistently
comply with and can be operated within the provisions of this Chapter, either because the design or process is unconventional or untried, or because
the person has elected to omit confidential details, or because there are insufficient data on which to estimate the air pollution potential, the Pollution
Control Officer is authorized to require as a condition precedent to the issuance of an installation permit or certificate of operation proof of financial
responsibility and of ability to make any changes that may be required after construction to ensure compliance with the provisions of this Chapter. Such
proof, in the discretion of the Pollution Control Officer, may be a written statement to such effect, signed by the owner or a responsibleofficer of a
financially sound organization, or a written guarantee of performance signed by a responsible supplier or contractor or other responsible person. The
responsibility of any such person or soundness of any such organization shall be a matter within the judgment of the Pollution Control Officer, subject to
the right of appeal.
In the event that he is not given adequate proof of financial responsibility and of ability to make any changes that may be required, the Pollution Control
Officer may require any such person, as owner, lessee, operator, supplier, contractor, vendor or other person, to file with the Pollution Control Officer a
surety bond running to the Village in the sum of not to exceed fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00), executed by such person or persons, as principal,
and two (2) or more sureties, or a surety company authorized to do business in this State.
F. Commencement Of Work: If construction, installation or alteration is not started within one year of the date of the installation permit, the permit shall
become void and all fees shall be forfeited. An extension not to exceed six (6) months may be granted by the Village Board through appeal procedures
upon proper application.
G. Inspection Of Work: After any work of erecting, constructing, reconstructing, installing, altering or repairing any fuel-burning equipment is completed, the
Pollution Control Officer shall inspect the same, and, if such work conforms to the application, plans and specifications filed in respect thereof and to
the provisions of this Chapter, he shall authorize the issuance of a permit known as an operating permit, to the person to whom the necessary
installation permit was issued, which operating permit shall be posted in a conspicuous position adjacent to the equipment.
H. Subsequent Violation:
1. The authorization of the issuance by the Pollution Control Officer of any installation permit or operating permit shall not be held to exempt the person
to whom the permit has been issued or who is in possession of the same, from prosecution for violating provisions of this Chapter. Upon notice that
the equipment has been found to comply with the provisions of this Chapter, and after payment of the prescribed fee, the Building Inspector shall
issue an operating permit, which shall be posted in a conspicuous place within the plant.
If, at the time of the annual inspection, it is found that the equipment is in such condition that it cannot be operated within the provisions of this
Chapter, the Pollution Control Officer is authorized to give notice in writing to the person owning, operating or in charge of such equipment of the
defects found and an order to correct, repair or replace the defective equipment. Failure to comply with this order within thirty (30) daysfrom its date
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 209/498
shall be a violation of this Section and the Pollution Control Officer is hereby authorized to seal the equipment. No person shall violate the seal on
any equipment that has been sealed at the direction of the Pollution Control Officer unless authorized by him in writing so to do. (1994 Code)
2. Any person who violates any of the provisions of or who fails to perform any duty imposed by this Chapter, or who violates any terms or order of the
Pollution Control Officer promulgated pursuant to this Chapter, shall be liable to a penalty of not to exceed the sum of seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00) for each violation, and an additional penalty of not to exceed seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each day during which the violation
continues, or by imprisonment in the County jail for a period not to exceed six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment, and in addition
thereto such person may be enjoined from continuing such violation as hereinafter provided.
After one conviction for any violation of the terms and provisions of this Chapter, the Board of Trustees may suspend, for a period not to exceed thirty
(30) days, the license of any Village licensed business so convicted. After two (2) convictions for violation of the terms and provisions of this Chapter,
the Board of Trustees may revoke the license of any Village licensed business so convicted. Such suspension or revocation may be in addition to
any other penalty which is provided herein. (Ord. 1998-17, 3-19-1998)
7-5-6: VARIANCES:
The Village Board of Trustees is hereby given authority for the granting of individual variances for any fuel-burning combustion or process equipment or
device, beyond the limitations prescribed in this Chapter whenever it is found, upon the presentation of adequate proof, that compliance with any provision
of this Chapter or other Village ordinances relating to pollution, or any rule, regulation, requirement or order of the Pollution Control Officer will result in an
arbitrary and unreasonable taking of property or in the practical closing and elimination of any lawful business, occupation or activity, in either case without
a sufficient corresponding benefit or advantage to the people in the reduction of pollution. In such case, there shall be prescribed other and different
requirements, not more onerous, applicable to plants or equipment involved. (1994 Code)
7-5-7: GRACE PERIOD:
In the event any person is compelled to, or deems it advisable to, install any new equipment, processes or devices, appliances, means or methods,
including needed pollutioncontrol equipment, in order to comply with any provisions of this Chapter, such person may obtain a period of grace in order to
effect such compliance in accordance with the following procedure. To obtain such period of grace, a written request shall be filed with the Pollution
Control Officer by any such person, and shall set forth that, following normal good operating procedures, it is impossible in the operation of any plant, fuelburning
combustion or process equipment or devices, or apparatus, to operate the same in compliance with the requirements of this Chapter. Said request
shall also state evidence satisfactory to the Pollution Control Officer that such person has taken, or will take, all steps necessary to provide for future
compliance with the provisions of this Chapter. The Pollution Control Officer shall be assured that the acquisition and installation of the proper equipment,
processes, devices or appliances, or control equipment will be effected within the period of time specified. (1994 Code)
7-5-8: FEES:
Fees required for permits, certificates and inspection of equipment and other sources of emission shall be collected by the Village Clerk for deposit with
the Village Treasurer. (1994 Code)
7-5-9: PERSONS LIABLE:
All persons owning, operating or in charge or control of any equipment who violate or cause, suffer or allow any violation of this Chapter, either as owners,
occupants, managers, agents, shall be jointly and severally liable to the penalties imposed by this Chapter. (1994 Code)
7-5-10: GENERAL AIR-POLLUTION EMISSION STANDARDS:
A. Air quality standards are ambient air quality goals established for the purpose of protecting public health and welfare. The levels of air quality
designated by the standards are designed to protect against injury to human, plant or animal life. They are further intended to allow maximum
enjoyment of property consistent with the intent of this Chapter.
The first use of our air resources is to sustain life. Air entering the respiratory tract must not menace health. Therefore, the air quality standards set
must, as a minimum, provide air which will not adversely affect, through acute or chronic symptoms, the health of the community.
The air quality standards set here will provide a basis for planning to achieve cleaner air. Even though in certain areas of the Village the quality of the
air maybe lower than the standards, they are not a license allowing unnecessary degradation of the air, going against the intent of the act which
requires a maintenance of the purity of the air resources of the State.
The standards have also been designed for use as a basis for the development of implementation plans for the abatement and control of pollutants
emissions from existing sources including development of air contaminant emission limitations and the setting of long and short-range objectives for
reduction of total emission of air contaminants as determined by emission inventories. And they will be used in the determination of air pollution control
emission limitations for future installations to ensure that urban and economic growth trends do not add to community air pollution problems.
B. Ambient air quality standards applicable in the Village are as follows:
Micrograms/Cubic Meter
(24-Hour Sample)
Suspended Particulates
Geometric mean 75
99% point 200
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 210/498
24-hour maximum 300
Sulfur dioxide (SO2) ppm
Geometric mean
(24-hour average) 0.015
99% point
(24-hour average) 0.10
24-hour maximum 0.20
1-hour maximum 0.50
C. No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit open burning of refuse or other matter.
D. A person shall not discharge into the atmosphere from any single source of emission whatsoever any air contaminants for a period or periods
aggregating more than three (3) minutes in any one hour which is:
1. As dark or darker in shade as that designated as No. 1 on the Ringelmann Chart, or
2. Of such opacity as to obscure an observer's view to adegree equal to or greater than does smoke described in subsection D1 above. (1994 Code)
7-5-11: EMISSIONS CAUSING NUISANCE:
A person shall not discharge from any source whatsoever such quantities of air contaminants or other material which may cause injury, detriment,
nuisance or annoyance to any other person or to the public or which endangers the comfort, repose, health or safety of any such persons or the public or
which causes or has a natural tendency to cause injury or damage to business or property. (1994 Code)
7-5-12: PARTICULATE MATTER:
A person shall not discharge into the atmosphere from any source particulate matter in excess of ten one-hundredths (0.10) grains per standard cubic foot
of gas at standard atmospheric conditions. (1994 Code)
7-5-13: SPECIFIC CONTAMINANTS:
A. Sulfur Dioxide Limitation:
1. No person shall cause or permit the use of, or if intended for use in the Village, the purchase, sale, offer for sale, storage or transportation of fuel
which, as determined by the methods of the American Society for Testing and Materials, contains more than the following percentages of sulfur by
weight:
For a period of 2 years, beginning
1 year after the effective date hereof
fuel: 2.5 percent
For a period of 18 months, beginning
3 years after the effective date hereof
fuel: 2.0 percent
Thereafter fuel: 1.5 percent
2. Upon the application of any person engaged in the operation of fuel burning equipment, the Pollution Control Officer, with the approval of the Board
of Trustees, may issue a certificate of operation in those cases wherein the applicant shall establish that the fuel burning equipment is operated in
such a manner or is equipped with such control apparatus, as to continually prevent the emission of any sulfur compound or compounds in amounts
greater than those that would be omitted from the burning (in the same fuel burning equipment without such control apparatus) of fuel containing any
amount of sulfur by weight not in excess of the maximum amount permittedat the applicable time by this Section.
3. When periods of stagnation, for twenty four (24) hours or greater, occur, the Pollution Control Officer, with Village Board approval, shall have the
power to implement a Pollution Incident Control Plan, whereby plants are required either to switch to a low sulfur fuel (less than 1.5 percent sulfur by
weight) or curtail emission of sulfur dioxide pollution during this period until the Pollution Control Officer determines that the stagnation period no
longer exists.
B. Organic Materials:
1. A person shall not discharge organic materials into the atmosphere in any one day from any article, machine, equipment or other contrivance in
excess of the following quantities:
a. More than fifteen (15) pounds when any organic solvent comes into contact with flame or is baked, heat cured or heat-polymerized, in the
presence of oxygen, unless all organic materials have been reduced either by at least eighty five percent (85%) overall or to not more than fifteen
(15) pounds in any one day.
b. More than forty (40) pounds when employing, applying, evaporating or drying any photochemically reactive solvent or material containing such
solvent unless all organic materials have been reduced either by at least eighty five percent (85%) overall or to not more than forty (40) pounds in
any one day.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 211/498
2. Any series of articles, machines, equipment or other contrivances designed for processing a moving sheet, web, strip or wire which is subject to any
combination of operations described in subsection B1a or B1b above involving any photochemically reactive solvent or material containing such
solvent, shall be subject to compliance with subsection B1b above. Where only nonphotochemically reactive solvents or material containing only
such solvents are employed or applied, and where any portion or portions of said series of articles, machines, equipment or other contrivances
involves operations described in subsection B1a above, said portions shall be collectively subject to compliance with subsection B1a above.
3. Emissions of organic materials to the atmosphere from the cleanup with photochemically reactive solvents of any article, machine, equipment or
other contrivance described in subsection B1a, B1b or B2 above shall be included with the other emissions of organic materials from that article,
machine, equipment or other contrivance for determining compliance with this Chapter.
4. Emissions of organic materials to the atmosphere as a result of spontaneously continuing drying of products for the first twelve (12) hours after their
removal from any article, machine, equipment or other contrivance described insubsections B1a, B1b or B2 above shall be included with other
emissions of organic materials from that article, machine, equipment or other contrivance for determining compliance with this Chapter.
5. Any person using organic solvents or any materials containing organic solvents shall supply the Pollution Control Officer, upon request and in the
manner and form prescribed by him, written evidence of the chemical composition, physical properties and amount consumed for each organic
solvent used.
6. The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to:
a. The manufacture of organic solvents, or the transportation or storage of organic solvents.
b. The spraying or other employment of insecticides, pesticides or herbicides.
c. The employment, application, evaporation or drying of saturated halogenated hydrocarbons or perchloroethylene.
7. A person shall not, during any one day, dispose of a total of more than one and one-half (11/2) gallons of any photochemically reactive solvent or any
material containing more than one and one-half (11/2) gallons of any such solvent by any means which will permit the evaporation of such solvent
into the atmosphere. (1994 Code)
7-5-14: PREVENTION OF AIR-BORNE PARTICULATE MATTER:
A. No person shall cause or permit particulate matter to be handled, transported or stored in a manner which allows or may allow the particulate matter to
become air-borne.
B. No person shall cause or permit a building or its appurtenances or a road to be constructed, altered, repaired or demolished without taking such
precautions as may be required by the Pollution Control Officer to prevent particulate matter from becoming air-borne.
C. No person shall cause or permit untreated open areas to be maintained without taking reasonable precautions to prevent particulate matter from
becoming air-borne. (1994 Code)
7-5-15: ODORS:
No person shall cause or permit the emission of odorous air contaminants, including any air contaminants whose emission is not otherwise prohibited by
this Chapter, if the air contaminants cause or may cause detriment to the health, safety, welfare or comfort of any person. (1994 Code)
7-5-16: TOXICS:
No activity or operation shall cause, at any time, the discharge of toxic matter into the atmosphere in such concentrations as to be detrimental to or
endanger the public health, safety or welfare, or cause injury or damage to property or business or be needlessly destructive of any insect, plant or animal
life which contributes to the general welfare. (1994 Code)
7-5-17: TESTS:
A. If the Pollution Control Officer has reasonable cause to believe that any equipment or fuel is in violation of this Chapter, the Pollution Control Officer
may order the owner or lessee of the equipment or fuel, or his agent to conduct and pay for such tests as are necessary in the opinion of the Pollution
Control Officer to determine whether the equipment or fuel is in violation of this Chapter and to submit the test results to the Pollution Control Officer
within ten (10) days after the tests are completed.
B. Such tests shall be conducted in a manner approved by the Pollution Control Officer. If any part of the test is conducted at a place other than the site
where the equipment or fuel is located, that part of the test shall be certified by a responsible laboratory.
C. The owner or lessee, or his agent, shall notify the Pollution Control Officer of the time and place of a test at least seven (7) days before the
commencement of a test. Reasonable facilities shall be made available for the Pollution Control Officer to witness the test. (1994 Code)
7-5-18: SOLIDS POLLUTION:
No person shall cause or permit litter of any kind to be deposited within the Village limits, said litter to consist of paper, glass, metals, plant material, waste
material of any sort and garbage.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 212/498
A. All garbage and waste materials shall be kept in closed or sealed containers at all times and waste collection areas behind commercial or industrial
establishments shall have proper enclosed receptacles for the containment of such waste materials and shall be properly fenced with a fence at least
six feet (6') high on all sides.
B. Construction trucks shall not deposit mud and other debris upon the highways and streets of the Village without providing for the removal of such mud
or other debris at the end of the working day.
C. No corporation having construction in process within theVillage shall keep or maintain more than one area for the location of their waste materials. This
area shall be only of the size necessary for said purposes and shall be fenced in, or in some way protected from becoming a public dumping ground.
The debris and waste materials collected in such area shall be removed at least twice a month and the area immediately adjacent to said dumping
ground shall be policed on a daily basis. (1994 Code)
Chapter 6
SEWAGE AND WASTEWATER TREATMENT
7-6-1: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meanings of terms used in this Chapter shall be as follows:
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT:
Administrator: The Administrator of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.
Federal Act: The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq.) as amended by the Federal Water Pollution Control Act of Amendments of
1972 (Pub. L. 92-500) and (Pub. L. 93-243).
Federal Grant: The U.S. government participation in the financing of the construction of treatment works as provided for by Title II, Grants for
Construction of Treatment Works of the Act and implementing regulations.
LOCAL GOVERNMENT:
Approving Authority: The Director of the Department of Public Works.
Chapter: This Chapter.
Village: The Village of Streamwood.
PERSON: Any and all persons, natural or artificial, including any individual, firm, company, Municipal or private corporation, association, society, institution,
enterprise, governmental agency or other entity.
SEWER TYPES AND APPURTENANCES:
Building Drain: That part of the lowest piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside the
walls of the building andconveys it to the building sewer or other approved point of discharge, beginning five feet (5') (1.5 m) outside the inner face of the
building wall.
Building Sewer: The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal.
Combined Sewer: A sewer which is designed and intended to receive wastewater, storm, surface and ground water drainage.
Easement: An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by others.
Public Sewer: A sewer provided by or subject to the jurisdiction of the Village. It shall also include sewers within or outside the Village boundaries that
serve one or more persons and ultimately discharge into the Village sanitary (or combined) sewer system, even though those sewers may not have been
constructed with Village funds.
Sanitary Sewer: A sewer that conveys sewage or industrial wastes or a combination of both, and into which storm, surface and ground waters or
unpolluted industrial wastes are not intentionally admitted.
Sewer: A pipe or conduit for conveying sewage or any other waste liquids, including storm, surface and ground water drainage.
Sewerage: The system of sewers and appurtenances for the collection, transportation and pumping of sewage.
Storm Sewer: A sewer that carries storm, surface and ground water drainage but excludes sewage and industrial wastes other than unpolluted cooling
water.
Storm Water Runoff: That portion of the precipitation that is drained into the sewers.
SHALL, MAY: "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissible.
STATE GOVERNMENT:
Director: The Director of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
State Act: The Illinois Anti-Pollution Bond Act of 1970.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 213/498
State Grant: The State of Illinois participation in the financing of the construction of treatment works as provided for by the Illinois Anti-Pollution Bond Act
and for making such grants as filed with the Secretary of State of the State of Illinois.
TREATMENT:
Pretreatment: The treatment of wastewaters from sources before introduction into the wastewater treatment works.
Wastewater Treatment Works: An arrangement of devices and structures for treating wastewater, industrial wastes and sludge. Sometimes used as
synonymous with "waste treatment plant" or "wastewater treatment plant" or "pollution control plant".
WASTEWATER AND ITS CHARACTERISTICS:
Floatable Oil: Oil, fat or grease in a physical state such that it will separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment facility.
A wastewater shall be considered free of floatable fat if it is properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the collection system.
Garbage: Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking and dispensing of food and from the handling, storage and sale of
produce.
Industrial Waste: Any solid, liquid or gaseous substance discharged, permitted to flow or escaping from any industrial, manufacturing, commercial or
business establishment or process or from the development, recovery or processing of any natural resource as distinct from sanitary sewage.
Milligrams Per Liter: A unit of the concentration of water or wastewater constituent. It is one one-thousandth (0.001) g of the constituent in one thousand
(1,000) ml of water. It has replaced the unit formerly used commonly, parts per million, to which it is approximately equivalent, in reporting the results of
water and wastewater analysis.
pH: The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration expressed by one of the procedures outlined in "Standard Methods".
PPM: Parts per million by weight.
Population Equivalent: A term used to evaluate the impact of industrial or other waste on a treatment works or stream. One population equivalent is one
hundred (100) gallons of sewage per day, containing seventeen one-hundredths (0.17) pounds of BOD and twenty two one-hundredths (0.22) pounds of
suspended solids.
Sewage: Is used interchangeably with "wastewater".
Sludge: Any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period
of duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes, more than five (5) times the average twenty four (24) hour concentration of flows during normal operation.
Standard Methods: The examination and analytical procedures set forth in the most recent edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water
and Wastewater" published jointly by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association and the Water Pollution Control
Federation.
Suspended Solids: Solids that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in water, sewage or industrial waste and which are removable by a
laboratory filtration device. Quantitative determination of suspended solids shall be made in accordance with procedures set forth in "Standard Methods".
Unpolluted Water: Water of quality equal to or better than the effluent criteria in effect or water that would not cause violation of receiving water quality
standards and would not be benefited by discharge to the sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided.
Wastewater: The spent water of a community. From this standpoint of course, it may be a combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes from
residences, commercial buildings industrial plants and institutions, together with any ground water, surface water and storm water that may be present.
Water Quality Standards: Defined in the Water Pollution Regulations of Illinois.
WASTEWATER FACILITIES: The structures, equipment and processes required to collect, carry away and treat domestic and industrial wastes and
transport effluent to a watercourse.
WATERCOURSE AND CONNECTIONS:
Natural Outlet: Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface or ground water.
Watercourse: A channel in which a flow of water occurs either continuously or intermittently. (1994 Code)
7-6-2: USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the Village or
in any area under the jurisdiction of said Village, any human or animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste.
B. It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the Village, or in any area under the jurisdiction of said Village, any sewage or other polluted
waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this Chapter.
C. Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank,cesspool or other facility intended or used
for the disposal of sewage.
D. The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes situated within the Village and
abutting on any street, alley or right of way in which there is now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary sewer of the Village, is hereby
required at his expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 214/498
the provisions of this Chapter, within one hundred twenty (120) days after date of official notice to do so; provided, that the property is located within
two hundred feet (200') of an available public sewer line. (1994 Code)
7-6-3: PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL:
A. Connection To Private Sewage Disposal System: Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of subsection 7-6-2D of this
Chapter, the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system complying with the provisions of this Section. (1994 Code)
B. Permit Required; Fee: Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal system, the owner shall first obtain a written permit signed
by the Director of Community Development. The application for such permit shall be made on a form furnished by the Director of Community
Development which the applicant shall supplement by any plans, specifications and other information as are deemed necessary by the Director of
Community Development.
A permit and inspection fee shall be paid to the Village at the time the application is filed.
C. Inspection Of System: A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of
the Director of Community Development. He shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction and, in any event, the applicant for the
permit shall notify the Director of Community Development when the work is ready for final inspection, and before any underground portions are
covered. (1994 Code; amd. Ord. 1995-36, 6-22-1995)
D. Specifications Of System: The type, capacities, location and layout of a private sewage disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the
State of Illinois Private Sewage Disposal Licensing Act and Code and with the State of Illinois Environmental Protection Agency. No permit shall be
issued for any private sewage disposal system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where the area of the lot is less than forty three thousand
six hundred fifty (43,650) square feet. No septic tank or cesspool shall bepermitted to discharge to any natural outlet.
E. Connection To Public System Required; Private System To Be Cleaned:
1. At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private sewage disposal system as provided in subsection 7-6-2D of this
Chapter, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with this Chapter, and any septic tanks, cesspools and similar private
sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned and filled with suitable material.
2. When a public sewer becomes available, the building sewer shall be connected to said sewer within one hundred twenty (120) days and the private
sewage disposal system shall be cleaned of sludge and filled with clean bank-run gravel or dirt.
F. System To Be Sanitary: The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times and at no expense
to the Village.
G. Additional Requirements: No statement contained in this Section shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed
by the Health Inspector. (1994 Code)
7-6-4: BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS:
A. No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof
without first obtaining a written permit from the Director of Community Development. (1994 Code; amd. Ord. 1995-36, 6-22-1995)
B. A building sewer permit will only be issued and a sewer connection shall only be allowed if it can be demonstrated that the downstream sewerage
facilities, including sewers, pump stations and wastewater treatment facilities, have sufficient reserve capacity to adequately and efficiently handle the
anticipated waste load.
C. A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building; except that where one building stands at the rear of another on an
interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the building
sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer.
D. Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the Village, to meet all
requirements of this Chapter.
E. The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing
and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of the Building and Plumbing Codes, as contained in Title 9 of this Code, or other
applicable rules and regulations of the Village. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in
appropriate specifications of the American Society of Testing Materials, Water Pollution Control Federation Manual of Practice No. 9, and Standard
Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois shall apply.
F. All buildings with basements, floors, rooms or occupancy areas that are lower than the elevation of the nearest sanitary sewer manhole rim plus fivetenths
of a foot (0.5') shall have overhead plumbing.
G. No permittee shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains, areaway drains or other sources of surface runoff or ground water
to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 215/498
H. The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the Building and Plumbing Codes or other applicable
rules and regulations of the Village, or the procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the American Society of Testing Materials, Water
Pollution Control Federation Manual of Practice No. 9, and Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois. All such
connections shall be made gastight and watertight. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the Director of
Public Works before installation. (1994 Code)
I. The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the Director of Community Development when the building sewer is ready for inspection and
connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the Director of Community Development or his representative.
(1994 Code; amd. Ord. 1995-36, 6-22-1995)
J. All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets,
sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the Village.
All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the
Village from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. The owner shall obtain insurance
to fund this indemnification and provide proof of that coverage to the Village. (1994Code)
7-6-5: USE OF THE PUBLIC SEWERS:
A. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any storm water, surface water, ground water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated
cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer.
B. Storm water and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers or to a natural outlet
approved by the Director of Public Works. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged, on approval of the Director of
Public Works, to a storm sewer or natural outlet.
C. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any public sewers:
1. Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas
2. Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to
injure or interfere with any sewage collection and distribution process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals or create a public nuisance.
3. Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than five and five-tenths (5.5) or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard
to structures, equipment and personnel of the sewage works.
4. Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers such as, but not limited to, ashes,
cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and
fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders.
D. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described substances, materials, waters or wastes if it appears likely in the opinion of
the Director of Public Works that such wastes can harm either the sewers or related equipment; have an adverse effect on the receiving stream; or can
otherwise endanger life, limb, public property or constitute a nuisance. In forming his opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the Director of
Public Works will give consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of
construction of the sewers and maximum limits established by regulatory agencies. The substances prohibited are:
1. Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit (150oF) (65oC).
2. Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous materials, or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of one hundred (100) mg/l or containing
substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between thirty two degrees and one hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit (32o and
150oF) (0o and 65oC).
3. Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths (3/4)
horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater shall be subject to the review and approval of the Director of Public Works.
4. Materials which exert or cause:
a. Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not limited to, fuller's earth, lime slurries and lime residues) or of dissolved solids
(such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate);
b. Unusual volume of flow or concentrations of wastes constituting "slugs" as defined herein.
E. If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the
characteristics enumerated in subsection D of this Section, and which in the judgment of the Director of Public Works may have a deleterious effect
upon the sewage works, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the Director of Public Works may impose one or
more of the below remedies in conjunction and at a later date may require again that one or more of these remedies be imposed:
1. Reject the wastes;
2. Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers;
3. Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 216/498
4. Require payment to cover the added costs of handling the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges, under the provisions of
subsection J of this Section.
If the Director of Public Works permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall
be subject to the review and approval of the Director of Public Works and subject to the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances and laws.
F. Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the Director of Public Works, they are necessary for the proper handling of
liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand of other harmful ingredients; except that, such interceptors shall
not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the Director of Public Works,
and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
G. Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by
the owner at his expense.
H. Each new industry shall be required to install a control manhole and, when required by the Director of Public Works, the owner of any property serviced
by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in
the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely
located and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the Director of Public Works. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his
expense and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times.
I. All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this Chapter shall be determined in
accordance with the latest edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater", published by the American Public Health
Association, and shall be determined at the control manhole provided or upon suitable samples taken at said control manhole. In the event that no
special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at
which the building sewer is connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the
sewage works and to determine the existence of hazards to life, limb and property. (The particular analyses involved will determine whether a 24 hour
composite of all outfalls of a premises is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples should be taken. Normally, but not always, BOD and
suspended solids analyses are obtained from 24 hour composites of all outfalls whereas pHs are determined from periodic grab samples.)
J. No statement contained in this Section shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the Village and any industrial
concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the Village for collection and distribution, subject to payment
therefor by the industrial concern. (1994 Code)
7-6-6: PROTECTION OF SEWAGE WORKS FROM DAMAGE:
It shall be unlawful for anyone to maliciously, wilfully or negligently break, damage, destroy or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which
is a part of the sewage works. Any person violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly conduct. (1994 Code)
7-6-7: POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS:
A. The Director of Public Works and other duly authorized employees of the Village bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter
all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter.
B. While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in subsection A above, the Director of Public Works or duly authorized employees
of the Village shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the company.
C. The Director of Public Works and other duly authorized employees of the Village bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter
all private properties for the purpose of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of
the sewage works lying within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement, shall be done in full accordance with the terms
of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved.
D. The Illinois Environmental Protection Agency or its authorized representative shall have access to any books, documents, papers and records of the
Village which are applicable to the Village's system of user charges or industrial cost recovery for the purpose of making audit, examination, excerpts
and transcriptions thereof to ensure compliance with the terms of the special and general conditions to any State grant. (1994 Code)
7-6-8: REGULATIONS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE; COPIES ON FILE:
Each rule, regulation, standard or code adopted by reference in this Chapter shall be deemed to have been incorporated as though fully set forth herein.
(1994 Code)
7-6-9: PENALTIES:
Should the Village through any of its authorized agents orconsultants determine that any person is in violation of any provision of this Chapter, the Village
shall cause such person to be served with written notice thereof. Such notice shall set forth the exact nature of each such violation and prescribe a
reasonable time limit within which each such violation shall be abated, ceased, cured or otherwise remedied in conformance with this Chapter. The
requirements of this Section shall not apply to alleged violations of Section 7-6-6 of this Chapter.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 217/498
Should any person served with a notice pursuant to this Section fail to abate, cease, cure or otherwise remedy alleged violations of this Chapter within the
time period so stated, the Village may cause said person or persons to be served with a complaint specifying their several violations of the terms of this
Chapter. Any person who shall have been found to be in violation of any provision of this Chapter shall be fined as set forth in Section 1-4-1 of this Code
for each and every separate and distinct violation. Each day on which any such violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense. (Ord. 1998-4,
1-8-1998)
Chapter 7
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE REMOVAL
7-7-1: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this Chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them:
ABANDONMENT: The act of leaving a thing with the intent not to retain possession of or assert ownership control over it. The intent need not coincide with
the act of leaving. It is prima facia evidence of the necessary intent to abandon a vehicle(s), vessel(s), and/or container(s) containing a hazardous
substance that:
A. The vehicle, vessel, and/or container has been left for more than two (2) days unattended and unmoved; or
B. License plates or other identifying marks have been removed from the vehicle, vessel, and/or container; or
C. The vehicle, vessel, and/or container has been damaged or is deteriorated so extensively that it has value only for junk or salvage; or
D. The owner/operator has been notified by a law enforcement agent to remove the vehicle, vessel, and/or container and it has not been removed
within twenty four (24) hours after notification.
CONTAINER: A receptacle used for the shipment of goods that meet one or more of the following:
A. Of permanent character and strong enough for repeated use; or
B. A cargo container used to transport small quantities of materials (e.g., box, drug, carboy); or
C. Specifically designed to facilitate the carriage of goods by one or more modes of transportation without intermediate reloading.
FIRE CHIEF: The Fire Chief of the Village of Streamwood or his authorized representative.
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE: A. Any material as designated pursuant to the Federal Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and
Liability Act of 1980, 42 USC 9601(14), as amended, or as may be amended on a future date; or
B. Any substance, material, waste, or mixture designated as a hazardous material, waste, or substance according to the 49 Code of Federal
Regulations (CFR) or according to 430 Illinois Compiled Statutes 35/1 et al., as amended or as may be amended, excluding highway route controlled
quantities of radioactive materials as defined in 49 CFR and special fireworks as defined in 49 CFR 173.88(d) when the aggregate amount of the
flash powder does not exceed fifty (50) pounds; or
C. Any material listed on the Environmental Protection Agency Pollutants, 40 CFR 401.15, as amended or as may be amended; or
D. Any material which is classified by the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) as a flammable liquid, a Class 2 combustible liquid or a Class 3
combustible liquid; or
E. Any material which has been determined by the party storing it, or having control of it, through testing or other objective means, to be likely to create
a significant potential or actual hazard to the public health, safety, or welfare or to the environment. This definition shall not establish any requirement
to test for the purposes of this Chapter; or
F. Any material which has been determined by the Fire Chief, through information based on appraisal and assessment from reliable resources, to be
likely to create a significant potential or actual hazard to the public health, safety, or welfare or to the environment. The fact that the material in
question is not designated as a hazardous substance pursuant to subsections A through E of this definition or is excluded by the legislation of NFPA
classifications of subsections A through D, does not preclude the Fire Chief from determining that the material is a hazard, given the totality of the
particular facts and circumstances existing at the time of the hazardous substance incident.
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE INCIDENT: Any circumstance involving the release or threatened release of a hazardous substance, which in the judgment of
an emergency response authority, whether saidemergency response authority be the Village, a mutual aid box alarm system (MABAS) agreement member
unit, or a Federal or a State agency or other local agency, creates a significant potential or actual hazard to the environment or the public health, safety,
and welfare excluding risks associated with hazardous substances in the normal course of an individual's employment. "Hazardous substance incident"
includes those incidents of releasing or abandoning of a hazardous substance, whether or not such release or abandoning is found to threaten immediate
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 218/498
and irreparable harm, but such term does not include any release of a hazardous substance authorized pursuant to Federal, State or local law or
regulation.
PERSON: Any individual, public or private corporation, partnership, association, firm trust, sole proprietorship, or estate, state or any department,
institution, or agency thereof, any municipal corporation, county, and city or other political subdivision of the State, or any other legal entity whatsoever
which is recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties and which is not subject to privilege or immunity from liability for a hazardous substance
incident.
RELEASE: Any actual or threatened spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying, discharging, injecting, escaping, leeching, dumping,
vaporizing, evaporating, or disposing into the environment, but excludes:
A. Any release which results in exposure to persons solely within a work place, with respect to a claim which such persons may assert against the
employer of such person;
B. Emission from the engine exhaust of a motor vehicle, rolling stock, aircraft, vessel, or pipeline pumping station engine;
C. Release of source, byproduct, or special nuclear material from a nuclear incident, as those terms are defined in the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, if
such release is subject to requirements with respect to financial protection established by the Nuclear Regulatory Commission under section 1870 of
such Act;
D. The normal application of fertilizer;
E. A release authorized pursuant to any Federal, State or local law or regulation.
REMOVE OR REMOVAL: The cleanup, containment, or removal of released hazardous substances from the environment or any actions as may be
necessary to be taken in the event of the threat of a release of hazardous substances and/or such actions as may be necessary to monitor, assess, and
evaluate the release or threatened release of hazardous substances, the disposal of removed material, or the taking of such other actions as may
benecessary to prevent, minimize, or mitigate damage to the public health or welfare or the environment which may otherwise result from a release or
threatened release of hazardous substances. The term includes, in addition, without being limited to, security fencing or other measures to limit access,
provisions of alternative water supplies, temporary evacuation and housing of threatened individuals, and any emergency assistance which may be
provided under the Illinois Emergency Services and Disaster Agency act of 1975, as amended or as may be amended, pursuant to a MABAS agreement.
VEHICLE: Any device which is capable of moving itself, or being moved, from place to place upon wheels or endless tracks. The term includes, but is not
limited to, any motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer, railroad engine, or railroad car.
VESSEL: Any craft which is made to float upon water or which does float upon water. (Ord. 1996-3, 1-18-1996; amd. Ord. 1998-8, 1-22-1998)
7-7-2: LIABILITY FOR REMOVAL AND COSTS:
A. Fire Department Authority: The Streamwood Fire Department is authorized to remove and/or abate the effects of any hazardous substance incident:
1. Upon or into property or facilities in the Village; or
2. Pursuant to any mutual aid box alarm agreement in effect; or
3. Outside the corporate and/or response limits where the health, welfare, and/or property of the Village and/or those people within its protection are in
danger.
B. Persons Liable To Village: The following persons shall be jointly and severally liable to the Village for payment of all costs, direct or indirect, incurred by
the Village as a result of any removal or abatement of a hazardous materials incident as to any member unit of an MABAS agreement rendering aid to
the Village pursuant to said agreement:
1. The person or persons whose conduct caused such release; and
2. The person or persons who owned or had custody or control of the hazardous substance at the time of such release, without regard to fault or
proximate cause; and
3. The person or persons who owned or had custody or control of the container, vehicle, or vessel which held such hazardous substance at the time of,
or immediately prior to, such release or threatened release, without regard to fault or proximate cause; and
4. Any person owning or in control of any real property from which a hazardous substance is or is threatened to be released.
C. Supervision By Fire Chief: In the event that any person undertakes, voluntarily or upon order of the Fire Chief, to remove or abate the effects of an
actual or threatened hazardous substance release, the Fire Chief may take such action as is necessary to supervise or verify the adequacy of the
removal or the abatement. The person described in subsection B1 through B4 of this Section shall be liable to the Village for all costs, direct or indirect,
incurred as a result of such supervision or verification. (Ord. 1996-3, 1-18-1996)
7-7-3: REMOVAL OR ABATEMENT COSTS:
A. Costs Incurred By Village: For purposes of this Chapter, costs incurred by the Village shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following: actual labor
costs of Village personnel including benefits and administrative overhead; costs of consultants whose expertise is required to remove or abate the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 219/498
incident or to assess the nature and the extent of the damage done; cost of equipment operation; the replacement cost of vehicles or equipment which,
in the determination of the Fire Chief, is contaminated beyond reuse or repair; laboratory costs; costs of materials and equipment obtained directly by
the Village; costs of any contractor, mutual aid labor, and materials; the same out-of-pocket costs incurred by any other fire department or entity
providing an MABAS response; and at prime simple interest per annum, determined as of January 1 of the calendar year of the release, for any sums
not paid in conformance with subsection D of this Section; and attorney fees incurred in collecting monies owed to the Village by the liable parties.
B. Extinguishing Fire: When the action to remove or abate the effects of a hazardous substance includes extinguishing a fire, the costs imposed pursuant
to this Section may only include the expenses related to the hazardous substance and not to any expense related to extinguishing the fire.
C. Right Of Recovery: Nothing contained in this Chapter shall be construed to change or impair any right of recovery or subrogation arising under any
mutual aid agreement, or other ordinance, statute, or provision of law. No criminal, quasi-criminal remedy for any wrongful action shall be excluded or
impaired by this Section.
D. Preparation Of Statement; Time For Payment: The Finance Director of the Village shall prepare statements for any and all sums due any and all parties
pursuant to this Chapter and shall allow forty five (45) days for payment of the reimbursement amount and shall consider any written objections on the
type and amount of expense. If payment is not made within said time period, or any additional time period granted by the finance Director, the Finance
Director shall refer the matter to the Village Attorney to determine whether to proceed with the litigation.
E. MABAS Agreement: An MABAS member unit rendering aid to the Village in a hazardous substance incident pursuant to an MABAS agreement shall
have its own right of action under this Chapter for recovery of its costs. (Ord. 1996-3, 1-18-1996)
7-7-4: LIBERAL CONSTRUCTION:
This Chapter shall be liberally construed to give effect to its purpose, which is to shift the burden of liability for threatened or actual hazardous substance
incidences from the citizens of the Village to those as defined in this Chapter as being responsible for the incident. (Ord. 1996-3, 1-18-1996)
7-7-5: REIMBURSEMENT TO VILLAGE FOR SERVICES RENDERED:
A. Third Party Defined: As used herein, the term "third party" means and includes any person, company or business entity, but not if such person is an
employee or an officer of the Village, a person directly or indirectly sharing an interest in such services with an employee or officer of the Village nor a
company any portion of which is owned by an employee or officer of the Village.
B. Invoice Required: The recipients or benefactors, or the administrators, personal representatives, executors, successors, heirs or assigns thereof, all as
determined by the head of the Village's department rendering aid or emergency relief, shall be, and are, obligated to reimburse the Village in the actual
amount of payments made by the Village to third parties for services rendered in providing aid or emergency relief and for payments to replenish
necessary supplies and equipment used while providing aid or emergency services. The head of the Village's department incurring such third party
costs shall notify the Village Finance Director's office of the circumstances and provide a copy of the invoice or billing statement from the third party that
specifies the nature of the expenditure and the amount to be, or in fact, paid. The Finance Director shall cause an invoice to issue for the amount
certified by the department head as to each such circumstance reported.
C. Time Allowed For Payment: The Village Finance Director shall allow for a reasonable time for the payment of the reimbursement amount and shall hear
any complaints or objections on the type and amount of expense. The Village Finance Director may adjust the amounts invoiced based upon
demonstrated hardship but is not required to so adjust. In the event that no payment or response to request for reimbursement has been received
within thirty (30) days from the date of invoice, the Village Finance Director is authorized to undertake such action as provided by law for the recovery
of money due the Village. (Ord. 1990-33, 6-7-1990)
Chapter 8
ILLICIT DISCHARGE AND CONNECTION
7-8-1: PURPOSE; INTENT:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the village of Streamwood through the regulation of
nonstorm water discharges to the storm drainage system to the maximum extent practicable as required by federal and state law. This chapter establishes
methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) in order to comply with requirements of the
national pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) permit process. The objectives of this chapter are:
A. To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the MS4 by storm water discharges by any user.
B. To prohibit illicit connections and discharges to the MS4.
C. To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance, monitoring, and enforcement procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this
chapter. (Ord. 2006-17, 4-6-2006)
7-8-2: DEFINITIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 220/498
For the purposes of this chapter, the following shall mean:
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs): Schedules of activities, prohibitions or practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution prevention
and educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly
to storm water, receiving waters, or storm water conveyance systems. BMPs also include treatment practices, operating procedures, and practices to
control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage.
CLEAN WATER ACT: The federal water pollution control act (33 USC section 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto.
CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY: Activities subject to NPDES construction permits. These include construction projects resulting in land disturbance of one
acre or more. Such activities include, but are not limited to, clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition.
DIRECTOR: The director of public works of the village of Streamwood.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS: Any material, including any substance, waste, or combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or
physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety,
property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed.
ILLEGAL DISCHARGE: Any direct or indirect nonstorm water discharge to the storm drain system, except as exempted in section 7-8-8 of this chapter.
ILLICIT CONNECTIONS: An illicit connection is defined as either of the following:
A. Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, that allows an illegal discharge to enter the storm drain system including, but not
limited to, any conveyances that allow any nonstorm water discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the storm drain
system and any connections to the storm drain system from indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain or connection had been
previously allowed, permitted, or approved by an authorized enforcement agency, or
B. Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial land use to the stormdrain system that has not been documented in plans, maps, or
equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency.
INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY: Activities subject to NPDES industrial storm water permits as defined in 40 CFR, section 122.26 (b)(14).
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4): The system of conveyances (including sidewalks, roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels, or storm drains) owned and operated by the village of Streamwood and designed or
used for collecting or conveying storm water, and that is not used for collecting or conveying sewage.
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) STORM WATER DISCHARGE PERMIT: A permit issued by EPA (or by a
state under authority delegated pursuant to 33 USC section 1342(b)) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether
the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general areawide basis.
NONSTORM WATER DISCHARGE: Any discharge to the storm drain system that is not composed entirely of storm water.
PERSON: Any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm, corporation or other entity recognized by law and acting as either the owner or as
the owner's agent.
POLLUTANT: Anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil and
other automotive fluids; nonhazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned
objects, ordinances, and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous
substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from
constructing a building or structure; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind.
PREMISES: Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.
STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM: Publicly owned facilities by which storm water is collected and/or conveyed, including, but not limited to, any roads with
drainage systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention basins, natural and human
made or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures.
STORM WATER: Any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such
precipitation.
STORM WATER MANAGEMENT PLAN: A document which describes the best management practices and activities to be implemented by a person or
business to identify sources of pollution or contamination at a site and the actions to eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to storm water, storm
water conveyance systems, and/or receiving waters to the maximum extent practicable.
VILLAGE MANAGER: The village manager of the village of Streamwood.
WASTEWATER: Any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated storm water, discharged from a facility. (Ord. 2006-17, 4-6-2006)
7-8-3: APPLICABILITY:
This chapter shall apply to all water entering the storm drain system generated on any developed and undeveloped lands unless explicitly exempted by the
village of Streamwood. (Ord. 2006-17, 4-6-2006)
7-8-4: RESPONSIBILITY FOR ADMINISTRATION:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 221/498
The village of Streamwood shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this chapter. Any powers granted or duties imposed upon the village
of Streamwood may be delegated by the village manager of the village of Streamwood to persons or entities acting in the beneficial interest of or in the
employ of the village. (Ord. 2006-17, 4-6-2006)
7-8-5: COMPATIBILITY WITH OTHER ORDINANCES AND VILLAGE REGULATIONS:
This chapter is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law including, but not limited to, chapter 7 of this
title. The requirements of this chapter are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, and where any
provision of this chapter imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, whichever
provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. Hazardous substance removal shall
remain under the authority of the village of Streamwood fire department pursuant to chapter 7 of this title. (Ord. 2006-17, 4-6-2006)
7-8-6: SEVERABILITY:
The provisions of this chapter are hereby declared to be severable. If any provision, clause, sentence, or paragraph of this chapter or the application
thereof to any person,establishment, or circumstances shall be held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions or application of this
chapter. (Ord. 2006-17, 4-6-2006)
7-8-7: ULTIMATE RESPONSIBILITY:
The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this chapter are minimum standards; therefore this chapter does not intend or imply that
compliance by any person will ensure that there will be no contamination, pollution, or unauthorized discharge of pollutants. (Ord. 2006-17, 4-6-2006)
7-8-8: DISCHARGE PROHIBITIONS:
A. Prohibition Of Illegal Discharges: No person shall throw, drain, or otherwise discharge, cause or allow others under its control to throw, drain, or
otherwise discharge into the MS4 any pollutants or waters containing any pollutants, other than storm water.
The commencement, conduct or continuance of any illegal discharge to the storm drain system is prohibited except as described as follows:
1. The following discharges are exempt from discharge prohibitions established by this chapter: water line flushing, landscape irrigation, diverted
stream flows, rising ground waters, uncontaminated ground water infiltration, uncontaminated pumped ground water, discharges from potable water
sources, foundation drains, air conditioning condensation, irrigation water, springs, water from crawl space pumps, footing drains, lawn watering,
individual residential car washing, flows from riparian habitats and wetlands, dechlorinated swimming pool discharges, and street wash water.
2. Discharges or flow from firefighting, and other discharges specified in writing by the village of Streamwood as being necessary to protect public
health and safety.
3. Discharges associated with dye testing, however this activity requires a written notification to the village of Streamwood prior to the time of the test.
4. The prohibition shall not apply to any nonstorm water discharge permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the
discharger and administered under the authority of the United States environmental protection agency (EPA), provided that the discharger is in full
compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has
been granted for any discharge to the storm drain system.
B. Prohibition Of Illicit Connections:
1. The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit connections to the storm drain system is prohibited.
2. This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible
under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection.
3. A person is considered to be in violation of this chapter if the person connects a line conveying sewage to the MS4, or allows such a connection to
continue.
4. Improper connections in violation of this chapter must be disconnected and redirected, if necessary, to an approved on site wastewater management
system or the sanitary sewer system upon approval of the village of Streamwood.
5. Any drain or conveyance that has not been documented in plans, maps or equivalent, and which may be connected to the storm sewer system, shall
be located by the owner or occupant of that property upon receipt of written notice of violation from the village of Streamwood requiring that such
locating be completed. Such notice will specify a reasonable time period within which the location of the drain or conveyance is to be determined,
that the drain or conveyance be identified as storm sewer, sanitary sewer or other, and that the outfall location or point of connection to the storm
sewer system, sanitary sewer system or other discharge point be identified. Results of these investigations are to be documented and provided to
the village of Streamwood. (Ord. 2006-17, 4-6-2006)
7-8-9: WATERCOURSE PROTECTION:
Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or such person's lessee or licensee shall keep and maintain that part of the
watercourse within the property free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, and other obstacles that would pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the
flow of water through the watercourse. In addition, the owner, lessee or licensee shall maintain existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a
watercourse, so that such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function, or physical integrity of the watercourse. (Ord. 2006-17, 4-6-2006)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 222/498
7-8-10: INDUSTRIAL OR CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY DISCHARGES:
A. Submission Of NOI To Village Of Streamwood:
1. Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES storm water discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof
of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the village of Streamwood prior to the allowing of discharges to the MS4.
2. The operator of a facility, including construction sites, required to have an NPDES permit to discharge storm water associated with industrial activity
shall submit a copy of the notice of intent (NOI) to the village of Streamwood at the same time the operator submits the original notice of intent to the
EPA as applicable.
3. The copy of the notice of intent may be delivered to the village of Streamwood either in person or by mailing it to:
Notice Of Intent To Discharge Storm Water
Village Of Streamwood Department Of Public Works
565 S. Bartlett Road
Streamwood, IL 60107
4. In addition to violation of any provision of this chapter a person also commits an offense if the person operates a facility that is discharging storm
water associated with industrial activity without having submitted a copy of the notice of intent to do so to the village of Streamwood. (Ord. 2006-17,
4-6-2006)
7-8-11: COMPLIANCE MONITORING:
A. Right Of Entry; Inspection And Sampling: The village of Streamwood shall be permitted to enter and inspect all facilities subject to regulation under this
chapter as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this chapter.
1. If a discharger has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the discharger shall
make the necessary arrangements to allow access to representatives of the village of Streamwood.
2. Facility operators shall allow the village of Streamwood ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling,
examination and copying of records that must be kept under the conditions of an NPDES permit to discharge storm water, and the performance of
any additional duties as defined by state and federal law.
3. The village of Streamwood shall have the right to set up on any permitted facility such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the village of
Streamwood to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the facility's storm water discharge.
4. The village of Streamwood has the right to require the discharger to install monitoring equipment at discharger's expense as necessary. The facility's
sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the discharger at its own expense, All
devices used to measure storm water flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy.
5. Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptlyremoved by the
operator at the written or oral request of the village of Streamwood and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by
the operator.
6. Unreasonable delays in allowing the village of Streamwood access to a permitted facility is a violation of a storm water discharge permit and of this
chapter. A person who is the operator of a facility with an NPDES permit to discharge storm water associated with industrial activity commits an
offense if the person denies the village of Streamwood reasonable access to the permitted facility for the purpose of conducting any activity
authorized or required by this chapter.
B. Search Warrants: If the village of Streamwood has been refused access to any part of the premises from which storm water is discharged, and he/she
is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this chapter, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of
a routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this chapter or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall
public health, safety, and welfare of the community, then the village of Streamwood may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of
competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 2006-17, 4-6-2006)
7-8-12: REQUIREMENT TO PREVENT, CONTROL, AND REDUCE STORM WATER POLLUTANTS BY THE USE OF BEST
MANAGEMENT PRACTICES:
The village of Streamwood will adopt requirements identifying best management practices for any activity, operation, or facility which may cause or
contribute to pollution or contamination of storm water, the storm drain system, or waters of the United States. The owner or operator of such activity,
operation or facility shall provide, at their own expense, reasonable protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes into the
municipal storm drain system or watercourses through the use of these structural and nonstructural BMPs. Further, any person responsible for a property
or premises that is, or may be, the source of an illicit discharge, may be required to implement, at said person's expense, additional structural and
nonstructural BMPs to prevent the further discharge of pollutants to the MS4. Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid NPDES permit
authorizing the discharge of storm water associated with industrial activity, to the extent practicable, shall be deemed in compliance with the provisions of
this chapter. These BMPs shall be part of a storm water management plan (SWMP) as necessary for compliance with requirements of the NPDES permit.
(Ord. 2006-17, 4-6-2006)
7-8-13: NOTIFICATION OF SPILLS:
Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a
facility or operation has information ofany known or suspected release of materials which are resulting or may result in illegal discharges or pollutants
discharging into storm water, the storm drain system, or waters of the United States, said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery,
containment, and cleanup of such release. In the event of such a release of hazardous materials said person shall immediately notify emergency response
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 223/498
agencies of the occurrence via emergency dispatch services.
Failure to provide notification of a release as provided above is a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 2006-17, 4-6-2006)
7-8-14: VIOLATIONS, ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES:
A. Violations: It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter. Any person who has
violated or continues to violate the provisions of this chapter, may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section or may be restrained by
injunction or otherwise abated in a manner provided by law.
In the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, the village of Streamwood is authorized to enter upon the
subject private property, without giving prior notice, to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. The
village of Streamwood will seek recovery of the costs of the abatement as outlined in this chapter.
B. Warning Notice: When the village of Streamwood finds that any person has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, or any order
issued hereunder, the village of Streamwood may at its option serve upon that person a written warning notice, specifying the particular violation
believed to have occurred and requesting the discharger to immediately investigate the matter and to seek a resolution whereby any offending
discharge will cease. Investigation and/or resolution of the matter in response to the warning notice in no way relieves the alleged violator of liability for
any violations occurring before or after receipt of the warning notice. Nothing in this subsection shall limit the authority of the village of Streamwood to
take any action, including emergency action or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a warning notice.
C. Notice Of Violation: Whenever the village of Streamwood finds that a person has violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this chapter,
the village of Streamwood may order compliance by written notice of violation to the responsible person.
The notice of violation shall contain:
1. The name and address of the alleged violator;
2. The address when available or location or a description of thebuilding, structure or land upon which the violation is occurring, or has occurred;
3. A statement specifying the nature of the violation;
4. A description of the remedial measures necessary to restore compliance with this chapter and a time schedule for the completion of such remedial
action;
5. A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall or may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed;
6. A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the village manager of the village of Streamwood by filing a written notice of
appeal within ten (10) days of service of notice of violation, and
7. A statement specifying that, should the violator fail to restore compliance within the established time schedule, the work will be done by a designated
governmental agency or a contractor and the expense thereof shall be charged to the violator.
Such notice may require, without limitation:
a. The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;
b. The elimination of illicit connections or discharges;
c. That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist;
d. The abatement or remediation of storm water pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property;
e. Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs; and
f. The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs.
D. Compensatory Action: In addition to or in lieu of enforcement proceedings, penalties, and remedies authorized by this chapter, the village of
Streamwood may impose upon a violator alternative compensatory actions, including, but not limited to, storm drain stenciling, attendance at
compliance workshops, creek cleanup, and similar remedial activities. (Ord. 2006-17, 4-6-2006)
7-8-15: SUSPENSION OF MS4 ACCESS:
A. Emergency Cease And Desist Orders: When the village of Streamwood finds that any person has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this
chapter, or any order issued hereunder, or that the person's past violations are likely to recur, and that the person's violation(s) has caused
orcontributed to an actual or threatened discharge to the MS4 or waters of the United States which reasonably appears to present an imminent or
substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons or to the environment, the village of Streamwood may issue an order to the violator
directing it immediately to cease and desist all such violations and directing the violator to:
1. Immediately comply with all chapter requirements; and
2. Take such appropriate preventive action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including immediately halting
operations and/or terminating the discharge.
Any person notified of an emergency order directed to it under this subsection shall immediately comply and stop or eliminate its endangering
discharge. In the event of a discharger's failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the emergency order, the village of Streamwood may take
such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize harm to the MS4 or waters of the United States, and/or endangerment to persons or to the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 224/498
environment, including immediate termination of a facility's water supply, sewer connection, or other municipal utility services. The village of
Streamwood may allow the person to recommence its discharge when it has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the village of Streamwood that the
period of endangerment has passed, unless further termination proceedings are initiated against the discharger under this chapter. A person that is
responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement, describing the
causes of the harmful discharge and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence, to the village of Streamwood within five (5) days of the
receipt of the emergency order. Issuance of an emergency cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other
action against the violator. (Ord. 2006-17, 4-6-2006)
7-8-16: SUSPENSION DUE TO ILLICIT DISCHARGES IN EMERGENCY SITUATIONS:
The village of Streamwood may, without prior notice, suspend MS4 discharge access to a person when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or
threatened discharge which presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the environment, or to the health or welfare of persons, or to the
MS4 or waters of the United States. If the violator fails to comply with a suspension order issued in an emergency, the village of Streamwood may take
such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the MS4 or waters of the United States, or to minimize danger to persons.
A. The village of Streamwood may, without prior notice, suspend water service, sanitary sewer service, and/or MS4 discharge access to a person
discharging to the MS4, waters of the UnitedStates, or POTW when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which:
1. Presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the environment or to the health or welfare of persons; or
2. Presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the MS4 or waters of the United States.
B. As soon as is practicable after the suspension of service or MS4 discharge access, the director shall notify the violator of the suspension in person or by
certified mail, return receipt requested, and shall order the violator to cease the discharge immediately. When time permits, the director should also
attempt to notify the violator prior to suspending service or access.
C. If the violator fails to comply with an order issued under subsection B of this section, the director may take such steps as the director deems necessary
to prevent or minimize damage to the MS4 or waters of the United States, or to minimize danger to persons.
D. The city shall not reinstate suspended services or MS4 access to the violator until:
1. The violator presents proof, satisfactory to the director, that the noncomplying discharge has been eliminated and its cause determined and
corrected;
2. The violator pays the village for all costs the village incurred in responding to abating, and remediating the discharge or threatened discharge; and
3. The violator pays the village for all costs the village will incur in reinstating service or access.
E. A violator whose service or access has been suspended or disconnected may appeal such enforcement action to the village manager, in writing, within
ten (10) days of notice of the suspension and such appeal shall be handled in accordance with section 7-8-20 of this chapter.
F. The village may obtain a lien against the property to recover its response costs.
G. The remedies provided by this section are in addition to any other remedies set out in this chapter. Exercise of this remedy shall not be a bar against,
nor a prerequisite for, taking other action against a violator. (Ord. 2006-17, 4-6-2006)
7-8-17: SUSPENSION DUE TO THE DETECTION OF ILLICIT DISCHARGE:
Any person discharging to the MS4 in violation of this chapter may have their MS4 access terminated if such termination would abate or reduce an illicit
discharge. The village of Streamwoodwill notify a violator of the proposed termination of its MS4 access. The violator may petition the village of
Streamwood for a reconsideration and hearing.
A person commits an offense if the person reinstates MS4 access to premises terminated pursuant to this section, without the prior approval of the village
of Streamwood.
A. The village may terminate the village provided water supply, sanitary sewer connection, and/or MS4 access to any person discharging to the MS4 in
violation of this chapter, if such termination would abate or reduce the illicit discharge.
B. The director will notify a violator of the proposed termination of its water supply, sanitary sewer connection, and/or MS4 access. The violator may
petition the village manager for a reconsideration and hearing within five (5) days.
C. The village shall not reinstate suspended services or MS4 access to the discharger until:
1. The violator presents proof, satisfactory to the director, that the noncomplying discharge has been eliminated and its cause determined and
corrected; and
2. The violator pays the village for all costs the village will incur in reinstating service or MS4 access.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 225/498
D. The remedies provided by this section are in addition to any other remedies set out in this chapter. Exercise of this remedy shall not be a bar against,
nor a prerequisite for, taking other action against a violator.
E. A person commits an offense if the person reinstates water service, sanitary sewer service, and/or MS4 access to premises terminated pursuant to this
section, without the prior approval of the director. (Ord. 2006-17, 4-6-2006)
7-8-18: CIVIL PENALTIES:
In the event the alleged violator fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described
therein within five (5) days, or such greater period as the village of Streamwood shall deem appropriate, after the village of Streamwood has taken one or
more of the actions described above, the village of Streamwood may impose a penalty not to exceed seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) (depending on
the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. (Ord. 2006-17, 4-6-2006)
7-8-19: CRIMINAL PROSECUTION:
Any person that has violated or continues to violate this chaptershall be liable to criminal prosecution to the fullest extent of the law, and shall be subject to
a criminal penalty of seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) per violation per day. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur
shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 2006-17, 4-6-2006)
7-8-20: APPEAL OF NOTICE OF VIOLATION:
Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination of the village of Streamwood. The notice of appeal must be received within ten
(10) days from the date of the notice of violation. Hearing on the appeal before the village manager or his/her designee shall take place within five (5) days
from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal. The decision of the municipal authority or their designee shall be final. (Ord. 2006-17, 4-6-2006)
7-8-21: ENFORCEMENT MEASURES AFTER APPEAL:
If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the notice of violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within ten (10) days of
the decision of the village manager or his/her designee upholding the decision of the director, then representatives of the village of Streamwood shall enter
upon the subject private property and are authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. It shall be
unlawful for any person, owner, agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow the government agency or designated contractor to enter
upon the premises for the purposes set forth above. (Ord. 2006-17, 4-6-2006)
7-8-22: COST OF ABATEMENT OF THE VIOLATION:
Within thirty (30) days after abatement of the violation, the owner of the property will be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs.
The property owner may file a written protest objecting to the amount of the assessment within ten (10) days. If the amount due is not paid within thirty (30)
days, a lien may be recorded against the property for the amount of the assessment and all administrative costs.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall become liable to the village of Streamwood by reason of such violation. (Ord. 2006-17, 4-6-
2006)
7-8-23: VIOLATIONS DEEMED A PUBLIC NUISANCE:
In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and is declared and deemed a nuisance, andmay be summarily abated or restored at the violator's
expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise compel the cessation of such nuisance may be taken. (Ord. 2006-17, 4-6-2006)
7-8-24: REMEDIES NOT EXCLUSIVE:
The remedies listed in this chapter are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal, state or local law and it is within the
discretion of the village of Streamwood to seek cumulative remedies.
The village of Streamwood may recover all attorney fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement of this chapter, including sampling
and monitoring expenses. (Ord. 2006-17, 4-6-2006)
Chapter 9
CHRONIC NUISANCE PROPERTY ABATEMENT
7-9-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meaning(s) ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 226/498
CHIEF OF POLICE: The chief of police of the village of Streamwood or his/her designee.
CHRONIC NUISANCE PROPERTY: Any property upon which three (3) or more nuisance activities within a twelve (12) month period have occurred as a
result of any three (3) separate factual events that have been independently investigated and verified by any law enforcement agency or code enforcement
department or three (3) or more citations of nuisance activity within a twelve (12) month period, which have been adjudicated and findings of liable or guilty
have been entered either by the village administrative hearing officer or court of competent jurisdiction.
CONTROL: The ability to regulate, restrain, dominate, counteract, or govern conduct that occurs on that property either directly or by intervention of any
governmental authority.
NUISANCE ACTIVITIES: Any of the following activities, behaviors, or conduct, as defined by federal or state or village of Streamwood ordinance:
A. Disorderly conduct as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/26-1 or section 4-3-2 of this code.
B. Unlawful use of weapons as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/24-1 et seq.
C. Mob action as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/25-1.
D. Discharge of a firearm as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/24-1.2 and 1.5 or subsection 4-4-6C of this code.
E. Gambling as defined by 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/28-1 or subsection 4-3-9C of this code.
F. Possession, manufacture, or delivery of controlled substances as defined by 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 570/401 et seq.
G. Public indecency as defined by 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-9.
H. Assault or battery or any related offense as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/12-1 et seq., or any violation of section 4-3-1 of this code.
I. Sexual abuse or related offense as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/12-15 et seq.
J. Prostitution as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-14 et seq.
K. Criminal damage to property as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-1 et seq.
L. Possession, cultivation, manufacture, or delivery of cannabis as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 550/1 et seq.
M. Illegal consumption or possession of alcohol as defined in 235 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1 et seq., or section 4-5-5 of this code.
N. Criminal housing management as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/12-5.1.
O. Structure unfit for human occupancy or unsafe structure as defined in the international building code or international property maintenance code as
adopted by title 9 of this code.
P. Unlawful structure as defined in the international building code or international property maintenance code as adopted by title 9 of this code.
Q. Three (3) or more separate violations of the village's property maintenance code continuing after disposition or finding of guilty by the circuit court of
Cook County, or finding of liable for such violations by the village administrative hearing officer at an administrative hearing, for those violations.
R. Activity that constitutes a violation of a felony or class A misdemeanor pursuant to federal law or Illinois criminal code.
OWNER: Any person, partnership, land trust, or corporation having any legal or equitable interest in the property. Owner includes, but is not limited to:
A. A mortgagee in possession in whom is vested:
1. All or part of the legal title to the property.
2. All or part of the beneficial ownership and the rights to the present use and enjoyment of the premises.
B. An occupant who can control what occurs on the property.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 227/498
C. Any person acting as an agent of an owner as defined herein.
PERMIT: To suffer, allow, consent to, acquiesce by failure to prevent, or attempt to prevent, or expressly assent or agree to the doing of an act.
PERSON: Any natural person, association, partnership, corporation, or other entity capable of owning, occupying, or using property in the village.
PERSON IN CHARGE: Any person in actual or constructive possession of a property, including, but not limited to, an owner, property manager, occupant
of the property in question under his or her ownership or control.
PROPERTY: Any real property, including its land and that which is affixed, incidental, or pertinent to land, including, but not limited to, any premises, room,
house, building, or structure, or any separate part or portion thereof, whether or not occupied or leased for residential purposes whether under written or
oral agreement, whether permitted or not.
VILLAGE CODE: The municipal code of ordinances of the village of Streamwood, including all codes adopted by specific reference. (Ord. 2009-24, 9-3-
2009; amd. Ord. 2013-4, 3-7-2013)
7-9-2: VIOLATION:
A. Chronic nuisance property is hereby declared to be a public nuisance.
B. It shall be unlawful for any property within the village to become or remain a chronic nuisance property in violation of this chapter.
C. It shall be unlawful for any property owner or person(s) in charge or tenant in possession to:
1. Encourage, aid, abet or permit a property to become a chronic nuisance property; and
2. Allow a property to continue as a chronic nuisance property after receipt of notice to abate the nuisance activity.
D. Each day that a violation of this chapter continues shall be considered a separate and distinct offense. (Ord. 2009-24, 9-3-2009)
7-9-3: PROCEDURE:
When the chief of police of the village receives one or more police reports documenting the occurrence of a nuisance activity as herein defined, on or
within a property, the chief of police shall independently review such reports to determine whether they describe nuisance activities. Upon such findings,
the chief may:
A. Notify the person(s) in charge in writing that the property is in danger of becoming a chronic nuisance property. The notice shall contain the following
information:
1. The street address or legal description sufficient for identification of the property.
2. A statement that the Streamwood police department has information that the property may be a chronic nuisance property, with a concise description
of the nuisance activities that may exist or that have occurred.
3. Service shall be provided by either personal delivery or by certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, addressed to the person(s) in
charge or tenant in possession at the address of the property believed to be a chronic nuisance property, or such other place which is likely to give
the owner, person(s) in charge or tenant in possession notice of the determination by the chief of police.
4. A copy of the notice shall be served on the taxpayer of record at such address as shown on the tax rolls of the county and/or the occupant, at the
address of the property, if these persons are different from the person in charge, and shall be made either personally or by first class mail, postage
prepaid.
5. The notice shall contain a statement that the chief of police has investigated and has cause to believe that the property constitutes a chronic
nuisance or is in danger of becoming a chronic nuisance as defined by this chapter. (Ord. 2009-24, 9-3-2009)
7-9-4: PROCEDURE FOR ADDRESSING POTENTIAL NUISANCE PROPERTY:
A. After independent review of any police reports, community development inspection reports or any other village data, and determination by the chief of
police that the activity described therein as occurring upon the property meets the definition of nuisance activity on at least two (2) separate occasions
within a twelve (12) month period, and that the owner or person(s) in control permitted the property to become a potential chronic nuisance property,
the chief of police may require that the owner or person(s) in charge thereof or other designee meet with the chief of police to discuss the nuisance
activity and steps the owner can take to mitigate or abate the activity prior to a third verified incident of nuisance activity, in accordance with the
following procedure:
1. The chief of police shall notify the owner, person(s) in charge, tenant or any local property manager, in the event the property is a rental residential
property, in writing, that the property is a potential chronic nuisance property. Such notice shall be provided by either personal delivery or by certified
mail, return receipt requested. The chief of police shall also send notice by personal service or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the tenant in
possession in the event the property is a residential rental property, at the address of the property. The notice shall contain the following information:
a. The street address or a legal description sufficient for identification of the potential nuisance property.
b. A statement that the chief of police has information that the property constitutes a potential chronic nuisance property as defined by this chapter,
with a concise description of the nuisance activity that may exist, or that has occurred that the chief of police believes may classify the property as
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 228/498
a potential chronic nuisance property.
c. Demand that the owner or person(s) in charge or his or her or its property manager and tenant in the event the property is a residential rental
property, or other designee respond and meet with the chief of police within twenty (20) days of receipt of the notice. Refusal of receipt of the
notice by any party to whom notice is sent shall be deemed receipt of the notice for purposes of this chapter.
2. At the meeting between the chief of police and the parties notified, the chief of police may request that the owner, person in charge or his or her or its
tenant and property manager in the case of residential rental property, implement a reasonable abatement plan designed to alleviate and prevent
future occurrences of the nuisance activity upon the property. The mitigation or abatement plan shall be reasonable under the circumstances in its
objective, cost and scope, and shall be implemented within sixty (60) days of the meeting with the chief of police or such longer period if not
practically feasible to do so within sixty (60) days.
If the nuisance activity complained of has or is being conducted by a tenant residing in or on the property, the chief of police may request that the
owner evict the tenant. If eviction is requested, the owner shall proceed with such an action in good faith. The village shall assist in the eviction action
by reasonably cooperating with the owner, person(s) in charge or property maintenance company, including, but not limited to, providing law
enforcement officers or other municipal employees as witnesses regarding the nuisance activity if relevant.
B. If, after complying with the procedures of subsection A2 of this section, within one year from the date of the first report of nuisance activity after the
meeting, the chief of police receives a report documenting the occurrence of a subsequent instance of nuisance activity upon the property, the property
may be declared a chronic nuisance property.
C. It shall be a violation of this chapter for:
1. The owner or person(s) in charge of the property, within sixty (60) days of the meeting or such other reasonable amount of time under the
circumstances, to fail to cause the implementation of a reasonable mitigation or abatement plan as requested by the chief of police, or
2. The owner or person(s) in charge to fail to respond and meet with the chief of police within the twenty (20) day period without good cause.
D. When any party affected by this section responds and meets with the chief of police as required above, no statements made in connection with the
furnishing of that response or in a meeting shall constitute or be used as an admission that any nuisance activity has or is occurring. This subsection
does not require the exclusion of any other evidence which is otherwise admissible and offered for any other purpose than an admission by a person
affected by this section. (Ord. 2009-24, 9-3-2009)
7-9-5: ABATEMENT; ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING:
A. At any hearing before the village administrative hearing officer to determine whether the property in question is a chronic nuisance property, which
hearing shall be conducted pursuant to provisions of title 1, chapter 17 of this code, the village shall have the initial burden of proof to show, by a
preponderance of evidence, that the property in question is a chronic nuisance property.
B. The village's representative shall present evidence in support of its claim that the property is a chronic nuisance property. The property owner, person(s)
in charge or the person in charge's local representative or an attorney on behalf of the responding party shall be permitted to rebut such evidence.
No continuances shall be authorized by the hearing officer in proceedings under this chapter unless for good cause shown or except where a
continuance is absolutely necessary to protect the rights of the property owner, person(s) in charge, tenant in the event the property is a rental property
or the village. Lack of preparedness shall not be grounds for a continuance.
At any time prior to the hearing date, the hearing officer may, at the request of either party, direct witnesses to appear and give testimony at the
hearing. The formal rules of evidence will not apply at the hearing and hearsay evidence including police reports shall be admissible only if it is the type
commonly relied upon by reasonable, prudent persons in the conduct of their affairs.
C. At the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall make a determination on the basis of the evidence presented at the hearing, whether or not a
violation exists and whether or not the property is a chronic nuisance property. The determination shall be in writing and shall be designated as the
findings, decisions, and order. The hearing officer's decision shall be final and binding, except that the provisions of the Illinois administrative review law
shall apply with respect to judicial review of the hearing officer's findings, decision and order. The findings, decision, and order shall include the hearing
officer's findings of fact, a decision whether or not a violation exists, a determination as to whether the property in question is or is not a chronic
nuisance property based upon the findings of fact, and sanctioning the person in charge/owner/tenant or occupant, as specified in subsection D of this
section, or dismissing the case in the event a violation is not proved. A copy of the findings, decision, and order shall be served upon the person in
charge, owner, or tenant or occupant, within fourteen (14) business days of the date of the hearing.
D. If the hearing officer makes a finding that a property was, or is, a chronic nuisance property, the hearing officer may fine the person in charge and/or the
owner, tenant or occupant of the property if those persons are different than the person in charge, an amount not to exceed seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00) for each violation of this section. Each day a nuisance activity occurs or continues shall be considered a separate and distinct violation for
purposes of determining a property to be a chronic nuisance property. The hearing officer may, in his or her discretion, impose such a fine for each day
the nuisance activity goes unabated. No person shall be found in violation of this section unless the village proves the violation by a preponderance of
the evidence. (Ord. 2009-24, 9-3-2009)
7-9-6: ALTERNATIVE ENFORCEMENT:
A. Abatement Of Nuisance: The village, as an alternative to administrative adjudication, may commence an action in the circuit court of Cook County third
municipal district for a determination that the property is a chronic nuisance property and/or to abate a chronic nuisance property as described above.
Upon being satisfied by affidavits or other sworn evidence that an alleged chronic nuisance property exists, the court may, without notice or bond, enter
a temporary restraining order or a preliminary injunction or permanent injunction to enjoin any defendant from maintaining such chronic nuisance
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 229/498
property and may enter an order restraining any defendant from occupying, using or interfering with all property used in connection with the chronic
nuisance property.
B. Commencement Of Action, Burden Of Proof:
1. In an action seeking closure of a chronic nuisance property, the village shall have the initial burden of showing by a preponderance of the evidence
that the property is a chronic nuisance property.
2. It is a defense to an action seeking the closure of a chronic nuisance property that the owner of the property or person(s) in charge, at the time in
question, could not, in the exercise of reasonable care or diligence, determine that the property had become a chronic nuisance property, or could
not, in spite of the exercise of reasonable care and diligence, control the conduct of others in possession leading to the findings that the property is a
chronic nuisance property.
3. In establishing the amount of any civil penalty requested, the court may consider any of the following factors if they are found appropriate, and shall
cite those found applicable:
a. The actions or lack of action taken by the owner or person(s) in charge to mitigate or correct the nuisance activity at the property.
b. Whether the nuisance activity at the property was repeated or continuous.
c. The magnitude or gravity of the nuisance activity at the property.
d. The cooperation of the owner or person(s) in charge of the property with the village.
e. The cost to the village of investigating and correcting or attempting to correct the condition.
C. Remedy:
1. In the event a court determines a property to be a chronic nuisance property, the court may order that the property be closed and secured against all
use and occupancy for a period of not less than thirty (30) days, but not more than one hundred eighty (180) days or until the nuisance activity(ies) or
violation(s) complained of is abated or the court may employ any other remedy deemed by it appropriate to abate the nuisance.
2. In addition to the remedy provided in subsection C1 of this section, the court may impose upon the owner, person(s) in charge and/or occupant(s) of
the property in question a civil penalty in an amount not to exceed seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) per day, payable to the village of
Streamwood, for each day the owner, person(s) in charge and/or occupant(s) had actual knowledge that the property was a chronic nuisance
property and permitted the property to remain a chronic nuisance property.
3. In determining what remedy or remedies to employ, the court may consider evidence of other conduct which has occurred on the property, including,
but not limited to:
a. The disturbance of neighbors.
b. The occurrence of other nuisances on or from the property.
c. The property's general reputation and/or the reputation of persons in or frequenting the property.
4. The court may authorize the village to physically secure the property against use or occupancy in the event the owner fails to do so within the time
specified by the court. In the event that the village is authorized to secure the property, all costs reasonably incurred by the village to affect the
closure shall be made and assessed as a lien against the property and debt to the village. As used herein, "costs" mean those costs actually incurred
by the village for the physical securing of the property.
5. The village building department or code enforcement department employee affecting the closure shall prepare a statement of costs, and the village
shall thereafter submit said statement to the court for its review. If no objection of the statement is made within the period described by the court, a
lien in said amount may be recorded against said property.
6. Any person who is assessed the cost of closure and/or civil penalty by the court shall be personally liable for the payment thereof to the village. (Ord.
2009-24, 9-3-2009)
7-9-7: CHRONIC NUISANCE RENTAL RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY; LICENSE REVOCATION:
A. In addition to or in lieu of any other penalty or penalties as herein provided, any rental residential property license issued pursuant to title 3, chapter 14
of this code may be revoked by order of the village administrative hearing officer for a period not to exceed one year from the date of the hearing
officer's written order of revocation if, within a twenty four (24) month period, there have been two (2) final determinations that the rental residential
property in question is a chronic nuisance property.
B. No such revocation shall be ordered unless all of the owner(s) of record of the rental residential property have been given no less than seven (7) days'
written notice of revocation hearing and an opportunity to appear and defend against the rental residential license revocation. Service of the notice of
license revocation hearing shall be as provided in subsection 7-9-3A3 of this chapter.
1. The notice of revocation shall provide the date, time, and location of the hearing and shall further set forth the reasons for license revocation.
2. The administrative hearing procedures set forth in this section shall apply to all license revocation hearings.
3. The case for the village shall be presented by the chief of police or his or her designee.
4. In determining whether or not to revoke a rental residential license, the hearing officer shall consider the nature of the nuisance activities giving rise
to the two (2) or more determinations or findings of chronic nuisance property within the twenty four (24) month period as well as the proximity in time
of the two (2) or more chronic nuisance property determinations. The hearing officer shall also consider those factors set forth in subsection 7-9-6B
of this chapter.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 230/498
5. Any order of rental residential license revocation shall include a finding that two (2) or more final determinations of chronic nuisance property have
been made or entered within a twenty four (24) month period and that it would be in the best interest of the village of Streamwood and its residents
that the rental residential license for the property in question be revoked for a period as determined by the hearing officer.
6. Any order of revocation shall further recite whether the rental residential license revocation is specific to the property in question or limited to the
owner(s) of the property in question.
7. In the event the rental residential property in question is a multi-unit rental residential property, any order of revocation may, in the discretion of the
village administrative hearing officer, be limited in scope as to apply only to the individual rental unit or person(s) in charge or occupants of that unit
forming the basis for the order of revocation. (Ord. 2009-24, 9-3-2009)
Chapter 10
NOISE CONTROL REGULATIONS
7-10-1: PURPOSE; INTENT:
The purpose of this chapter is to protect, preserve, and promote the health, safety, welfare, peace and quiet of the citizens of the village through the
reduction, control, and prevention of unreasonably loud and raucous sounds, or any noise that disturbs, injures, or endangers the comfort, repose, health,
peace or safety of reasonable persons of ordinary sensitivity. (Ord. 2010-12, 7-15-2010)
7-10-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following shall mean:
EMERGENCY: Any occurrence or set of circumstances involving actual or imminent physical trauma or property damage demanding immediate attention.
EMERGENCY WORK: Any work performed for the purposes of preventing or alleviating physical trauma or property damage, whether actually caused or
threatened by an emergency; and any work completed by private or public utilities when restoring utility service.
NOISE SENSITIVE AREA: Those areas including, but not limited to, the land on which a school, hospital, nursing home, church, court, public library, or
similar institution is located and the area within two hundred fifty feet (250') of those areas.
PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY: Any street, avenue, boulevard, highway, sidewalk, alley, or similar place normally accessible to the public that is owned or
controlled by a governmental entity.
PUBLIC SPACE: Any real property or structures on real property, including, but not limited to, parks and other recreational areas, owned by a
governmental entity and normally accessible to the public.
RESIDENTIAL AREA: Any real property which contains a structure or building in which one or more persons reside, provided that the structure or building
is properly zoned for residential use, or is a legally nonconforming residential use in accordance with the village zoning ordinance. (Ord. 2010-12, 7-15-
2010)
7-10-3: APPLICABILITY:
This chapter shall apply to the control of noise originating within the jurisdictional limits of the village. (Ord. 2010-12, 7-15-2010)
7-10-4: GENERAL PROHIBITION:
A. No person shall make, continue, or cause to be made or continued, the following activities:
1. Any unreasonably loud or raucous noise;
2. Any noise which disturbs, injures, or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace, or safety of reasonable persons of ordinary sensitivity within the
jurisdictional limits of the village.
B. Factors in determining whether a sound is unreasonably loud or raucous include, but are not limited to, the following:
1. The proximity of the sound to sleeping facilities, whether residential or commercial;
2. The land use, nature, and zoning of both the area from which the sound emanates and the area where the sound is received or perceived;
3. The time the sound occurs;
4. The duration of the sound; and
5. Whether the sound is recurrent, intermittent, or constant. (Ord. 2010-12, 7-15-2010)
7-10-5: NOISES PROHIBITED:
Per se violations of this chapter include, but are not limited to, the following activities:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 231/498
A. Unreasonable Noises: The making, or knowing permission to make, any unreasonably loud, boisterous or unusual noise, disturbance, commotion or
vibration in any noise sensitive area, public right of way, public space, or residential area.
B. Nonemergency Signaling: The sounding, or permission to sound, any amplified signal from any bell, chime, siren, whistle or similar device, intended for
nonemergency purposes, from any place for more than ten (10) consecutive seconds in any hourly period. The sounding of such devices by houses of
religious worship, seasonal contribution solicitors, or the village for traffic control purposes is exempt from this subsection.
C. Emergency Signaling: The intentional sounding, or permission to sound, outdoors, of any emergency signaling device including fire, burglar, civil
defense alarm, siren, whistle, or similar emergency signaling device, except in an emergency or except as provided in subsection C1 of this section.
The sounding of emergency signaling devices by local, state and federal governments is exempt from this subsection.
1. Testing of emergency signaling devices is exempt from this subsection C, provided that such testing occurs between seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and
seven o'clock (7:00) P.M., uses only minimum cycle test time, does not exceed five (5) minutes, and does not occur more than once in each calendar
month.
D. Radios, Televisions, Boom Boxes, Phonographs, Stereos, Musical Instruments And Similar Devices:
1. The loud playing or operation of a radio, television, boom box, stereo, musical instrument, or similar device for the producing or reproducing of sound
which is cast upon the public streets of the village between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M.
2. The loud playing or operation of a radio, television, boom box, stereo, musical instrument, or similar device for the producing or reproducing of sound
which is cast upon the public streets of the village which can be heard at a distance of one hundred feet (100') from the point of its origin between the
hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) P.M.
3. This subsection D shall not apply to violations of section 5/12-611 of the Illinois vehicle code1.
E. Loudspeakers, Amplifiers, Public Address Systems, And Similar Devices:
1. The unreasonably loud and raucous use or operation of a loudspeaker, amplifier, public address system or other device for producing or reproducing
sound between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M., on weekdays, and between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M.
and ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. on weekends and holidays, except as provided in this subsection E.
2. The unreasonably loud and raucous use or operation of a loudspeaker, amplifier, public address system or other device for producing or reproducing
sound, which can be heard at a distance of one hundred feet (100') from the point of its origin between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and ten
o'clock (10:00) P.M. on weekdays, and between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. on weekends and holidays, except
as provided in this subsection E.
3. The use or operation of a loudspeaker, amplifier, public address system, or similar device, upon or along the public right of way, may be permitted
only in accordance with the provisions of subsection 7-10-6A of this chapter.
4. This subsection E shall not apply to any public performance, gathering or parade for which a permit has been obtained from the village.
F. Yelling, Shouting, And Similar Activities: Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling, or singing in noise sensitive areas, public rights of way, public spaces or
residential areas between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M., or at any time which unreasonably disturbs the quiet,
comfort, or repose of reasonable persons of ordinary sensitivities.
G. Animals And Birds: The unreasonably loud and raucous noise emitted by an animal or bird for which a person is responsible. A person is responsible
for an animal or bird, for the purposes of this subsection, if the person owns, controls, or otherwise cares for the animal or bird. Sounds made by
animals or birds in animal shelters, veterinary hospitals, pet shops, or pet kennels which have been licensed and are in compliance with the licensing
and permitting provisions set forth in this code, and which use reasonable measures to minimize such sounds emanating from their property, are
exempt from this subsection.
H. Loading Or Unloading Merchandise, Materials, Equipment, Refuse And Recycling Equipment: The creation of unreasonably loud, raucous, and
excessive noise in connection with the loading or unloading of any vehicle at a residence or place of business, or the collection of any refuse and/or
recycling, between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M.
I. Construction Or Repair Of Buildings, Excavation Of Streets And Highways: The construction, demolition, alteration or repair of any building, or the
excavation of streets and highways, between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. on weekdays, and between the hours
of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. on weekends. Emergency work and work undertaken by local, state, or federal governmental
entities are exempt from this provision. In nonemergency situations, the construction, demolition, alteration or repair of any building, or the excavation
of streets and highways, may be permitted between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. on weekdays, and between the
hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. on weekends, only in accordance with the provisions of subsection 7-10-6B of this
chapter.
J. Blowers And Similar Devices: The operation of any unreasonably loud and raucous blower, power fan, or any internal combustion engine in a noise
sensitive area or residential area between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. which causes noise due to the explosion
of operating gases, fuels, or fluids. This subsection shall not apply to snowblowers, other snow removal machinery, or landscaping operations
conducted on golf courses.
K. Commercial Establishments: The creation of unreasonably loud, raucous, and excessive noise from the premises of a commercial establishment,
including any outdoor area which is a part of or under the control of the commercial establishment, between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and
seven o'clock (7:00) A.M.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 232/498
L. Audible Signaling Device On Motor Vehicle:
1. The sounding of any horn or audible signaling device on any motor vehicle except in the event of an emergency to warn of the danger of a collision
between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M.
2. The sounding of any horn or audible signaling device on any motor vehicle except in the event of an emergency to warn of the danger of a collision
which can be heard at a distance of one hundred feet (100') from the point of its origin between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and ten
o'clock (10:00) P.M.
M. Discharge Of The Engine Exhaust:
1. The discharge of the exhaust of any internal combustion engine except through a muffler or other similar device which effectively prevents loud or
explosive noises from being emitted between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M.
2. The discharge of the exhaust of any internal combustion engine except through a muffler or other similar device which effectively prevents loud or
explosive noises from being emitted which can be heard at a distance of one hundred feet (100') from the point of its origin between the hours of
seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) P.M.
N. Motor Vehicle Sound Amplification System: Operating or permitting to operate any sound amplification system within a motor vehicle which can be
heard from outside the vehicle at a distance of seventy five feet (75') or more. (Ord. 2010-12, 7-15-2010)
7-10-6: NOISES PERMITTED:
The following noises are permitted subject to the procedures set forth below:
A. Loudspeakers, Amplifiers, Public Address Systems, And Similar Devices On Public Streets:
1. A person may use, operate, or cause to be used or operated, a loudspeaker, amplifier, public address system, or similar device upon or along the
public right of way in accordance with a permit obtained pursuant to this subsection A.
2. Any person desiring a permit to use, operate, or cause to be used or operated, a loudspeaker, amplifier, public address system, or similar device
shall make a written application to the director of community development stating the applicant's name, the length of time, and the place(s) where the
device(s) shall be located. The applicant shall also pay the permit fee as provided in subsection A3 of this section. If the director of community
development grants a permit pursuant to this subsection A, and the permit fee provided in subsection A3 of this section has been paid, the director of
community development shall issue to the applicant a permit for the purpose and time specified in the application.
3. The fee for permits granted under this subsection A shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00) per day for the use of any loudspeaker, amplifier, public
address system, or similar device to be operated.
B. Construction Or Repair Of Buildings, Excavation Of Streets And Highways:
1. After having first obtained written permission as provided in this subsection B, a person may, in nonemergency situations, undertake the construction
or repair of any buildings, or the excavation of streets or highways, between the hours of nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. on
weekdays, and between the hours of six o'clock (6:00) P.M. and eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. on weekends.
2. Any person desiring to undertake the construction or repair of any buildings, or the excavation of streets and highways, pursuant to this subsection
B, shall make a written application to the director of community development stating the applicant's name, the specific work to be done, the location
of the work to be done, and the time required to complete the work. The director of community development may, at his discretion, issue written
permission to undertake the construction or repair of any building, or the excavation of streets and highways, between the hours of nine o'clock
(9:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. on weekdays, and between the hours of six o'clock (6:00) P.M. and eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. on weekends, if
he determines that the public health and safety will not be detrimentally affected by the noise created by the work performed. Permission granted
under this subsection shall be for a period of no more than three (3) days, and may be renewed for one period of no more than three (3) days. (Ord.
2010-12, 7-15-2010)
7-10-7: EXEMPTIONS:
The following activities are per se exempt from the activities regulated by this section:
A. Emergency repairs of utility structures;
B. Sirens, whistles, or bells lawfully used by emergency vehicles, or other alarm systems used in case of fire, collision, civil defense, police activity, or
imminent danger;
C. Repairs or excavations of bridges, streets, or highways by or on behalf of the village of Streamwood, state of Illinois, or the federal government between
the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. when public welfare and convenience renders it impractical to perform the work at any
other time;
D. Outdoor school and playground activities conducted on public playgrounds, public parks or school/university grounds, which are conducted in
accordance with the manner in which such spaces are generally used, including, but not limited to, school/university athletic and entertainment events;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 233/498
E. Outdoor gatherings, public dances, shows, parades, festivals and other similar outdoor events for which a permit has been obtained from the
appropriate permitting authority;
F. Any event that is sponsored and directly controlled by the village or its designee; and
G. Emergency generators operating in residential and commercial districts during power outages. (Ord. 2010-12, 7-15-2010)
7-10-8: ENFORCEMENT:
A. The chief of police or his designee shall enforce the regulations contained in this chapter. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the chief of police or his
designee from obtaining voluntary compliance by way of warning, notice, or education.
B. Violations of this chapter shall be prosecuted in the same manner as other misdemeanor/petty offense violations of this code. (Ord. 2010-12, 7-15-
2010)
7-10-9: PENALTIES:
A. Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be fined as set forth in section 1-4-1 of this code; and, a separate
offense shall be deemed committed on each day that said violation is allowed to exist.
B. As an additional remedy, any violation of this chapter which unreasonably disturbs, injures, or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace, or safety of
reasonable persons of ordinary sensitivity shall be deemed, and is declared to be, a public nuisance, and may be subject to abatement summarily by a
restraining order or injunction issued by a court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 2010-12, 7-15-2010)
Title 8
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
Chapter 1
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC WAYS
8-1-1: STREET OBSTRUCTIONS AND OPENINGS:
8-1-1-1: STREET OR PARKWAY OBSTRUCTIONS:
A. Permit Required: No street, parkway or other public property shall be obstructed without a special permit first having been secured from the Director of
Community Development.
B. Fees And Deposits: The fee for such street or parkway obstruction permit shall be fifteen dollars ($15.00) per month, or part thereof, for each twenty five
feet (25') or fractional part thereof of frontage so occupied. The minimum deposit shall be fifty dollars ($50.00).
C. Term, Additional Fees: The validity of such permit shall not exceed ninety (90) days after the date of issuance of same. Said permit may be renewed for
an additional thirty (30) days with the approval of the Director of Community Development, and in such event the applicant shall pay an additional fee of
twenty five dollars ($25.00) per twenty five feet (25') or fractional part thereof of frontage so occupied per month or fraction thereof.
D. Deposit Refunds: Upon the discontinuance of the use of such street or parkway, the amount due for the special obstruction permit shall be deducted
from the deposit and the difference returned. (1994 Code; amd. Ord. 1995-36, 6-22-1995)
8-1-1-2: OPENING STREETS OR SIDEWALKS:
A. Permit Fee: The permit fee for the opening of a street or sidewalk for the purpose of making connections to the sewer, water, gas or electric piping shall
be twenty five dollars ($25.00).
B. Bond Requirement: No permit shall be issued until theapplicant shall have executed and filed with the Director of Community Development a bond in
the penal sum of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), with a responsible surety company as surety thereon. Said bond shall indemnify the Village and its
officials for the full period of time provided by the statutes of limitations of the State of Illinois from any and all loss, costs, expense or liability of any kind
or nature whatsoever, which said Village or its officials may suffer, or which may be recovered from such Village or its officials by reason of the
issuance of such permit.
C. Replacement Guarantee Requirement: No permit shall be issued until the applicant has deposited with the Village Treasurer the sum of two hundred
dollars ($200.00), to guarantee the replacement or repair of broken or damaged sidewalks, curbs, gutters and streets, restoring the public property and
for the removal of dirt and litter from public streets abutting the premises involved, except that if the improvement to be made is a single-room addition
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 234/498
or a detached garage, such sum shall not exceed fifty dollars ($50.00). However, the applicant shall not be required to have on deposit, at any one
time, with the Village Treasurer, any sum in excess of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) for this purpose, regardless of the number of permits issued to
the applicant. (1994 Code; amd. Ord. 1995-36, 6-22-1995)
8-1-1-3: EXCLUSION:
Notwithstanding the other provisions of this Section 8-1-1, this Section shall not affect or pertain to the holding of block parties or other special events
which may be approved by the President and Trustees. (1994 Code)
8-1-1-4: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this Section 8-1-1 shall be fined as set forth in Section 1-4-1 of this Code. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 1998-4, 1-8-1998)
8-1-2: SIGNS AND HANDBILLS:
8-1-2-1: SIGNS IN RIGHT OF WAY PROHIBITED:
A. Sign Defined: A sign is any object, device, or structure or part thereof situated outdoors which is used to advertise, identify, display, direct or attract
attention to an object, person, institution, organization, business, product, service, event or location by means including words, letters, figures, designs,
symbols, fixtures, colors, motion illuminations or projected images. The term "sign" includes but is not limitedto any projecting sign, wall sign, printed
sign, roof sign, billboard, posterboard, freestanding sign, ground sign, pole sign, window sign, vehicle sign, awning, canopy, marquee, changeable copy
sign, illuminated sign, flashing sign, portable sign, pennants, banners or any other attention getting device or any other display.
B. Sign In Right Of Way Prohibited: No sign shall be located, erected or maintained upon any public right of way or parkway for any purpose whatsoever
except that this subsection shall not apply to the "entrance" and "exit" signs located, erected or maintained in conformance with the Village Zoning
Ordinance (Title 11 of this Code). (1994 Code)
C. Violation: Any person found guilty of violating subsection B of this Section shall be punished by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor
more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). (Ord. 1998-7, 1-22-1998)
8-1-2-2: HANDBILLS AND ADVERTISEMENTS:
A. Billposting: It shall be unlawful for any person to paste, post or fasten any handbill, poster, advertisement or notice of any kind whatsoever or cause the
same to be done on any curbstone, flagstone or any other portion or part of any sidewalk or street or upon any tree or street light post, telephone or
electric light pole, hydrant, bridge, pier or upon any structures within the limits of the streets in the Village, except such notice as may be required by
the laws of the State and the ordinances of the Village.
B. Permit Required: No person shall paste, post or fasten any handbill, poster, advertisement or notice of any kind whatsoever, or cause the same to be
done, which exceeds twenty four (24) square feet in area without first obtaining a permit so to do.
C. Sign Projector: No person shall attach any advertising board or sign to the side of any private structure or building abutting the street in such manner
that any portion of such advertising board or sign shall project into the street. (1994 Code)
8-1-2-3: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this Section 8-1-2 where no other penalty is provided, shall be fined as set forth in Section 1-4-1 of this Code; and a
separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (1994 Code)
ARTICLE 1. CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS OF
WAY
8-1.1-1: PURPOSE AND SCOPE:
A. Purpose: The purpose of this article is to establish policies and procedures for constructing facilities on rights of way within the village's jurisdiction,
which will provide public benefit consistent with the preservation of the integrity, safe usage, and visual qualities of the village rights of way and the
village as a whole.
B. Intent: In enacting this article, the village intends to exercise its authority over the rights of way in the village and, in particular, the use of the public ways
and property by utilities, by establishing uniform standards to address issues presented by utility facilities, including, without limitation:
1. Prevent interference with the use of streets, sidewalks, alleys, parkways and other public ways and places;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 235/498
2. Prevent the creation of visual and physical obstructions and other conditions that are hazardous to vehicular and pedestrian traffic;
3. Prevent interference with the facilities and operations of the village's utilities and of other utilities lawfully located in rights of way or public property;
4. Protect against environmental damage, including damage to trees, from the installation of utility facilities;
5. Protect against increased storm water runoff due to structures and materials that increase impermeable surfaces;
6. Preserve the character of the neighborhoods in which facilities are installed;
7. Preserve open space, particularly the tree lined parkways that characterize the village's residential neighborhoods;
8. Prevent visual blight from the proliferation of facilities in the rights of way; and
9. Assure the continued safe use and enjoyment of private properties adjacent to utility facilities locations.
C. Facilities Subject To This Article: This article applies to all facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the public rights of way within
the jurisdiction of the village. A facility lawfully established prior to the effective date of this article may continue to be maintained, repaired and
operated by the utility as presently constructed and located, except as may be otherwise provided in any applicable franchise, license or similar
agreement.
D. Franchises, Licenses, Or Similar Agreements: The village, in its discretion and as limited by law, may require utilities to enter into a franchise, license or
similar agreement for the privilege of locating their facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the village rights of way. Utilities that
are not required by law to enter into such an agreement may request that the village enter into such an agreement. In such an agreement, the village
may provide for terms and conditions inconsistent with this article.
E. Effect Of Franchises, Licenses, Or Similar Agreements:
1. Utilities Other Than Telecommunications Providers: In the event that a utility other than a telecommunications provider has a franchise, license or
similar agreement with the village, or has received a franchise to provide cable or video service from the state of Illinois, such franchise, license or
similar agreement shall govern and control during the term of such agreement and any lawful renewal or extension thereof to the extent which the
franchise or license agreement is in conflict with the terms of this article.
2. Telecommunications Providers: In the event of any conflict with, or inconsistency between, the provisions of this article and the provisions of any
franchise, license or similar agreementbetween the village and any telecommunications provider, the provisions of such franchise, license or similar
agreement shall govern and control during the term of such agreement and any lawful renewal or extension thereof.
F. Conflicts With Other Articles: This article supersedes all articles or parts of articles adopted prior hereto that are in conflict herewith, to the extent of such
conflict.
G. Conflicts With State And Federal Laws: In the event that applicable federal or state laws or regulations conflict with the requirements of this article, the
utility shall comply with the requirements of this article to the maximum extent possible without violating federal or state laws or regulations.
H. Sound Engineering Judgment: The village shall use sound engineering judgment when administering this article and may vary the standards,
conditions, and requirements expressed in this article when the village so determines. Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the ability of the village
to regulate its rights of way for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare. (Ord. 2008-1, 1-17-2008)
8-1.1-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this article and unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the words and terms listed shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this
section. Any term not defined in this section shall have the meaning ascribed to it in 92 Illinois administrative code section 530.30, unless the context
clearly requires otherwise.
AASHTO: American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials.
ANSI: American National Standards Institute.
ASTM: American Society for Testing and Materials.
APPLICANT: A person, company or utility applying for a permit under this article.
BACKFILL: The methods or materials for replacing excavated material in a trench or pit.
BORE OR BORING: To excavate an underground cylindrical cavity for the insertion of a pipe or electrical conductor.
CABLE OR VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER: Any provider of cable service or video service as defined in the cable and video competition act of 2007, 220
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-101 et seq., which has facilities located within the right of way of the village of Streamwood.
CARRIER PIPE: The pipe enclosing the liquid, gas or slurry to betransported.
CASING: A structural protective enclosure for transmittal devices such as carrier pipes, electrical conductors, and fiber optic devices.
CLEAR ZONE: The total roadside border area, starting at the edge of the pavement, available for safe use by errant vehicles. This area may consist of a
shoulder, a recoverable slope, a nonrecoverable slope, and a clear run out area. The desired width is dependent upon the traffic volumes and speeds, and
on the roadside geometry. Distances are specified in the AASHTO "Roadside Design Guide".
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 236/498
COATING: Protective wrapping or mastic cover applied to buried pipe for protection against external corrosion.
CODE: The municipal code of the village of Streamwood.
CONDUCTOR: Wire carrying electrical current.
CONDUIT: A casing or encasement for wires or cables.
CONSTRUCTION OR CONSTRUCT: The installation, repair, maintenance, placement, alteration, enlargement, demolition, modification or abandonment
in place of facilities.
COVER: The depth of earth or backfill over buried utility pipe or conductor.
CROSSING FACILITY: A facility that crosses one or more right of way lines of a right of way.
DIRECTIONAL BORING: A method which compresses the earth to make the opening for cable installation.
DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS: The village director of public works or his or her designee.
DISRUPT THE RIGHT OF WAY: For the purposes of this article, any work that obstructs the right of way or causes a material adverse effect on the use of
the right of way for its intended use. Such work may include, without limitation, the following: excavating or other cutting; placement (whether temporary or
permanent) of materials, equipment, devices, or structures; damage to vegetation; and compaction or loosening of the soil, and shall not include the
parking of vehicles or equipment in a manner that does not materially obstruct the flow of traffic on a highway.
EMERGENCY: Any immediate maintenance to the facility required for the safety of the public using or in the vicinity of the right of way or immediate
maintenance required for the health and safety of the general public served by the utility.
ENCASEMENT: Provision of a protective casing.
EQUIPMENT: Materials, tools, implements, supplies, and/or other items used to facilitate construction of facilities.
EXCAVATION: The making of a hole or cavity by removing material, or laying bare by digging.
EXTRA HEAVY PIPE: Pipe meeting ASTM standards for this pipe designation.
FACILITY: All structures, devices, objects, and materials (including track and rails, wires, ducts, fiber optic cable, communications and video cables and
wires, poles, conduits, grates, covers, pipes, cables, and appurtenances thereto) located on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within rights of
way under this article, except those owned or operated by the village.
FREESTANDING FACILITY: A facility that is not a crossing facility or a parallel facility, such as an antenna, transformer, pump, or meter station.
FRONTAGE ROAD: Roadway, usually parallel, providing access to land adjacent to the highway where it is precluded by control of access to a highway.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS: Any substance or material which, due to its quantity, form, concentration, location, or other characteristics, is determined by
the director of public works to pose an unreasonable and imminent risk to the life, health or safety of persons or property or to the ecological balance of the
environment, including, but not limited to, explosives, radioactive materials, petroleum or petroleum products or gases, poisons, etiology (biological)
agents, flammables, corrosives or any substance determined to be hazardous or toxic under any federal or state law, statute or regulation.
HIGHWAY: A specific type of right of way used for vehicular traffic including rural or urban roads or streets. "Highway" includes all highway land and
improvements, including roadways, ditches and embankments, bridges, drainage structures, signs, guardrails, protective structures and appurtenances
necessary or convenient for vehicle traffic.
HIGHWAY CODE: The Illinois highway code, 605 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-101 et seq., as amended from time to time.
IDOT: Illinois department of transportation.
ILCC: Illinois commerce commission.
JACKING: Pushing a pipe horizontally under a roadway by mechanical means with or without boring.
JOINT USE: The use of pole lines, trenches or other facilities by two (2) or more utilities.
MAJOR INTERSECTION: The intersection of two (2) or more major arterial highways.
OCCUPANCY: The presence of facilities on, over or under right of way.
PARALLEL FACILITY: A facility that is generally parallel or longitudinal to the centerline of a right of way.
PARKWAY: Any portion of the right of way not improved by street or sidewalk.
PAVEMENT CUT: The removal of an area of pavement for access to a facility or for the construction of a facility.
PERMITTEE: That entity to which a permit has been issued pursuant to sections 8-1.1-4 and 8-1.1-5 of this article.
PETROLEUM PRODUCTS PIPELINES: Pipelines carrying crude or refined liquid petroleum products including, but not limited to, gasoline, distillates,
propane, butane, or coal slurry.
PRACTICABLE: That which is performable, feasible or possible, rather than that which is simply convenient.
PRESSURE: The internal force acting radially against the walls of a carrier pipe expressed in pounds per square inch gauge (psig).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 237/498
PROMPT: That which is done within a period of time specified by the village. If no time period is specified, the period shall be thirty (30) days.
PUBLIC ENTITY: A legal entity that constitutes or is part of the government, whether at local, state or federal level.
RESTORATION: The repair of a right of way, highway, roadway, or other area disrupted by the construction of a facility.
RIGHT OF WAY: Any street, alley, other land or waterway, dedicated or commonly used for utility purposes, including utility easements in which the village
has the right and authority to authorize, regulate or permit the location of facilities other than those of the village. "Right of way" shall not include any real
or personal village property that is not specifically described in the previous two (2) sentences and shall not include village buildings, fixtures, and other
structures or improvements, regardless of whether they are situated in the right of way.
ROADWAY: That part of the highway that includes the pavement and shoulders.
SALE OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS AT RETAIL: The transmitting, supplying, or furnishing of telecommunications and all services rendered in connection
therewith for a consideration, other than between a parent corporation and its wholly owned subsidiaries orbetween wholly owned subsidiaries, when the
gross charge made by one such corporation to another such corporation is not greater than the gross charge paid to the retailer for their use or
consumption and not for sale.
SECURITY FUND: That amount of security required pursuant to section 8-1.1-10 of this article.
SHOULDER: A width of roadway, adjacent to the pavement, providing lateral support to the pavement edge and providing an area for emergency vehicular
stops and storage of snow removed from the pavement.
SOUND ENGINEERING JUDGMENT: A decision(s) consistent with generally accepted engineering principles, practices and experience.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS: This term includes, but is not limited to, messages or information transmitted through use of local, toll, and wide area
telephone service, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter service, computer exchange service, private line services, specialized mobile radio
services, or any other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar means, between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser,
microwave, radio, satellite, or similar facilities. Unless the context clearly requires otherwise, "telecommunications" shall also include wireless
telecommunications as defined in the Illinois telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee act, 35 Illinois Compiled Statutes 635/1 et seq.
"Telecommunications" shall not include value added services in which computer processing applications are used to act on the form, content, code, and
protocol of the information for purposes other than transmission. "Telecommunications" shall not include purchase of telecommunications by a
telecommunications service provider for use as a component part of the service provided by him or her to the ultimate retail consumer who originates or
terminates the end to end communications. Retailer access charges, right of access charges, charges for use of intercompany facilities, and all
telecommunications resold in the subsequent provision and used as a component of, or integrated into, end to end telecommunications service shall not
be included in gross charges as sales for resale. "Telecommunications" shall not include the provision of video and cable services as defined in the cable
and video competition law of 2007, 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-201, as now or hereafter amended or cable or other programming services subject
to an open video system fee payable to the village through an open video system as defined in the rules of the federal communications commission (47
CFR 76.1500 and following) as now or hereafter amended.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER: Any person that installs, owns, operates or controls facilities in the public right of way used or designed to be used
to transmit telecommunications in any form.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS RETAILER: Means and includes every person engaged in making sales of telecommunications at retail as defined herein.
TRENCH: A relatively narrow open excavation for the installation of an underground facility.
UTILITY: The individual or entity owning or operating any "facility" as defined in this article.
VENT: A pipe to allow the dissipation into the atmosphere of gases or vapors from an underground casing.
VILLAGE: The village of Streamwood.
WATER LINES: Pipelines carrying raw or potable water.
WET BORING: Boring using water under pressure at the cutting auger to soften the earth and to provide a sluice for the excavated material. (Ord. 2008-1,
1-17-2008)
8-1.1-3: ANNUAL REGISTRATION REQUIRED:
Every utility that occupies right of way within the village shall register on January 1 of each year with the director of public works, providing the utility's
name, address and regular business telephone and telecopy numbers, the name of one or more contact persons who can act on behalf of the utility in
connection with emergencies involving the utility's facilities in the right of way and a twenty four (24) hour telephone number for each such person, and
evidence of insurance as required in section 8-1.1-8 of this article, in the form of a certificate of insurance. (Ord. 2008-1, 1-17-2008)
8-1.1-4: PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATIONS AND FEES:
A. Permit Required: No person shall construct (as defined in this article) any facility on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within any village right
of way which: 1) changes the location of the facility, 2) adds a new facility, 3) disrupts the "right of way" (as defined in this article), or 4) materially
increases the amount of area or space occupied by the facility on, over, above, along, under, across or within the right of way, without first filing an
application with the director of public works and obtaining a permit from the village therefor, except as otherwise provided in this article. No permit shall
be required for installation and maintenance of service connections to customers' premises where there will be no disruption of the right of way.
B. Permit Application: All applications for permits pursuant to this article shall be filed on a form provided by the village and shall be filed in such number of
duplicate copies as the village may designate or on a utility company form acceptable to thevillage. The applicant may designate those portions of its
application materials that it reasonably believes contain proprietary or confidential information as "proprietary" or "confidential" by clearly marking each
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 238/498
page of such materials accordingly. Permitted work shall be completed within one hundred eighty (180) consecutive calendar days. Should the
permitted work continue beyond the one hundred eighty (180) day period, the utility shall apply for an additional permit.
C. Minimum General Application Requirements: The application shall be made by the utility or its duly authorized representative and shall contain, at a
minimum, the following:
1. The utility's name and address and telephone and telecopy numbers;
2. The applicant's name and address, if different than the utility, its telephone and telecopy numbers, e-mail address, and its interest in the work;
3. The names, addresses and telephone and telecopy numbers and e-mail addresses of all professional consultants, if any, advising the applicant with
respect to the application;
4. A general description of the proposed work and the purposes and intent of the facility and the uses to which the facility will be put. The scope and
detail of such description shall be appropriate to the nature and character of the work to be performed, with special emphasis on those matters likely
to be affected or impacted by the work proposed;
5. Evidence that the utility has placed on file with the village:
a. A written traffic control plan demonstrating the protective measures and devices that will be employed consistent with the "Illinois Manual On
Uniform Traffic Control Devices", latest edition, to prevent injury or damage to persons or property and to minimize disruptions to efficient
pedestrian and vehicular traffic; and
b. An emergency contingency plan which shall specify the nature of potential emergencies, including, without limitation, construction and hazardous
materials emergencies, and the intended response by the applicant. The intended response shall include notification to the village and shall
promote protection of the safety and convenience of the public. Compliance with ILCC regulations for emergency contingency plans constitutes
compliance with this section unless the village finds that additional information or assurances are needed;
6. Drawings, plans and specifications showing the work proposed on sheets not exceeding twenty four inches by thirty six inches (24" x 36") drawn at a
scale of one inch to twenty feet (1" = 20'), including the certification of an engineer that such drawings, plans, and specifications comply with
applicable codes, rules, and regulations, if deemed necessary by the director ofpublic works;
7. Evidence of insurance as required in section 8-1.1-8 of this article;
8. Evidence of posting of the security fund as required in section 8-1.1-10 of this article;
9. Any request for a variance from one or more provisions of this article (see section 8-1.1-21 of this article);
10. Such additional information as may be reasonably required by the village;
11. The applicant shall be a member of JULIE.
D. Supplemental Application Requirements For Specific Types Of Utilities: In addition to the requirements of subsection C of this section, the permit
application shall include the following items as applicable to the specific utility that is the subject of the permit application:
1. In the case of new electric power, communications or natural gas distribution system installation, evidence that any "certificate of public convenience
and necessity" has been issued by the ILCC that the applicant is required by law, or has elected, to obtain;
2. In the case of natural gas systems, state the proposed pipe size, design, construction class, and operating pressures;
3. In the case of water lines, indicate that all requirements of the Illinois environmental protection agency, division of public water supplies, have been
satisfied;
4. In the case of sewer line installations, indicate that the land and water pollution requirements of the Illinois environmental protection agency, division
of water pollution control and the metropolitan water reclamation district, or other local or state entities with jurisdiction, have been satisfied; or
5. In the case of petroleum products pipelines, state the type or types of petroleum products, pipe size, maximum working pressure, and the design
standard to be followed.
E. Applicant's Duty To Update Information: Throughout the entire permit application review period and the construction period authorized by the permit,
any amendments to information contained in a permit application shall be submitted by the utility in writing to the village within thirty (30) days after the
change necessitating the amendment.
F. Application Fees: Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license, or similar agreement, all applications for permits pursuant to this article shall be
accompanied by a fee in theamount of five hundred dollars ($500.00). No application fee is required to be paid by any telecommunications retailer that
is paying the simplified municipal telecommunications tax pursuant to the simplified municipal telecommunications tax act, 35 Illinois Compiled Statutes
636/5 et seq., adopted by the village or by any electrical utility that is paying the municipal electricity maintenance fee pursuant to the electricity
maintenance fee act. (Ord. 2008-1, 1-17-2008)
8-1.1-5: ACTION ON PERMIT APPLICATIONS:
A. Village Review Of Permit Applications: Completed permit applications, containing all required documentation, shall be examined by the director of public
works within a reasonable time after filing. If the application does not conform to the requirements of all applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules, and
regulations, the director of public works shall reject such application in writing, stating the reasons therefor. If the director of public works is satisfied
that the proposed work conforms to the requirements of this article and all applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules, and regulations, the director of
public works shall issue a permit therefor as soon as practicable.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 239/498
B. Additional Village Review Of Applications Of Telecommunications Retailers And Cable Or Video Service Providers:
1. Pursuant to section 4 of the telephone company act, 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 65/4, a telecommunications retailer shall notify the village that it
intends to commence work governed by this article for facilities for the provision of telecommunications services. Such notice shall consist of plans,
specifications, and other documentation sufficient to demonstrate the purpose and intent of the facilities, and shall be provided by the
telecommunications retailer to the village not less than ten (10) days prior to the commencement of work requiring no excavation and not less than
thirty (30) days prior to the commencement of work requiring excavation. The director of public works shall specify the portion of the right of way
upon which the facility may be placed, used and constructed.
The village shall have the right to review the location of any ground mounted utility installation (GMUI) and require alternative locations if the
proposed GMUI is found by the village to create a safety hazard in the right of way or is inconsistent with the aesthetics of public property where the
GMUI is proposed to be located.
2. In the event that the director of public works fails to provide such specification of location to the telecommunications retailer within either: a) ten (10)
days after service of notice to the village by the telecommunications retailer in the case of work not involving excavation for new construction or b)
twenty five (25) days after service of notice by the telecommunicationsretailer in the case of work involving excavation for new construction, the
telecommunications retailer may commence work without obtaining a permit under this article.
3. Upon the provision of such specification by the village, where a permit is required for work pursuant to section 8-1.1-4 of this article the
telecommunications retailer shall submit to the village an application for a permit and any and all plans, specifications and documentation available
regarding the facility to be constructed. Such application shall be subject to the requirements of subsection A of this section.
C. Additional Village Review Of Applications Of Holders Of State Authorization Under The Cable And Video Competition Law Of 2007:
1. Applications by a utility that is a holder of a state issued authorization under the cable and video competition law of 2007 shall be deemed granted
forty five (45) days after submission to the village, unless otherwise acted upon by the village, provided the holder has complied with applicable
village codes, ordinances and regulations.
2. The village shall have the right to review the location of any ground mounted utility installation (GMUI) and require alternative locations if the
proposed GMUI is found by the village to create a safety hazard in the right of way or is inconsistent with the aesthetics of public property where the
GMUI is proposed to be located. (Ord. 2008-1, 1-17-2008)
8-1.1-6: EFFECT OF PERMIT:
A. Authority Granted; No Property Right Or Other Interest Created: A permit from the village authorizes a permittee to undertake only certain activities in
accordance with this article on village rights of way, and does not create a property right or grant authority to the permittee to impinge upon the rights of
others who may have an interest in the public rights of way.
B. Compliance With All Laws Required: The issuance of a permit by the village does not excuse the permittee from complying with other requirements of
the village and all applicable statutes, laws, ordinances, rules, and regulations.
C. Duration: No permit issued under this article shall be valid for a period longer than six (6) months unless construction is actually begun within that period
and is thereafter diligently pursued to completion. (Ord. 2008-1, 1-17-2008)
8-1.1-7: REVISED PERMIT DRAWINGS:
In no event shall the actual locations of any facilities deviate in any material respect from the locations identified in the plans, drawings and specifications
submitted with the permit application. Any revised drawings or plans submitted after theinitial application shall specifically identify where the revised
locations of the facilities deviate from the locations originally shown. If the locations of the facilities deviate from the locations shown on the plans
submitted, the village may require the removal of any such facilities from the right of way, or the modification of such facility so that it conforms to the
permit and revised drawings of plans. (Ord. 2008-1, 1-17-2008)
8-1.1-8: INSURANCE:
A. Required Coverages And Limits: Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license, or similar agreement, each utility occupying right of way or
constructing any facility in the right of way shall secure and maintain the following liability insurance policies insuring the utility as named insured and
naming the village, and its elected and appointed officers, officials, agents, and employees as additional insureds on the policies listed in subsections
A1 and A2 of this section.
1. Commercial general liability insurance, including premises-operations, explosion, collapse, and underground hazard (commonly referred to as "X",
"C", and "U" coverages) and products-completed operations coverage with limits not less than:
a. Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for bodily injury or death to each person;
b. Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for property damage resulting from any one accident; and
c. Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for all other types of liability;
2. Automobile liability for owned, nonowned and hired vehicles with a combined single limit of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for personal injury
and property damage for each accident;
3. Workers' compensation with statutory limits; and
4. Employer's liability insurance with limits of not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per employee and per accident.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 240/498
B. Excess Or Umbrella Policies: The coverages required by this section may be in any combination of primary, excess, and umbrella policies. Any excess
or umbrella policy must provide excess coverage over underlying insurance on a following form basis such that when any loss covered by the primary
policy exceeds the limits under the primary policy, the excess or umbrella policy becomes effective to cover such loss.
C. Copies Required: The utility shall provide copies of any of the policies required by this section to the village within ten (10) days following receipt of a
written request therefor fromthe village.
D. Maintenance And Renewal Of Required Coverages: The insurance policies required by this section shall contain the following endorsement:
It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be canceled nor the intention not to renew be stated until thirty (30) days after receipt by
the Village, by registered mail or certified mail, return receipt requested, of a written notice addressed to the Village Manager of such intent to cancel or
not to renew.
Within ten (10) days after receipt by the village of said notice, and in no event later than ten (10) days prior to said cancellation, the utility shall obtain
and furnish to the village evidence of replacement insurance policies meeting the requirements of this section.
E. Self-Insurance: A utility may self-insure all or a portion of the insurance coverage and limit requirements required by subsection A of this section. A
utility that self-insures is not required, to the extent of such self-insurance, to comply with the requirement for the naming of additional insureds under
subsection A of this section, or the requirements of subsections B, C and D of this section. A utility that elects to self-insure shall provide to the village
evidence sufficient to demonstrate its financial ability to self-insure the insurance coverage and limit requirements required under subsection A of this
section, such as evidence that the utility is a "private self-insurer" under the workers' compensation act.
F. Effect Of Insurance And Self-Insurance On Utility's Liability: The legal liability of the utility to the village and any person for any of the matters that are
the subject of the insurance policies or self-insurance required by this section shall not be limited by such insurance policies or self-insurance or by the
recovery of any amounts thereunder.
G. Insurance Companies: All insurance provided pursuant to this section shall be effected under valid and enforceable policies, issued by insurers legally
able to conduct business with the licensee in the state of Illinois. All insurance carriers and surplus line carriers shall be rated "A-" or better and of a
class size "X" or higher by A.M. Best Company. (Ord. 2008-1, 1-17-2008)
8-1.1-9: INDEMNIFICATION:
By occupying or constructing facilities in the right of way, a utility shall be deemed to agree to defend, indemnify and hold the village and its elected and
appointed officials and officers, employees, agents and representatives harmless from and against any and all injuries, claims, demands, judgments,
damages, lossesand expenses, including reasonable attorney fees and costs of suit or defense, arising out of, resulting from or alleged to arise out of or
result from the negligent, careless or wrongful acts, omissions, failures to act or misconduct of the utility or its affiliates, officers, employees, agents,
contractors or subcontractors in the construction of facilities or occupancy of the rights of way, and in providing or offering service over the facilities,
whether such acts or omissions are authorized, allowed or prohibited by this article or by a franchise, license, or similar agreement; provided, however,
that the utility's indemnity obligations hereunder shall not apply to any injuries, claims, demands, judgments, damages, losses or expenses arising out of or
resulting from the negligence, misconduct or breach of this article by the village, its officials, officers, employees, agents or representatives. (Ord. 2008-1,
1-17-2008)
8-1.1-10: SECURITY:
A. Purpose: The permittee shall establish a security fund in a form and in an amount as set forth in this section. The security fund shall be continuously
maintained in accordance with this section at the permittee's sole cost and expense until the completion of the work authorized under the permit. The
security fund shall serve as security for:
1. The faithful performance by the permittee of all the requirements of this article;
2. Any expenditure, damage, or loss incurred by the village occasioned by the permittee's failure to comply with any codes, rules, regulations, orders,
permits and other directives of the village issued pursuant to this article; and
3. Complete restoration of the work area to a condition equal to or better than the original condition. All turf must be established prior to release of the
security fund. All pavement repairs must be a minimum of one year old prior to release of the security fund.
4. The payment by permittee of all liens and all damages, claims, costs, or expenses that the village may pay or incur by reason of any action or
nonperformance by permittee in violation of this article including, without limitation, any damage to public property or restoration work the permittee is
required by this article to perform that the village must perform itself or have completed as a consequence solely of the permittee's failure to perform
or complete, and all other payments due the village from the permittee pursuant to this article or any other applicable law.
B. Form: The permittee shall provide the security fund to the village in the form, at the permittee's election, of cash, a surety bond in a form acceptable to
the village, or an unconditional letter of credit in a form acceptable to the village. Any surety bond or letter of credit provided pursuant tothis subsection
shall, at a minimum:
1. Provide that it will not be canceled without prior notice to the village and the permittee;
2. Not require the consent of the permittee prior to the collection by the village of any amounts covered by it; and
3. Shall provide a location convenient to the village and within the state of Illinois at which it can be drawn.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 241/498
C. Amount: The dollar amount of the security fund shall be sufficient to provide for the reasonably estimated cost to restore the right of way to at least as
good a condition as that existing prior to the construction under the permit, as determined by the director of public works, and may also include
reasonable, directly related costs that the village estimates are likely to be incurred if the permittee fails to perform such restoration. Where the
construction of facilities proposed under the permit will be performed in phases in multiple locations in the village, with each phase consisting of
construction of facilities in one location or a related group of locations, and where construction in another phase will not be undertaken prior to
substantial completion of restoration in the previous phase or phases, the director of public works may, in the exercise of sound discretion, allow the
permittee to post a single amount of security which shall be applicable to each phase of the construction under the permit. The amount of the security
fund for phased construction shall be equal to the greatest amount that would have been required under the provisions of this subsection for any single
phase.
D. Withdrawals: The village, upon fourteen (14) days' advance written notice clearly stating the reason for, and its intention to exercise withdrawal rights
under this subsection, may withdraw an amount from the security fund, provided that the permittee has not reimbursed the village for such amount
within the fourteen (14) day notice period. Withdrawals may be made if the permittee:
1. Fails to make any payment required to be made by the permittee hereunder;
2. Fails to pay any liens relating to the facilities that are due and unpaid;
3. Fails to reimburse the village for any damages, claims, costs or expenses which the village has been compelled to pay or incur by reason of any
action or nonperformance by the permittee; or fails to restore the work area;
4. Fails to comply with any provision of this article that the village determines can be remedied by an expenditure of an amount in the security fund.
E. Replenishment: Within fourteen (14) days after receipt of written notice from the village that any amount has beenwithdrawn from the security fund, the
permittee shall restore the security fund to the amount specified in subsection C of this section.
F. Interest: The permittee may request that any and all interest accrued on the amount in the security fund be returned to the permittee by the village, upon
written request for said withdrawal to the village, provided that any such withdrawal does not reduce the security fund below the minimum balance
required in subsection C of this section.
G. Closing And Return Of Security Fund: Upon three (3) years from the date of completion of the work authorized under the permit, the permittee shall be
entitled to the return of the security fund, or such portion thereof as remains on deposit, within a reasonable time after account is taken for all offsets
necessary to compensate the village for failure by the permittee to comply with any provisions of this article or other applicable law. In the event of any
revocation of the permit, the security fund, and any and all accrued interest therein, shall become the property of the village to the extent necessary to
cover any reasonable costs, loss or damage incurred by the village as a result of said revocation, provided that any amounts in excess of said costs,
loss or damage shall be refunded to the permittee. Upon application to the director of public works, said security deposit may be reduced to one
hundred twenty five percent (125%) of the cost to complete restoration.
H. Rights Not Limited: The rights reserved to the village with respect to the security fund are in addition to all other rights of the village, whether reserved
by this article or otherwise authorized by law, and no action, proceeding or exercise of right with respect to said security fund shall affect any other right
the village may have. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the village shall not be entitled to a double monetary recovery with respect to any of its rights
which may be infringed or otherwise violated. (Ord. 2008-1, 1-17-2008)
8-1.1-11: PERMIT SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION:
A. Village Right To Revoke Permit: The village may revoke or suspend a permit issued pursuant to this article for one or more of the following reasons:
1. Fraudulent, false, misrepresenting, or materially incomplete statements in the permit application;
2. Noncompliance with this article;
3. Permittee's physical presence or presence of permittee's facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the public rights of way
presents a direct or imminent threat to the public health, safety, or welfare; or
4. Permittee's failure to construct the facilities substantiallyin accordance with the permit and approved plans.
B. Notice Of Revocation Or Suspension: If time permits, the village shall send written notice of its intent to revoke or suspend a permit issued pursuant to
this article stating the reason or reasons for the revocation or suspension and the alternatives available to permittee under this section. If the village
decides an emergency exists the permit may be revoked or suspended without notice.
C. Permittee Alternatives Upon Receipt Of Notice Of Revocation Or Suspension: Upon receipt of a written notice of revocation or suspension from the
village, the permittee shall have the following options:
1. Immediately provide the village with evidence that no cause exists for the revocation or suspension;
2. Immediately correct, to the satisfaction of the village, the deficiencies stated in the written notice, providing written proof of such connection to the
village within five (5) working days after receipt of the written notice of revocation; or
3. Immediately remove the facilities located on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the public rights of way and restore the rights of way
to the satisfaction of the village providing written proof of such removal to the village within ten (10) days after receipt of the written notice of
revocation. The village may, in its discretion, for good cause shown, extend the time periods provided for in this subsection.
D. Stop Work Order: In addition to the issuance of a notice of revocation or suspension, the village may issue a stop work order immediately upon
discovery of any of the reasons for revocation set forth within subsection A of this section.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 242/498
E. Failure Or Refusal Of The Permittee To Comply: If the permittee fails to comply with the provisions of subsection C of this section, the village or its
designee may, at the option of the village: 1) correct the deficiencies; 2) upon not less than twenty (20) days' notice to the permittee, remove the
subject facilities or equipment; or 3) after not less than thirty (30) days' notice to the permittee of failure to cure the noncompliance, deem them
abandoned and property of the village. The permittee shall be liable in all events to the village for all costs of removal. (Ord. 2008-1, 1-17-2008)
8-1.1-12: CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP OR OWNER'S IDENTITY OR LEGAL STATUS:
A. Notification Of Change: A utility shall notify the village no less than thirty (30) days prior to the transfer of ownership of any facility in the right of way or
change in identity of the utility. The new owner of the utility or the facility shall have all the obligations and privileges enjoyed by the former ownerunder
the permit, if any, and all applicable laws, ordinances, rules and regulations, including this article, with respect to the work and facilities in the right of
way.
B. Amended Permit: A new owner shall request that any current permit be amended to show current ownership. If the new owner fails to have a new or
amended permit issued in its name, the new owner shall be presumed to have accepted, and agreed to be bound by, the terms and conditions of the
permit if the new owner uses the facility or allows it to remain on the village's right of way.
C. Insurance And Bonding: All required insurance coverage or bonding must be changed to reflect the name of the new owner upon transfer. (Ord. 2008-1,
1-17-2008)
8-1.1-13: GENERAL CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS:
A. Standards And Principles: All construction in the right of way shall be consistent with applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules and regulations, and
commonly recognized and accepted traffic control and construction principles, sound engineering judgment and, where applicable, the principles and
standards set forth in the following IDOT publications:
1. "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction", latest edition;
2. "Supplemental Specifications And Recurring Special Provisions", latest edition;
3. "Highway Design Manual", latest edition;
4. "Highway Standards Manual", latest edition;
5. "Standard Specifications For Traffic Control Items", latest edition;
6. "Illinois Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices" (92 Ill. adm. code section 545) as amended;
7. "Flagger's Handbook", latest edition; and
8. "Work Site Protection Manual For Daylight Maintenance Operations", latest edition.
B. Interpretation Of Municipal Standards And Principles: If a discrepancy exists between or among differing principles and standards required by this
article, the village director of public works shall determine, in the exercise of sound engineering judgment, which principles apply and such decision
shall be final. If requested, the director of public works shall state which standard or principle will apply to the construction, maintenance, or operation of
a facility in the future. (Ord. 2008-1, 1-17-2008)
8-1.1-14: TRAFFIC CONTROL:
A. Minimum Requirements: The village's minimum requirements for traffic protection are contained in IDOT's "Illinois Manual On Uniform Traffic Control
Devices", latest edition, and this code.
B. Warning Signs, Protective Devices, And Flaggers: The utility is responsible for providing and installing warning signs, protective devices and flaggers,
when necessary, meeting all applicable federal, state, and local requirements for protection of the public and the utility's workers when performing any
work on the public rights of way.
C. Interference With Traffic: All work shall be phased so that there is minimum interference with pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
D. Notice When Access Is Blocked: At least forty eight (48) hours prior to beginning work that will partially or completely block access to any residence,
business or institution, the utility shall notify the resident, business or institution of the approximate beginning time and duration of such work; provided,
however, that in cases involving emergency repairs pursuant to section 8-1.1-20 of this article, the utility shall provide such notice as is practicable
under the circumstances.
E. Compliance: The utility shall take immediate action to correct any deficiencies in traffic protection requirements that are brought to the utility's attention
by the village. (Ord. 2008-1, 1-17-2008)
8-1.1-15: LOCATION OF FACILITIES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 243/498
A. General Requirements: In addition to location requirements applicable to specific types of utility facilities, all utility facilities, regardless of type, shall be
subject to the general location requirements of this subsection.
1. No Interference With Village Facilities: No utility facilities shall be placed in any location if the village director of public works determines that the
proposed location will require the relocation or displacement of any of the village's utility facilities or will otherwise interfere with the operation or
maintenance of any of the village's utility facilities.
2. Minimum Interference And Impact: The proposed location shall cause only the minimum possible interference with the use of the right of way and
shall cause only the minimum possible impact upon, and interference with the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin said
right of way.
3. No Interference With Travel: No utility facility shall be placed in any location that interferes with the usual travel on such right of way.
4. No Limitations On Visibility: No utility facility shall be placed in any location so as to limit visibility of or by users of the right of way.
5. Size Of Utility Facilities: The proposed installation shall use the smallest suitable vaults, boxes, equipment enclosures, power pedestals, and/or
cabinets then in use by the facility owner, regardless of location, for the particular application.
B. Parallel Facilities Located Within Highways:
1. Overhead Parallel Facilities: An overhead parallel facility may be located within the right of way lines of a highway only if not prohibited by this code
or development agreements and if:
a. Lines are located as near as practicable to the right of way line and as nearly parallel to the right of way line as reasonable pole alignment will
permit; no parallel lines shall be installed over the street pavement;
b. Where pavement is curbed, poles are as remote as practicable from the curb with a minimum distance of two feet (2') (0.6 m) behind the face of
the curb, where available;
c. Where pavement is uncurbed, poles are as remote from pavement edge as practicable with minimum distance of four feet (4') (1.2 m) outside the
outer shoulder line of the roadway and are not within the clear zone;
d. No pole is located in the ditch line of a highway; and
e. Any ground mounted appurtenance is located within one foot (1') (0.3 m) of the right of way line or as near as possible to the right of way line.
2. Underground Parallel Facilities: An underground parallel facility may be located within the right of way lines of a highway only if:
a. The facility is located as near the right of way line as practicable and not more than eight feet (8') (2.4 m) from and parallel to the right of way line;
b. A new facility may be located under the paved portion of a highway only if other locations are impracticable or inconsistent with sound engineering
judgment (e.g., a new cable may be installed in existing conduit without disrupting the pavement); any facility installed under and parallel to the
street shall be installed in a rigid conduit and shall be a minimum of three feet (3') below the top of the pavement; and
c. In the case of an underground power or communications line, the facility shall be located as near the right of way line as practicable and not more
than five feet (5') (1.5 m) from the right of way line and any above grounded appurtenance shall be located within one foot (1') (0.3 m) of the right
of way line oras near as practicable.
C. Facilities Crossing Highways:
1. No Future Disruption: The construction and design of crossing facilities installed between the ditch lines or curb lines of village highways may require
the incorporation of materials and protections (such as encasement or additional cover) to avoid settlement or future repairs to the roadbed resulting
from the installation of such crossing facilities.
2. Cattle Passes, Culverts, Or Drainage Facilities: Crossing facilities shall not be located in cattle passes, culverts, or drainage facilities.
3. Ninety Degree Crossing Required: Crossing facilities shall cross at or as near to a ninety degree (90°) angle to the centerline as practicable.
4. Overhead Power Or Telecommunication Facility: An overhead power or telecommunication facility may cross a highway only if:
a. It has a minimum vertical clearance as required by ILCC's rules entitled, "construction of electric power and communication lines" (83 Ill. adm.
code 305);
b. Poles are located within one foot (1') (0.3 m) of the right of way line of the highway and outside of the clear zone; and
c. Overhead crossings at major intersections are avoided.
5. Underground Power Or Telecommunication Facility: An underground power or telecommunication facility may cross a highway only if:
a. The design materials and construction methods will provide maximum maintenance free service life; and
b. Capacity for the utility's foreseeable future expansion needs is provided in the initial installation.
6. Markers: The village may require the utility to provide a marker at each right of way line where an underground facility other than a power or
communication facility crosses a highway. Each marker shall identify the type of facility, the utility, and an emergency phone number. Markers may
also be eliminated as provided in current federal regulations (49 CFR 192.707 (1989)).
D. Facilities To Be Located Within Particular Rights Of Way: The village may require that facilities be located within particular rights of way that are not
highways, rather than within particular highways.
E. Freestanding Facilities:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 244/498
1. The village may restrict the location and size of anyfreestanding facility located within a right of way.
2. The village may require any freestanding facility located within a right of way to be screened from view.
3. No facilities may be installed at any location that includes standby power supplied by an engine driven generator or alternator. All standby power
must be supplied by batteries.
F. Appearance Standards:
1. The village may prohibit the installation of facilities in particular locations in order to preserve visual quality.
2. A facility may be constructed only if its construction does not require extensive removal or alteration of trees or terrain features visible to the highway
user or impair the aesthetic quality of the lands being traversed.
G. Aboveground Installation: Aboveground facilities may be installed only if:
1. No other existing facilities in the area are located underground;
2. New underground installation is not technically feasible; and
3. The proposed installation will be made at a location, and will employ suitable design and materials, to provide the greatest protection of aesthetic
qualities of the area being traversed without adversely affecting safety. Suitable designs include, but are not limited to, self-supporting armless, single
pole construction with vertical configuration of conductors and cable.
H. Facility Attachments To Bridges Or Roadway Structures:
1. Facilities may be installed as attachments to bridges or roadway structures only where the utility has demonstrated that all other means of
accommodating the facility are not practicable. Other means shall include, but are not limited to, underground, underwater, independent poles, cable
supports and tower supports, all of which are completely separated from the bridge or roadway structure. Facilities transmitting commodities that are
volatile, flammable, corrosive, or energized, especially those under significant pressure or potential, present high degrees of risk and such
installations are not permitted.
2. A utility shall include in its request to accommodate a facility installation on a bridge or roadway structure supporting data demonstrating the
impracticability of alternate routing. Approval or disapproval of an application for facility attachment to a bridge or roadway structure will be based
upon the following considerations:
a. The type, volume, pressure or voltage of the commodity to be transmitted and an evaluation of the resulting risk to personsand property in the
event of damage to or failure of the facility;
b. The type, length, value, and relative importance of the highway structure in the transportation system;
c. The alternative routings available to the utility and their comparative practicability;
d. The proposed method of attachment;
e. The ability of the structure to bear the increased load of the proposed facility;
f. The degree of interference with bridge maintenance and painting;
g. The effect on the visual quality of the structure; and
h. The public benefit expected from the utility service as compared to the risk involved. (Ord. 2008-1, 1-17-2008)
8-1.1-16: CONSTRUCTION METHODS AND MATERIALS:
A. Standards And Requirements For Particular Types Of Construction Methods:
1. Boring And Jacking:
a. Pits And Shoring: Boring or jacking under rights of way shall be accomplished from pits located at a minimum distance specified by the director of
public works from the edge of the pavement. Pits for boring or jacking shall be excavated no more than forty eight (48) hours in advance of boring
or jacking operations and backfilled within twenty four (24) hours after boring or jacking operations are completed. While pits are open, they shall
be clearly marked and protected by barricades and fencing. The utility or contractor shall comply with all OSHA requirements.
b. Wet Boring Or Jetting: Wet boring or jetting shall not be permitted under the roadway.
c. Borings With Diameters Greater Than Six Inches: Borings over six inches (6") (0.15 m) in diameter shall be accomplished with an auger and
following pipe, and the diameter of the auger shall not exceed the outside diameter of the following pipe by more than one inch (1") (25 mm).
Directional boring over six inches (6") in diameter must be specifically approved by the village.
d. Borings With Diameters Six Inches Or Less: Borings of six inches (6") or less in diameter may be accomplished by either directional boring,
jacking, guided with auger, or auger and following pipe method.
e. Tree Preservation: Any facility located within the drip lineof any tree designated by the village to be preserved shall be bored under or around the
root system. No excavation is allowed within the drip line.
2. Trenching: Trenching for facility installation, repair, or maintenance on rights of way shall be done in accord with the applicable portions of section
819 of IDOT's "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction".
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 245/498
a. Length: The length of open trench shall be kept to the practicable minimum consistent with requirements for pipe/line testing. Open cutting of
streets is not permitted unless special permission is obtained from the director of public works.
b. Open Trench And Excavated Material: Open trench and windrowed excavated material shall be protected as required by chapter 6 of the "Illinois
Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices". Where practicable, the excavated material shall be deposited between the roadway and the trench as
added protection. Excavated material shall not be allowed to remain on the paved portion of the roadway. Where right of way width does not allow
for windrowing excavated material off the paved portion of the roadway, excavated material shall be hauled to an off road location.
c. The utility shall not trench within the drip line of any tree designated by the village to be preserved.
3. Backfilling:
a. Any pit, trench, or excavation created during the installation of facilities shall be backfilled for its full width, depth, and length using methods and
materials in accordance with IDOT's "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction". When excavated material is hauled away or is
unsuitable for backfill, suitable granular backfill shall be used. The director of public works may require granular trench backfill at any location, and
may require that all excavated material must be removed from the work site.
b. For a period of three (3) years from the date construction of a facility is completed, the utility shall be responsible to remove and restore any
backfilled area that has settled due to construction of the facility. If so ordered by the director of public works, the utility, at its expense, shall
remove any pavement and backfill material to the top of the installed facility, place and properly compact new backfill material, and restore new
pavement, sidewalk, curbs, and driveways to the proper grades, as determined by the director of public works.
4. Pavement Cuts: Pavement cuts for facility installation or repair shall be permitted on a highway only if that portion of the highway is closed to traffic
and only with the express consent of the DPW and only when no other alternative is available. A security deposit will be required before any
pavement can be cut. If a variance to the limitation set forth inthis subsection A4 is permitted under section 8-1.1-21 of this article, the following
requirements shall apply:
a. Any excavation under pavements shall be backfilled as soon as practicable with granular material of FA-2, CA-6 or CA-10 gradation, as
designated by the director of public works. All trench backfill shall be compacted by method 3 of section 550.07 of the "Standard Specifications For
Road And Bridge Construction", latest edition.
b. Restoration of pavement, in kind, shall be accomplished as soon as practicable, and temporary repair with bituminous mixture shall be provided at
the same time the excavation is backfilled. Any subsequent failure of either the temporary repair or the restoration shall be rebuilt upon notification
by the village.
c. All saw cuts shall be full depth.
d. For all rights of way which have been reconstructed with a concrete surface base in the last seven (7) years, or resurfaced in the last three (3)
years, permits shall not be issued unless such work is determined to be an emergency repair or other work considered necessary and unforeseen
before the time of the reconstruction.
5. Encasement:
a. Casing pipe shall be designed to withstand the load of the highway and any other superimposed loads. The casing shall be continuous either by
one piece fabrication or by welding or jointed installation approved by the village.
b. All water main crossings under existing pavement shall include the use of a steel casing pipe. The diameter of the casing pipe shall be approved
by the village. All water main in casing shall be class 52 ductile iron pipe. All water main in casing shall be installed with stainless steel supports.
The entire casing shall be filled with sand or other approved material. The type of joint required will be determined by the village.
c. In the case of gas pipelines of sixty (60) psig or less, encasement may be eliminated.
d. In the case of gas pipelines or petroleum products pipelines with installations of more than sixty (60) psig, encasement may be eliminated only if:
1) extra heavy pipe is used that precludes future maintenance or repair and 2) cathodic protection of the pipe is provided.
e. If encasement is eliminated for a gas or petroleum products pipeline, the facility shall be located so as to provide that construction does not disrupt
the right of way.
f. High pressure gas pipelines or petroleum pipelines crossing a street shall construct a concrete protective slab over the pipe(s). The design of the
slab shall be approved by the village.The slab shall be designed to transfer no pavement load to the pipe.
6. Minimum Cover Of Underground Facilities: Cover shall be provided and maintained at least in the amount specified in the following table for
minimum cover for the type of facility:
Type Of Facility Minimum Cover
Power or communication line (in general) 30 inches (0.8 m)
Communication line installed by the plowed method 24 inches (0.6 m)
Gas or petroleum products 30 inches (0.8 m)
Water line 5.5 feet to the top of the pipe
Sanitary sewer Sufficient cover to provide freeze protection
B. Standards And Requirements For Particular Types Of Facilities:
1. Electric Power Or Communication Lines:
a. Code Compliance: Electric power or communications facilities within village rights of way shall be constructed, operated, and maintained in
conformity with the provisions of 83 Illinois administrative code 305 (formerly general order 160 of the Illinois commerce commission) entitled
"rules for construction of electric power and communication lines", and the national electrical safety code.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 246/498
b. Overhead Facilities: Overhead power or communication facilities shall use single pole construction and, where practicable, joint use of poles shall
be used. Utilities shall make every reasonable effort to design the installation so guys and braces will not be needed. Variances may be allowed if
there is no feasible alternative and if guywires are equipped with guy guards for maximum visibility.
c. Underground Facilities:
(1) Cable must be installed by directional boring. Cable may be installed by trenching or plowing only if it is technically impossible to directional
bore.
(2) If a crossing is installed by boring or jacking, encasement shall be provided between jacking or bore pits. Encasement may be eliminated only
if: a) the crossing is installed by the use of directional boring or b) the installation is by the open trench method which is only permitted prior to
roadway construction.
(3) Cable shall be grounded in accordance with the national electrical safety code.
2. Underground Facilities Other Than Electric Power Or Communication Lines: Underground facilities other than electric power or communication lines
may be installed by:
a. The use of directional boring;
b. Jacking or boring with encasement provided between the ditch lines or toes of slopes of the highway;
c. Open trench with encasement between ultimate ditch lines or toes of slopes, but only if prior to roadway construction; or
d. Tunneling vented encasement, but only if installation is not possible by other means.
3. Gas Transmission, Distribution And Service: Gas pipelines within rights of way shall be constructed, maintained, and operated in a village approved
manner and in conformance with the federal code of the office of pipeline safety operations, department of transportation, part 192 - transportation of
natural and other gas by pipeline: minimum federal safety standards (49 CFR 192), IDOT's "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge
Construction", and all other applicable laws, rules, and regulations.
4. Petroleum Products Pipelines: Petroleum products pipelines within rights of way shall conform to the applicable sections of ANSI standard code for
pressure piping (liquid petroleum transportation piping systems ANSI-B 31.4).
5. Water Lines, Sanitary Sewer Lines, Storm Water Sewer Lines Or Drainage Lines: Water lines, sanitary sewer lines, storm sewer lines, and drainage
lines within rights of way shall meet or exceed the recommendations of the current "Standard Specifications For Water And Sewer Main Construction
In Illinois" and those requirements in title 10 of this code.
6. Ground Mounted Appurtenances: Ground mounted appurtenances to overhead or underground facilities, when permitted within a right of way, shall
be provided with a vegetation free area extending one foot (1') (305 mm) in width beyond the appurtenance in all directions. The vegetation free area
may be provided by an extension of the mounting pad, or similar material approved by the director of public works. With the approval of the director
of public works, shrubbery surrounding the appurtenance may be used in place of vegetation free area. The housing for ground mounted
appurtenances shall be painted a neutral color to blend with the surroundings. All ground mounted appurtenances shall be landscaped with shrubs,
evergreen trees, and other plant materials as approved by the director of public works. Landscape plans must be submitted for approval with the
permit application.
C. Materials:
1. General Standards: The materials used in constructing facilities within rights of way shall be those meeting theaccepted standards of the appropriate
industry, the applicable portions of IDOT's "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction", the requirements of the Illinois commerce
commission, or the standards established by other official regulatory agencies for the appropriate industry and title 10 of this code.
2. Material Storage On Right Of Way: All pipe, conduit, wire, poles, cross arms, or other materials shall be distributed along the right of way prior to and
during installation in a manner to minimize hazards to the public or an obstacle to right of way maintenance or damage to the right of way and other
property. If material is to be stored on right of way, prior approval must be obtained from the village. In no case may material be stored for more than
ten (10) days, and in no case can material be distributed along the right of way for more than three hundred feet (300'). Any material left in the street
must be protected and have traffic control devices installed in accordance with the "Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices".
3. Hazardous Materials: The plans submitted by the utility to the village shall identify any hazardous materials that may be involved in the construction
of the new facilities or removal of any existing facilities. No hazardous material shall be stored within the ROW.
D. Operational Restrictions:
1. Construction operations on rights of way may, at the discretion of the village, be required to be discontinued when such operations would create
hazards to traffic or the public health, safety, and welfare. Such operations may also be required to be discontinued or restricted when conditions are
such that construction would result in extensive damage to the right of way or other property.
2. These restrictions may be waived by the director of public works when emergency work is required to restore vital utility services.
3. Unless otherwise permitted by the village, the hours of construction are those set forth herein.
4. No trees shall be trimmed, pruned or removed without a permit and the prior approval of the director of public works. The village will require
compensation for trees extensively damaged and for trees removed without authorization. The formula developed by the International Society of
Arboriculture will be used as a basis for determining the compensation for damaged trees or unauthorized removal of trees. All work shall be stopped
for damaged trees or unauthorized removal of trees; the work will remain stopped until satisfactory compensation in accordance with the
International Society of Arboriculture has been made to the village.
E. Location Of Existing Facilities: Any utility proposing toconstruct facilities in the village shall contact JULIE and ascertain the presence and location of
existing aboveground and underground facilities within the rights of way to be occupied by its proposed facilities. The village will make its permit
records available to a utility for the purpose of identifying possible facilities. When notified of an excavation or when requested by the village or by
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 247/498
JULIE, a utility shall locate and physically mark its underground facilities within forty eight (48) hours, excluding weekends and holidays, in accordance
with the Illinois underground facilities damage prevention act1. (Ord. 2008-1, 1-17-2008)
8-1.1-17: VEGETATION CONTROL:
A. Electric Utilities; Compliance With State Laws And Regulations: An electric utility shall conduct all tree trimming and vegetation control activities in the
right of way in accordance with applicable Illinois laws and regulations, and additionally, with such local franchise or other agreement with the village as
permitted by law.
B. Other Utilities; Tree Trimming Permit Required: Tree trimming shall not be considered a normal maintenance operation, but shall require the application
for, and the issuance of, a permit, in addition to any other permit required under this article.
1. Application For Tree Trimming Permit: Applications for tree trimming permits shall include assurance that the work will be accomplished by
competent workers with supervision who are experienced in accepted tree pruning practices. Tree trimming permits shall designate an expiration
date in the interest of assuring that the work will be expeditiously accomplished.
2. Damage To Trees: Poor pruning practices resulting in damaged or misshapen trees will not be tolerated and shall be grounds for cancellation of the
tree trimming permit and for assessment of damages. The village will require compensation for trees extensively damaged and for trees removed
without authorization. The formula developed by the International Society of Arboriculture will be used as a basis for determining the compensation
for damaged trees or unauthorized removal of trees. The village may require the removal and replacement of trees if trimming or radical pruning
would leave them in an unacceptable condition.
C. Specimen Trees Or Trees Of Special Significance: The village may require that special measures be taken to preserve specimen trees or trees of
special significance. The required measures may consist of higher poles, side arm extensions, covered wire or other means.
D. Chemical Use:
1. Except as provided in the following subsection, no utility shall spray, inject or pour any chemicals on or near any trees, shrubs or vegetation in the
village for any purpose, including the control of growth, insects or disease.
2. Spraying of any type of brush killing chemicals will not be permitted on rights of way unless the utility demonstrates to the satisfaction of the director
of public works that such spraying is the only practicable method of vegetation control. (Ord. 2008-1, 1-17-2008)
8-1.1-18: REMOVAL, RELOCATION, OR MODIFICATION OF UTILITY FACILITIES:
A. Notice: Within ninety (90) days following written notice from the village, a utility shall, at its own expense, temporarily or permanently remove, relocate,
change or alter the position of any utility facilities within the rights of way whenever the corporate authorities have determined that such removal,
relocation, change or alteration, is reasonably necessary for the construction, repair, maintenance, or installation of any village improvement in or upon,
or the operations of the village in or upon, the rights of way, at no cost to the village.
B. Removal Of Unauthorized Facilities: Within thirty (30) days following written notice from the village, any utility that owns, controls, or maintains any
unauthorized facility or related appurtenances within the public rights of way shall, at its own expense, remove all or any part of such facilities or
appurtenances from the public rights of way. A facility is unauthorized and subject to removal in the following circumstances:
1. Upon expiration or termination of the permittee's license or franchise, unless otherwise permitted by applicable law;
2. If the facility was constructed or installed without the prior grant of a license or franchise, if required;
3. If the facility was constructed or installed without prior issuance of a required permit in violation of this article; or
4. If the facility was constructed or installed at a location not permitted by the permittee's license or franchise.
C. Emergency Removal Or Relocation Of Facilities: The village retains the right and privilege to cut or move any facilities located within the rights of way of
the village, as the village may determine to be necessary, appropriate or useful in response to any public health or safety emergency. If circumstances
permit, the municipality shall attempt to notify the utility, if known, prior to cutting or removing a facility and shall notify the utility, if known, after cutting
or removing a facility.
D. Abandonment Of Facilities: Upon abandonment of a facilitywithin the public rights of way of the village, the utility shall notify the village within ninety (90)
days. Following receipt of such notice the village may direct the utility to remove all or any portion of the facility if the director of public works
determines that such removal will be in the best interest of the public health, safety and welfare. In the event that the village does not direct the utility
that abandoned the facility to remove it, by giving notice of abandonment to the village, the abandoning utility shall be deemed to consent to the
alteration or removal of all or any portion of the facility by another utility or person. (Ord. 2008-1, 1-17-2008)
8-1.1-19: CLEANUP AND RESTORATION:
Upon completion of all construction or maintenance of facilities, the utility shall remove all excess material and restore all turf and terrain in a timely
manner and to the satisfaction of the village. This includes restoration of entrances and side roads. Restoration of roadway surfaces shall be made using
materials and methods approved by the director of public works. Such cleanup and repair may be required to consist of backfilling, regrading, reseeding,
resodding, or any other requirement to restore the right of way to a condition substantially equivalent to that which existed prior to the commencement of
the project. All pavement repairs shall be done in the presence of a village inspector. Repairs done without inspection are not permitted and will require
replacement. (Ord. 2008-1, 1-17-2008)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 248/498
8-1.1-20: MAINTENANCE AND EMERGENCY MAINTENANCE:
A. General: Facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within rights of way are to be maintained by or for the utility in a manner satisfactory
to the village and at the utility's expense.
B. Emergency Maintenance Procedures: Emergencies may justify noncompliance with normal procedures for securing a permit:
1. If an emergency creates a hazard on the traveled portion of the right of way, the utility shall take immediate steps to provide all necessary protection
for traffic on the highway or the public on the right of way including the use of signs, lights, barricades or flaggers. If a hazard does not exist on the
traveled way, but the nature of the emergency is such as to require the parking on the shoulder of equipment required in repair operations, adequate
signs and lights shall be provided. Parking on the shoulder in such an emergency will only be permitted when no other means of access to the facility
is available.
2. In an emergency, the utility shall, as soon as possible, notify the director of public works or his or her duly authorized agent of the emergency,
informing him or her as to what steps have been taken for protection of the traveling public and whatwill be required to make the necessary repairs. If
the nature of the emergency is such as to interfere with the free movement of traffic, the village police shall be notified immediately.
3. In an emergency, the utility shall use all means at hand to complete repairs as rapidly as practicable and with the least inconvenience to the traveling
public.
C. Emergency Repairs: The utility must file in writing with the village a description of the repairs undertaken in the right of way within forty eight (48) hours
after an emergency repair. (Ord. 2008-1, 1-17-2008)
8-1.1-21: VARIANCES:
A. Request For Variance: A utility requesting a variance from one or more of the provisions of this article must do so in writing to the director of public
works as a part of the permit application. The request shall identify each provision of this article from which a variance is requested and the reasons
why a variance should be granted.
B. Authority To Grant Variances: The director of public works shall decide whether a variance is authorized for each provision of this article identified in the
variance request on an individual basis.
C. Conditions For Granting Of Variance: The director of public works may authorize a variance only if the utility requesting the variance has demonstrated
that:
1. One or more conditions not under the control of the utility (such as terrain features or an irregular right of way line) create a special hardship that
would make enforcement of the provision unreasonable, given the public purposes to be achieved by the provision; and
2. All other designs, methods, materials, locations or facilities that would conform with the provision from which a variance is requested are
impracticable in relation to the requested approach.
D. Additional Conditions For Granting Of A Variance: As a condition for authorizing a variance, the director of public works may require the utility
requesting the variance to meet reasonable standards and conditions that may or may not be expressly contained within this article but which carry out
the purposes of this article. (Ord. 2008-1, 1-17-2008)
8-1.1-22: PENALTIES:
Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with any of the provisions of this article shall be subject to fine in accordance with
the penalty provisions of thiscode. There may be times when the village will incur delay or other costs, including third party claims, because the utility will
not or cannot perform its duties under its permit and this article. Unless the utility shows that another allocation of the cost of undertaking the requested
action is appropriate, the utility shall bear the village's costs of damages and its costs of installing, maintaining, modifying, relocating, or removing the
facility that is the subject of the permit. No other administrative agency or commission may review or overrule a permit related cost apportionment of the
village. Sanctions may be imposed upon a utility who does not pay the costs apportioned to it. (Ord. 2008-1, 1-17-2008)
8-1.1-23: ENFORCEMENT:
Nothing in this article shall be construed as limiting any additional or further remedies that the village may have for enforcement of this article. (Ord. 2008-
1, 1-17-2008)
ARTICLE 2. SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY CONSTRUCTION IN RIGHTS-OF-WAY
8-1.2-1: PURPOSES AND SCOPE:
A. Purposes: The purposes of this article are to:
1. Establish regulations, standards, and procedures for the siting and collocation of small wireless facilities on rights-of-way within the Village's
jurisdiction, or outside the rights-of-way on property zoned by the Village exclusively for commercial or industrial use, in a manner that is consistent
with the Small Wireless Facilities Deployment Act1 while minimizing the visual impacts associated with small wireless facilities; and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 249/498
2. Encourage creative approaches in locating and designing small wireless facilities that blend in with the surroundings of such facilities.
B. Goals: The goals of this article are to:
1. Encourage the collocation of small wireless facilities while minimizing the total number of wireless support structures throughout the Village;
2. Encourage the joint-use of new and existing wireless support structures;
3. Encourage small wireless providers to locate small wireless facilities, to the extent feasible, at locations where the adverse visual impact on the
neighborhoods of the Village is significantly minimized;
4. Encourage small wireless providers to configure small wireless facilities in ways that minimize the adverse visual impact of the wireless support
structures; and
5. Enhance the ability of the small wireless service provider to provide such services to the community quickly, effectively, and efficiently.
C. Interpretation: The provisions of this article shall be interpreted and applied in order to comply with the provisions of the Small Wireless Facilities
Deployment Act, 50 Illinois Compiled Statutes 835/1, et seq.
D. Conflicts With Other Ordinances: This article supersedes all ordinances or parts of ordinances adopted prior hereto, that are in conflict herewith, to the
extent of such conflict.
E. Conflicts With State And Federal Laws: In the event that applicable Federal or State laws or regulations conflict with the requirements of this article, the
wireless provider shall comply with the requirements of this article to the maximum extent possible without violating Federal and State laws or
regulations. (Ord. 2018-19, 7-19-2018)
8-1.2-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
ANTENNA: Communications equipment that transmits or receives electromagnetic radio frequency signals used in the provision of wireless services.
APPLICABLE CODES: Building, Fire, Electrical, Plumbing, or Mechanical Codes adopted by a recognized national code organization or local amendments
to those codes, including the National Electric Safety Code.
APPLICANT: Any person who submits an application and is a wireless provider.
APPLICATION: A request submitted by an applicant to the Village for a permit to collocate small wireless facilities, and a request that includes the
installation of a new utility pole for such collocation, as well as any applicable fee for the review of such application.
COLLOCATE OR COLLOCATION: To install, mount, maintain, modify, operate, or replace wireless facilities on or adjacent to a wireless support structure
or utility pole.
COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE: Cable service, as defined in 47 USC 522(6), as amended; information service, as defined in 47 USC 153(24), as
amended; telecommunications service, as defined in 47 USC 153(53), as amended; mobile service, as defined in 47 USC 153(53), as amended; or
wireless service other than mobile service.
COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE PROVIDER: A cable operator, as defined in 47 USC 522(5), as amended; a provider of information service, as defined in
47 USC 153(24), as amended; a telecommunications carrier, as defined in 47 USC 153(51), as amended; or a wireless provider.
FCC: The Federal Communications Commission of the United States.
FEE: A one-time charge.
HISTORIC DISTRICT OR HISTORIC LANDMARK: A building, property, or site, or group of buildings, properties, or sites that are either: a) listed in the
National Register of Historic Places or formally determined eligible for listing by the Keeper of the National Register, the individual who has been delegated
the authority by the Federal agency to list properties and determine their eligibility for the National Register, in accordance with section VI.D.1.a.i through
section VI.D.1.a.v of the Nationwide Programmatic Agreement codified at 47 CFR part 1, appendix C; or b) designated as a locally landmarked building,
property, site, or historic district by an ordinance adopted by the Village pursuant to a preservation program that meets the requirements of the Certified
Local Government Program of the Illinois State Historic Preservation Office or where such certification of the preservation program by the Illinois State
Historic Preservation Office is pending.
LAW: A Federal or State Statute, common law, code, rule, regulation, order, or local ordinance or resolution.
MICRO WIRELESS FACILITY: A small wireless facility that is no larger in dimension than twenty four inches (24") in length, fifteen inches (15") in width,
and twelve inches (12") in height, and that has an exterior antenna, if any, no longer than eleven inches (11").
MUNICIPAL UTILITY POLE: A utility pole owned or operated by the Village in public rights-of-way.
PERMIT: A written authorization required by the Village to perform an action or initiate, continue, or complete a project.
PERSON: An individual, corporation, limited liability company, partnership, association, trust, or other entity or organization.
PUBLIC SAFETY AGENCY: The functional division of the Federal government, the State, a unit of local government, or a special purpose district located
in whole or in part within this State, that provides or has authority to provide firefighting, police, ambulance, medical, or other emergency services to
respond to and manage emergency incidents.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 250/498
RATE: A recurring charge.
RIGHT-OF-WAY: The area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway, street, public sidewalk, alley, or utility easement dedicated for compatible use.
Right-of-way does not include Village-owned aerial lines.
SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY: A wireless facility that meets both of the following qualifications: a) each antenna is located inside an enclosure of no more
than six (6) cubic feet in volume or, in the case of an antenna that has exposed elements, the antenna and all of its exposed elements could fit within an
imaginary enclosure of no more than six (6) cubic feet; and b) all other wireless equipment attached directly to a utility pole associated with the facility is
cumulatively no more than twenty five (25) cubic feet in volume. The following types of associated ancillary equipment are not included in the calculation of
equipment volume: electric meter, concealment elements, telecommunications demarcation box, ground-based enclosures, grounding equipment, power
transfer switch, cut-off switch, and vertical cable runs for the connection of power and other services.
UTILITY POLE (OR POLE): A pole or similar structure that is used in whole or in part by a communications service provider, and for electric distribution,
lighting, traffic control, or a similar function.
WIRELESS FACILITY: Equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless communications between user equipment and a communications network,
including: a) equipment associated with wireless communications; and b) radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup
power supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration. Wireless facility includes small wireless facilities. Wireless facility
does not include: a) the structure or improvements on, under, or within which the equipment is collocated; or b) wireline backhaul facilities, coaxial or fiber
optic cable that is between wireless support structures or utility poles or coaxial, or fiber optic cable that is otherwise not immediately adjacent to or directly
associated with an antenna.
WIRELESS INFRASTRUCTURE PROVIDER: Any person authorized to provide telecommunications service in the State that builds or installs wireless
communication transmission equipment, wireless facilities, wireless support structures, or utility poles and that is not a wireless services provider but is
acting as an agent or a contractor for a wireless services provider for the application submitted to the Village.
WIRELESS PROVIDER: A wireless infrastructure provider or a wireless services provider.
WIRELESS SERVICES: Any services provided to the general public, including a particular class of customers, and made available on a nondiscriminatory
basis using licensed or unlicensed spectrum, whether at a fixed location or mobile, provided using wireless facilities.
WIRELESS SERVICES PROVIDER: A person who provides wireless services.
WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE: A freestanding structure, such as a monopole; tower, either guyed or self-supporting; billboard; or other existing or
proposed structure designed to support or capable of supporting wireless facilities. Wireless support structure does not include a utility pole. (Ord. 2018-
19, 7-19-2018)
8-1.2-3: REGULATION OF SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES:
A. Permitted Use: Small wireless facilities shall be classified as permitted uses and subject to administrative review, except for applications including
requested variations from the requirements of this article as specified herein, and not subject to zoning review or approval if they are collocated: 1) in
rights-of-way in any zoning district, or 2) outside rights-of-way in property zoned exclusively for commercial or industrial use.
B. Permit Required: No person shall place, construct, reconstruct or modify a small wireless facility within the Village without a permit. An applicant shall
obtain one or more permits from the Village to collocate a small wireless facility. An application shall be received and processed, and permits issued
shall be subject to the following conditions and requirements:
1. Application Requirements: A wireless provider shall provide the following information to the Village, together with the Village's Small Wireless
Facilities Permit Application, as a condition of any permit application to collocate small wireless facilities on a utility pole or wireless support structure:
a. Site specific structural integrity and, for a Municipal utility pole, make-ready analysis prepared by a structural engineer, as that term is defined in
section 4 of the Structural Engineering Practice Act of 1989;
b. The location where each proposed small wireless facility or utility pole would be installed and photographs of the location and its immediate
surroundings depicting the utility poles or structures on which each proposed small wireless facility would be mounted or location where utility
poles or structures would be installed. This shall include a photo simulated depiction of the completed facility;
c. Specifications and drawings prepared by a structural engineer, as that term is defined in section 4 of the Structural Engineering Practice Act of
1989, for each proposed small wireless facility covered by the application as it is proposed to be installed, to include dimensional details of small
wireless facilities and mounting hardware used to attach equipment to the utility pole or small wireless support structure;
d. The equipment type and model numbers for the antennas and all other wireless equipment associated with the small wireless facility;
e. A proposed schedule for the installation and completion of each small wireless facility covered by the application, if approved;
f. Certification that the collocation complies with the collocation requirements and conditions stated in section 8-1.2-4 of this article, to the best of the
applicant's knowledge;
g. In the event that the proposed small wireless facility is to be attached to an existing pole owned by an entity other than the Village, the wireless
provider shall provide legally competent evidence of the consent of the owner of such pole to the proposed collocation;
h. In the event that the proposed small wireless facility is to be attached to an existing pole owned by the Village, the wireless provider shall be
required to enter into a pole usage agreement pursuant to subsection B2e of this section;
i. Specific designation of any proposed small wireless facility as an "eligible facility request", as that term is defined in the Federal
Telecommunications Act, 42 USC section 1455; and
j. All other documentation and materials identified in section 8-1.1-4, "Permit Required; Applications And Fees", of this chapter.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 251/498
2. Application Process: The Village shall process applications as follows:
a. Application Prioritization: The first completed application shall have priority over applications received by different applicants for collocation on the
same utility pole or wireless support structure.
b. Existing Poles Or Structures: An application to collocate a small wireless facility on an existing utility pole or wireless support structure, or
replacement of an existing utility pole or wireless support structure, shall be processed on a nondiscriminatory basis and shall be deemed
approved if the Village fails to approve or deny the application within ninety (90) days after the submission of a completed application.
However, if an applicant intends to proceed with the permitted activity on a deemed approved basis, the applicant shall notify the Village in writing
of its intention to invoke the deemed approved remedy no sooner than seventy five (75) days after the submission of a completed application.
The permit shall be deemed approved on the latter of the 90th day after submission of the complete application or the 10th day after the receipt of
the deemed approved notice by the Village. The receipt of the deemed approved notice shall not preclude the denial of the permit request within
the time limits as provided under this article.
c. Application To Collocate On New Pole: An application to collocate a small wireless facility that includes the installation of a new utility pole shall be
processed on a nondiscriminatory basis and deemed approved if the Village fails to approve or deny the application within one hundred twenty
(120) days after the submission of a completed application.
However, if an applicant intends to proceed with the permitted activity on a deemed approved basis, the applicant shall notify the Village in writing
of its intention to invoke the deemed approved remedy no sooner than one hundred five (105) days after the submission of a completed
application.
The permit shall be deemed approved on the latter of the 120th day after submission of the complete application or the 10th day after the receipt of
the deemed approved notice by the Village. The receipt of the deemed approved notice shall not preclude the Village's denial of the permit request
within the time limits as provided under this article.
d. Application Denial: The Village shall deny an application which does not meet the requirements of this article, including but not limited to sections
8-1.2-4 and 8-1.2-13 of this article.
If the Village determines that applicable codes, ordinances, or regulations that concern public safety, or the collocation requirements and
conditions stated in section 8-1.2-4 of this article require that the utility pole or wireless support structure be replaced before the requested
collocation, approval shall be conditioned on the replacement of the utility pole or wireless support structure at the cost of the provider.
The Village shall document the basis for a denial, including the specific code provisions or application conditions on which the denial is based, and
send the documentation to the applicant on or before the day the Village denies an application.
The applicant may cure the deficiencies identified by the Village and resubmit the revised application once within thirty (30) days after notice of
denial is sent to the applicant without paying an additional application fee. The Village shall approve or deny the revised application within thirty
(30) days after the applicant resubmits the application or it is deemed approved. Failure to resubmit the revised application within thirty (30) days
of denial shall require the applicant to submit a new application with applicable fees, and recommencement of the Village's review period. The
applicant must notify the Village in writing of its intention to proceed with the permitted activity on a deemed approved basis, which may be
submitted with the revised application.
Any review of a revised application shall be limited to the deficiencies cited in the denial. However, this revised application does not apply if the
cure requires the review of a new location, new or different structure to be collocated upon, new antennas, or other wireless equipment associated
with the small wireless facility.
e. Pole Attachment Agreement: Within thirty (30) days after an approved permit to collocate a small wireless facility on a Municipal utility pole, the
Village and the applicant shall enter into a Master Pole Attachment Agreement provided by the Village for the initial collocation on a Municipal
utility pole by the applicant. For subsequent approved permits to collocate a small wireless facility on a Municipal utility pole, the Village and the
applicant shall enter into a License Supplement of the Master Pole Attachment Agreement.
3. Completeness Of Application: Within thirty (30) days after receiving an application, the Village shall determine whether the application is complete
and notify the applicant. If an application is incomplete, the Village must specifically identify the missing information. An application shall be deemed
complete if the Village fails to provide notification to the applicant within thirty (30) days after all documents, information and fees specifically
enumerated in the Village's permit application form are submitted by the applicant to the Village.
Processing deadlines are tolled from the time the Village sends the notice of incompleteness to the time the applicant provides the missing
information.
4. Tolling: The time period for applications may be further tolled by:
a. An express written agreement by both the applicant and the Village; or
b. A local, State, or Federal disaster declaration, or similar emergency that causes the delay.
5. Consolidated Applications: An applicant seeking to collocate small wireless facilities within the jurisdiction of the Village shall be allowed, at the
applicant's discretion, to file a consolidated application and receive a single permit for the collocation of up to twenty five (25) small wireless facilities
if the collocations each involve substantially the same type of small wireless facility and substantially the same type of structure.
If an application includes multiple small wireless facilities, the Village may remove small wireless facility collocations from the application and treat
separately small wireless facility collocations for which incomplete information has been provided or that do not qualify for consolidated treatment or
that are denied. The Village may issue separate permits for each collocation that is approved in a consolidated application.
6. Duration Of Permits: The duration of a permit shall be for a period of not less than five (5) years, and the permit shall be renewed for equivalent
durations unless the Village makes a finding that the small wireless facilities or the new or modified utility pole do not comply with the applicable
Village codes or any provision, condition or requirement contained in this article.
If the Small Wireless Facilities Deployment Act is repealed as provided in section 90 therein, renewals of permits shall be subject to the applicable
Village Code provisions or regulations in effect at the time of renewal.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 252/498
7. Means Of Submitting Applications: Applicants shall submit applications, supporting information and notices to the Village by personal delivery at the
Village's designated place of business, or by regular mail postmarked on the date due or by any other commonly used means, including electronic
mail. (Ord. 2018-19, 7-19-2018)
8-1.2-4: COLLOCATION REQUIREMENTS AND CONDITIONS:
A. Public Safety Space Reservation: The Village may reserve space on Municipal utility poles for future public safety uses, but a reservation of space may
not preclude the collocation of a small wireless facility unless the Village reasonably determines that the Municipal utility pole cannot accommodate
both uses.
B. Installation And Maintenance: The wireless provider shall install, maintain, repair, and modify its small wireless facilities in safe condition, and good
repair and compliance with the requirements and conditions of this article. The wireless provider shall ensure that its employees, agents or contractors
that perform work in connection with its small wireless facilities are adequately trained and skilled in accordance with all applicable industry and
governmental standards and regulations. The wireless provider shall maintain each small wireless facility or small wireless support structure under their
control to the standards imposed by the Village under this article at the time of the granting of its permit. Such maintenance shall include, but shall not
be limited to, maintenance of the paint, structural integrity, and landscaping. If the small wireless provider fails to maintain the small wireless facility or
small wireless support structure, the Village may undertake the maintenance at the expense of the small wireless provider, or terminate the provider's
permit at the Village's sole option.
C. No Interference With Public Safety Communication Frequencies: The wireless provider's operation of the small wireless facilities shall not interfere with
the frequencies used by a public safety agency for public safety communications.
A wireless provider shall install small wireless facilities of the type and frequency that will not cause unacceptable interference with a public safety
agency's communications equipment.
Unacceptable interference will be determined by and measured in accordance with industry standards and the FCC's regulations addressing
unacceptable interference to public safety spectrum or any other spectrum licensed by a public safety agency.
If a small wireless facility causes such interference, and the wireless provider has been given written notice of the interference by the public safety
agency, the wireless provider, at its own expense, shall remedy the interference in a manner consistent with the abatement and resolution procedures
for interference with public safety spectrum established by the FCC, including 47 CFR 22.970 through 47 CFR 22.973 and 47 CFR 90.672 through 47
CFR 90.675.
The Village may terminate a permit for a small wireless facility based on such interference if the wireless provider is not in compliance with the Code of
Federal Regulations cited in the previous paragraph. Failure to remedy the interference as required herein shall constitute a public nuisance.
D. Prohibited Utility Poles And Exceptions: The wireless provider shall not collocate small wireless facilities on Village owned utility poles that are part of
an electric distribution or transmission system within the communication worker safety zone of the pole or the electric supply zone of the pole.
However, the antenna and support equipment of the small wireless facility may be located in the communications space on the Village owned utility
pole and on the top of the pole, if not otherwise unavailable, if the wireless provider complies with applicable codes for work involving the top of the
pole.
For purposes of this subparagraph, the terms "communications space", "communication worker safety zone", and "electric supply zone" have the
meanings given to those terms in the National Electric Safety Code as published by the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers.
E. Complying With Codes: The wireless provider shall comply with all applicable codes and local code provisions, or regulations that concern public safety.
F. Complying With Stealth, Concealment And Aesthetic Standards: The wireless provider shall comply with generally applicable written stealth,
concealment, and aesthetic standards that are set forth in a section 8-1.2-13 of this article.
G. Alternate Placements: Except as provided in this section, a wireless provider shall not be required to collocate small wireless facilities on any specific
utility pole, or category of utility poles, or be required to collocate multiple antenna systems on a single utility pole. However, with respect to an
application for the collocation of a small wireless facility associated with a new utility pole, the Village may propose that the small wireless facility be
collocated on an existing utility pole or existing wireless support structure within one hundred feet (100') of the proposed collocation, which the
applicant shall accept if it has the right to use the alternate structure on reasonable terms and conditions, and the alternate location and structure does
not impose technical limits or additional material costs as determined by the applicant.
If the applicant refuses a collocation proposed by the Village, the applicant shall provide written certification describing the property rights, technical
limits, or material cost reasons the alternate location does not satisfy the criteria in this paragraph.
H. Height Limitations: The maximum height of a small wireless facility shall be no more than ten feet (10') above the utility pole or wireless support
structure on which the small wireless facility is collocated.
New or replacement utility poles or wireless support structures on which small wireless facilities are collocated may not exceed the higher of:
1. Ten feet (10') in height above the tallest existing utility pole, other than a utility pole supporting only wireless facilities, that is in place on the date the
application is submitted to the Village, that is located within three hundred feet (300') of the new or replacement utility pole or wireless support
structure and that is in the same right-of-way within the jurisdictional boundary of the Village, provided the Village may designate which intersecting
right-of-way within three hundred feet (300') of the proposed utility pole or wireless support structures shall control the height limitation for such
facility; or
2. Forty five feet (45') above ground level.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 253/498
I. Height Exceptions: If an applicant proposes a height for a new or replacement pole in excess of the above height limitations on which the small wireless
facility is proposed for collocation, the applicant shall apply for a variation in conformance with procedures, terms and conditions set forth in section 11-
13-5, "Variations", of this Code.
J. Contractual Design Requirements: The wireless provider shall comply with requirements that are imposed by a contract between the Village and a
private property owner that concern design or construction standards applicable to utility poles and ground-mounted equipment located in the right-ofway.
K. Ground-Mounted Equipment Spacing: The wireless provider shall comply with section 8-1.1-15, "Location Of Facilities", of this chapter concerning the
location of ground-mounted equipment located in the right-of-way. If an applicant proposes a facility to be located in the public right-of-way which would
not comply with the requirements of said section 8-1.1-15 of this chapter, the applicant shall apply for a variation in conformance with procedures,
terms, and conditions set forth in section 11-13-5, "Variations", of this Code.
L. Undergrounding Regulations: The wireless provider shall comply with section 8-1.1-15, "Location Of Facilities", of this chapter concerning the location of
facilities in the right-of-way and prohibiting certain above-ground facilities. If an applicant proposes an above-ground facility to be located in the public
right-of-way which would not comply with the requirements of said section 8-1.1-15 of this chapter, the applicant shall apply for a variation in
conformance with procedures, terms, and conditions set forth in section 11-13-5, "Variations", of this Code.
M. Collocation Completion Deadline: Collocation for which a permit is granted shall be completed within one hundred eighty (180) days after issuance of
the permit, unless the Village and the wireless provider agree to extend this period or a delay is caused by make-ready work for a Municipal utility pole
or by the lack of commercial power or backhaul availability at the site, provided the wireless provider has made a timely request within sixty (60) days
after the issuance of the permit for commercial power or backhaul services, and the additional time to complete installation does not exceed three
hundred sixty (360) days after issuance of the permit. Otherwise, the permit shall be void unless the Village grants an extension in writing to the
applicant.
N. Cooperation With Other Small Wireless Service Providers: As a condition of any permit for installation of a new pole, small wireless support structure, or
other above-ground facility granted pursuant to this article, permittees shall be required to cooperate with other small wireless providers in collocating
additional small wireless facilities on poles and small wireless support structures owned by the permittee, provided that such proposed additional small
wireless provider has been issued permits for that location by the Village as described herein. All permittees shall exercise good faith in collocating
other small wireless providers regarding sharing of the permitted site, provided that such shared use does not give rise to a substantial technical level
of impairment of the ability to provide the permitted use (i.e., significant interference in broadcast or reception capabilities as opposed to a competitive
conflict or financial burden). Such good faith shall include sharing technical information to evaluate the feasibility of sharing utility poles or small
wireless infrastructure. In the event that a dispute arises as to whether a permittee has exercised good faith in accommodating other users, the Village
may require a third-party technical study at the expense of the applicant, the permittee, or both. (Ord. 2018-19, 7-19-2018)
8-1.2-5: APPLICATION FEES:
Application fees are imposed as follows:
A. Applicant shall pay an application fee of six hundred fifty dollars ($650.00) for an application to collocate a single small wireless facility on an existing
utility pole or wireless support structure, and three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00) for each small wireless facility addressed in a consolidated application
to collocate more than one small wireless facility on existing utility poles or wireless support structures.
B. Applicant shall pay an application fee of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each small wireless facility addressed in an application that includes the
installation of a new utility pole for such collocation.
C. Notwithstanding any contrary provision of State law or local ordinance, applications pursuant to this article shall be accompanied by the required
application fee. Application fees shall be non-refundable.
D. The Village shall not require an application, approval or permit, or require any fees or other charges from a communications service provider authorized
to occupy the rights-of-way, for:
1. Routine maintenance;
2. The replacement of wireless facilities with wireless facilities that are substantially similar, the same size, or smaller if the wireless provider notifies the
Village at least ten (10) days prior to the planned replacement and includes equipment specifications for the replacement of equipment consistent
with subsection 8-1.2-3B1d of this article; or
3. The installation, placement, maintenance, operation or replacement of micro wireless facilities suspended on cables that are strung between existing
utility poles in compliance with applicable Safety Codes.
E. Wireless providers shall secure a permit from the Village to work within rights-of-way for activities that affect traffic patterns or require lane closures.
(Ord. 2018-19, 7-19-2018)
8-1.2-6: EXCEPTIONS TO APPLICABILITY:
Nothing in this article authorizes a person to collocate small wireless facilities on:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 254/498
A. Property owned by a private party, property owned or controlled by the Village or another unit of local government that is not located within rights-ofway,
or a privately owned utility pole or wireless support structure without the consent of the property owner;
B. Property owned, leased, or controlled by a park district, forest preserve district, or conservation district for public park, recreation or conservation
purposes without the consent of the affected district, excluding the placement of facilities on rights-of-way located in an affected district that are under
the jurisdiction and control of a different unit of local government, as provided by the Illinois Highway Code; or
C. Property owned by a rail carrier registered under section 18c-7201 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, Metra Commuter Rail or any other public commuter rail
service, or an electric utility as defined in section 16-102 of the Public Utilities Act, without the consent of the rail carrier, public commuter rail service, or
electric utility. The provisions of this article do not apply to an electric or gas public utility or such utility's wireless facilities if the facilities are being used,
developed and maintained consistent with the provisions of subsection (i) of section 16-108.5 of the Public Utilities Act.
For the purposes of this subsection, "public utility" has the meaning given to that term in section 3-105 of the Public Utilities Act. Nothing in this article
shall be construed to relieve any person from any requirement: 1) to obtain a franchise or a State-issued authorization to offer cable service or video
service or 2) to obtain any required permission to install, place, maintain, or operate communications facilities other than small wireless facilities subject
to this article. (Ord. 2018-19, 7-19-2018)
8-1.2-7: PRE-EXISTING AGREEMENTS:
Existing agreements between the Village and wireless providers that relate to the collocation of small wireless facilities in the right-of-way, including the
collocation of small wireless facilities on Village utility poles, that are in effect on June 1, 2018, remain in effect for all small wireless facilities collocated on
the Village's utility poles pursuant to applications submitted to the Village before June 1, 2018, subject to applicable termination provisions contained
therein. Agreements entered into after June 1, 2018, shall comply with this article. (Ord. 2018-19, 7-19-2018)
8-1.2-8: ANNUAL RECURRING RATE:
A wireless provider shall pay to the Village an annual recurring rate to collocate a small wireless facility on a Village utility pole located in a public right-ofway
that equals: a) two hundred dollars ($200.00) per year or b) the actual, direct, and reasonable costs related to the wireless provider's use of space on
the Village utility pole. If the Village has not billed the wireless provider actual and direct costs, the fee shall be two hundred dollars ($200.00) payable on
the first day after the first annual anniversary of the issuance of the permit or notice of intent to collocate, and on each annual anniversary date thereafter.
(Ord. 2018-19, 7-19-2018)
8-1.2-9: OBSOLESCENCE, ABANDONMENT, AND REMOVAL:
Any small wireless facility that is no longer needed or is not operational shall be reported immediately by the small wireless provider to the Village
Manager. Any obsolete or nonoperational small wireless facilities shall be removed within ninety (90) days following notice to the Village. A small wireless
facility that is not operated or removed for a continuous period of twelve (12) months shall be considered abandoned. The owner of the facility shall
remove the small wireless facility within ninety (90) days after receipt of written notice from the Village notifying the wireless provider of the abandonment.
The notice shall be sent by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, by the Village to the owner at the last known address of the wireless
provider. If the small wireless facility is not removed within ninety (90) days of such notice, the Village may remove or cause the removal of such facility
pursuant to the terms of its pole attachment agreement for Municipal utility poles, or through whatever actions are provided for abatement of nuisances or
by other law for removal and cost recovery. A wireless provider shall provide written notice to the Village if it sells or transfers small wireless facilities within
the jurisdiction of the Village. Such notice shall include the name and contact information of the new wireless provider. (Ord. 2018-19, 7-19-2018)
8-1.2-10: DISPUTE RESOLUTION:
The Circuit Court of Cook County, Illinois shall have exclusive jurisdiction to resolve all disputes arising under the Small Wireless Facilities Deployment
Act. Pending resolution of a dispute concerning rates for collocation of small wireless facilities on Municipal utility poles within the right-of-way, the Village
shall allow the collocating person to collocate on its poles at annual rates of no more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) per year per Municipal utility pole,
with rates to be determined upon final resolution of the dispute. (Ord. 2018-19, 7-19-2018)
8-1.2-11: INDEMNIFICATION:
A wireless provider shall indemnify and hold the Village harmless against any and all liability or loss from personal injury or property damage resulting from
or arising out of, in whole or in part, the use or occupancy of the Village improvements or right-of-way associated with such improvements by the wireless
provider or its employees, agents, or contractors arising out of the rights and privileges granted under this article and the Small Wireless Facilities
Deployment Act. A wireless provider has no obligation to indemnify or hold harmless against any liabilities and losses as may be due to or caused by the
sole negligence of the Village or its employees or agents. A wireless provider shall further waive any claims that they may have against the Village with
respect to consequential, incidental, or special damages, however caused, based on the theory of liability. (Ord. 2018-19, 7-19-2018)
8-1.2-12: INSURANCE:
The wireless provider shall carry, at the wireless provider's own cost and expense, the following insurance:
A. Property insurance for its property's replacement cost against all risks;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 255/498
B. Workers' compensation insurance, as required by law; and
C. Commercial general liability insurance with respect to its activities on the Village improvements or rights-of-way to afford minimum protection limits as
set forth in subsection 8-1.1-8A of this chapter.
The wireless provider shall include the Village as an additional insured on the commercial general liability policy and provide certification and
documentation of inclusion of the Village in a commercial general liability policy prior to the collocation of any wireless facility. (Ord. 2018-19, 7-19-
2018)
8-1.2-13: STEALTH, CONCEALMENT AND AESTHETIC STANDARDS:
A. Purpose: The purposes of this section are to:
1. Provide a variety of locations and options for wireless providers while minimizing the negative visual impacts associated with small wireless facilities;
2. Encourage creative approaches, including but not limited to painting, in locating and designing small wireless facilities that match or blend in with the
surroundings of such facilities;
3. Provide standards that comply with the Telecommunications Act of 1996 ("the Telecommunications Act") and the Small Wireless Facilities
Deployment Act2; the provisions of this section are not intended, and shall not be interpreted, to prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting personal
wireless services as defined in the Telecommunications Act; and
4. Administer the provisions of this article in such a manner as not to unreasonably discriminate between providers of functionally equivalent personal
wireless services, as defined in the Telecommunications Act.
B. Site Location And Development: Site location and development of small wireless facilities shall preserve the existing character of the surrounding
buildings and landscape to the extent consistent with the function of the proposed small wireless facilities. All small wireless support infrastructure and
poles shall be integrated through location and design to blend in with the existing characteristics of the site to the extent practical. Existing on-site
vegetation shall be preserved or improved, and disturbance to the existing topography shall be minimized unless such disturbance would result in less
adverse visual impact to the surrounding area. The following provisions establish design and concealment standards for small wireless facilities.
1. Building Attachment: Small wireless facilities may be mounted to a building if the antennas do not interrupt the building's architectural theme. To the
extent possible all small wireless facilities shall be concealed within a structure that is architecturally compatible with the existing rooftop. Rooftop
additions shall be concealed on all sides.
a. Small wireless facilities attached to the side or roof of buildings shall employ a symmetrical, balanced design for all facade mounted antennas.
Subsequent deployments will be required to ensure consistent design, architectural treatment, and symmetry when placing antennas on the
structure's exterior with any existing small wireless facilities on the same side of the structure.
b. The interruption of architectural lines or horizontal or vertical reveals is prohibited unless demonstrated to be unavoidable.
c. New architectural features such as columns, pilasters, corbels, or other ornamentation that conceal antennas may be used if it complements the
architecture of the existing building.
d. Small wireless facilities shall utilize the smallest mounting brackets necessary in order to provide the smallest offset from the building.
e. Skirts or shrouds shall be utilized on the sides and bottoms of antennas in order to conceal mounting hardware, create a cleaner appearance, and
minimize the visual impact of the antennas. Exposed conduit, cabling, and wiring are prohibited.
f. Small wireless facilities shall be painted and textured to match the adjacent building surfaces.
g. All installations of small wireless facilities shall have permission from the pole/structure owner to install facilities on such structure.
2. Signs:
a. Small wireless facilities replicating a sign shall be subject to the requirements of title 11, chapter 10, "Signs", of this Code. A sign permit is required
unless the small wireless facilities are placed entirely within an existing sign.
b. All antennas shall be completely screened by the facade of the sign.
c. All cables and conduit to and from the sign shall be routed from within the building wall or structure upon which the sign is mounted. Cable
coverings may be allowed on the exterior of the building wall in limited circumstances in situations where they are minimally visible and concealed
to match the adjacent building surfaces.
3. Existing Or Replacement Utility Poles: An existing utility pole may be replaced or altered to accommodate small wireless facilities and related
equipment subject to the following requirements:
a. Conforming Design: Replacement utility poles shall conform to any design standard for the surrounding zoning district, subdivision, or planned
development, including, but not limited to, historic districts as defined herein and planned unit developments as described in title 11, chapter 8,
"Planned Unit Developments", of this Code. The replacement pole shall look substantially the same as existing poles in the surrounding zoning
district, subdivision, or planned unit development.
b. Design Standards: When no design standard is identified for a particular zoning district, subdivision, or planned unit development, replacement
poles shall match the height, width, color, and material of the original or adjacent poles. The maximum height of any new or replacement pole shall
not exceed limits specified in subsection 8-1.2-4H of this article, subject to any variation requested pursuant to subsection 8-1.2-4I of this article.
The Village may, likewise, approve minor variations of up to fifty percent (50%) of the pole width or thirty inches (30"), whichever is greater, when
housing equipment within the pole base.
c. Location: Replacement poles shall be located as close as possible to the existing pole to be replaced, and the replaced pole shall be removed.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 256/498
d. Cables And Equipment Placed Internally: Wherever compatible with the pole design and technologically feasible, all equipment and cabling shall
be internal to the replacement street lighting or traffic signal standard or otherwise camouflaged to appear to be an integrated part of a utility pole.
If equipment or cabling is not proposed to be placed internal to the replacement pole, a concealment element plan shall be submitted in
accordance with the provisions of subsection C of this section.
e. No Illumination: Small wireless facilities shall not be illuminated.
f. Generators And Backup Battery: Generators are not permitted for small wireless facilities. All proposed battery backups must be requested through
the submittal of a concealment element plan in accordance with the provisions of subsection C of this section.
g. Cabinet Location And Dimensions: The equipment cabinet for small wireless facilities shall be the smallest amount of cabinet enclosure necessary
to enclose the equipment. Disconnect switches may be located outside of the primary equipment cabinet.
h. Flush-Mounting And Pole-Top Antennas: In situations when interior concealment is demonstrated to not be possible, the small wireless facility
shall, to the full extent permitted under the State Electrical Code and the utilities' requirements, be flush-mounted on the subject pole, which means
mounting directly to the pole with little to no gap other than that which may be required for the screws/bolts, or located at the top of the pole.
Canisters attached to the top of a pole shall not exceed the diameter of the pole unless technically required and then shall not be more than fifty
percent (50%) greater than the diameter of the pole.
i. Antenna Design: Where an enclosure is proposed to house an antenna, the antenna shall be located in an enclosure of no more than six (6) cubic
feet in volume, or in case of an antenna that has exposed elements, the antenna and all of its exposed elements could fit within an enclosure of no
more than six (6) cubic feet. No more than four (4) antennas are permitted on a single pole and with a total volume not to exceed twenty four (24)
cubic feet.
j. Material And Color: If interior concealment described in subsection B3d of this section is not possible, the small wireless facility shall to the
maximum extent feasible match the color of the pole and shall be non-reflective.
4. New Poles: In areas of the Village in which above-ground facilities are allowed in the public right-of-way pursuant to section 8-1.1-15, "Location Of
Facilities", of this chapter, the installation of a new pole for the purpose of locating small wireless facilities is permitted only when the applicant
establishes that:
a. The small wireless facility cannot be located on a site outside of the public right-of-way such as a public park, public property, or in or on a building
whether by roof or panel-mount or separate structure; and
b. The small wireless facility cannot be located on an existing pole within the public right-of-way.
The applicant shall establish the foregoing requirements by submission of competent documentary evidence that:
a. No existing towers or structures are located within the geographic area required to meet the applicant's engineering plans;
b. Existing utility poles, towers, base stations, or small wireless support structures are not of sufficient height to meet the applicant's engineering
requirements;
c. Existing utility poles, towers, base stations, or small wireless support structures do not have sufficient structural strength to support the applicant's
proposed small wireless facility;
d. The applicant's proposed small wireless facility would cause electromagnetic interference with the existing utility poles, towers, base stations, or
small wireless facilities, or the existing utility poles, towers, base stations, or small wireless facilities would cause interference with the applicant's
proposed small wireless facility;
e. The fees, costs and contractual provisions required by the owners of the existing utility poles, towers, base stations, or small wireless support
structures to share existing space, or to adapt existing structures for sharing space are unreasonable. Costs exceeding new tower development
are presumed to be unreasonable;
f. There are other limiting factors which render existing utility poles, towers, base stations, or small wireless support structures unsuitable; and
g. Reasonable efforts to develop an alternative location on an existing utility pole, tower, or small wireless support structure have been made.
Any proposed new utility pole or small wireless support structure proposed by an applicant shall comply with a preferred concealment technique as
described in subsection B3 of this section, or an approved concealment element plan as provided in subsection C of this section.
5. Ground-Mounted Equipment Standards; ADA Compliance Required: To allow full use of the public right-of-way by pedestrians, bicycles and other
users, all ground-mounted equipment other than poles or wireless support structures shall be housed underground in a vault meeting the Village's
construction standards. The location of wireless support structures, replacement poles, and/or any new poles shall comply with the Americans With
Disabilities Act (ADA), Village construction standards, and State and Federal regulations in order to provide a clear and safe passage within the
public right-of-way.
6. Maximum Noise Levels: No small wireless facilities or related equipment shall be operated to produce noise levels above forty (40) decibels as
measured from the nearest property line to which the small wireless facility is located.
7. Advertising Prohibited: No lettering, symbols, images, or trademarks large enough to be legible to pedestrian or vehicular users of the right-of-way or
other persons occupying the space in the immediate area of the small wireless facility, utility pole, or small wireless support structure shall be placed
on or affixed to any utility pole, small wireless support structure, or small wireless facility other than as required by Federal Communications
Commission regulations or other applicable law. Small wireless facilities concealed within signs or billboards shall not be construed to be in violation
of this prohibition.
C. Concealment Element Plan:
1. Concealment Element Plan Required: Applications for proposed small wireless facility installations which do not conform to a preferred concealment
technique as identified in subsection B3 of this section shall submit a concealment element plan. The plan shall include the design of the screening,
fencing, or other concealment technology for a base station, pole, or equipment structure, and all related transmission equipment or facilities
associated with the proposed small wireless facility.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 257/498
2. Purpose Of Concealment Element Plan, Generally: Concealment element plans should seek to minimize the visual obtrusiveness of proposed small
wireless facilities using methods including, but not limited to, integrating the installation with architectural features or building design components,
utilization of coverings or concealment devices of similar material, color and texture, or the appearance thereof, as the surface or background against
which the small wireless facility will be seen or on which it will be installed. Other concealment element approaches may include, but not be limited
to, use of street furniture concealment products such as trash cans, benches, information kiosks, or other types of enclosures reasonably compatible
to conceal ground level equipment. Additionally, the use of a concealment support or device, such as a clock tower, steeple, flagpole, tree,
wayfinding sign, decorative pole with banner, art work, street sign, or other applicable concealment structure may be approved.
3. Review Of Concealment Element Plan: Where a small wireless facility is proposed that does not comply with a preferred concealment technique as
specified in subsection B3 of this section, a concealment element plan shall be subject to Village review and approval in conformance with the
procedures, terms and conditions set forth in section 11-13-5, "Variations", of this Code. (Ord. 2018-19, 7-19-2018)
Chapter 2
STATE PROJECTS
8-2-1: STATE PROJECT T5003-78:
A. Parking is hereby prohibited on both sides of Bartlett Road from Route 19, six hundred fifty feet (650') north and from Route 19, seven hundred sixty
feet (760') to the south. Parking is also prohibited on both sides of Route 19 from Bartlett Road, six hundred thirty feet (630') east and from Bartlett
Road, six hundred fifty feet (650') to the west.
B. The discharge of sanitary waste and industrial wastewaters is hereby prohibited into any storm sewers constructed as part of state project T5003-78.
C. All encroachments within the limits of state project T5003-78 are hereby declared to be illegal and ordered to be moved within a period of ninety (90)
days. Any new encroachments within said state project are hereby prohibited.
D. No permit or authorization will be given by the Village for the operation, practice or encroachment which will change, impede or interrupt the ordinary
flow of vehicular traffic on the completed state project T5003-78 and no permit for driveways within the limits of said project shall be granted without the
consent of the county or state.
E. The village shall exercise its franchise rights to cause any private utilities to be relocated at no expense to the county or state. (1994 Code)
8-2-2: STATE HIGHWAY RESTRICTIONS:
A. That parking shall not be permitted along state highways, the discharge of sanitary sewage into storm sewers shall not be permitted and
encroachments along state highways shall not be permitted within the corporate limits of the village of Streamwood.
B. That the president and board of trustees of the village of Streamwood will prohibit future parking at such locations on or immediately adjacent to state
highways, prohibit the discharge of sanitary sewage into storm sewers and prohibit encroachments along state highways as may be determined and
directed by the state of Illinois to be necessary to ensure the free flow of traffic and safety to the motoring public. (Ord. 2003-9, 3-6-2003)
Chapter 3
WATERWORKS AND SEWERAGE SYSTEM REGULATIONS
8-3-1: WATER AND SEWER CONNECTIONS:
8-3-1-1: PERMIT REQUIRED:
A. No person shall make any connection to the waterworks or sewerage system of the village without first having obtained a permit from the village upon
written application to the village clerk. Such application shall be accompanied by the payment of all fees and charges as hereinafter provided. Each
application shall state the name of the applicant, the nature of the permit desired, the location of the proposed connection, the use of the property to
which the proposed connection is to be made and the fee to be paid, together with such additional information as may be needed to assist village
officials in the issuance of the permit. Each such permit shall be in writing and executed by the appropriate village officer.
B. No connection shall be made with the combined waterworks and sewerage system without the signed permit of the public works director. Any
connection or opening made with the waterworks and sewerage system without such signed permit or in any manner different from the mode described
for such opening or connection shall subject the maker to a penalty as hereinafter provided. (1994 Code)
8-3-1-2: LOCATION AND COST:
All connections to the waterworks or sewerage system of the village shall be made by a licensed plumber. Each applicant shall provide and pay for the
cost of construction, both labor and materials of the water or sewer service, from the main to the premises to be served and thereafter the owner of the
premises shall be responsible for the maintenance of said service. Any licensed plumber performing work under this chapter shall have on file with the
village building department a properly executed bond. (1994 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 258/498
8-3-1-3: INSPECTIONS:
No connection to the village waterworks or sewerage system shall be covered until the work has been inspected and approved by the appropriate officer
or employee of the village.
For connection charges as established by this chapter, the village will inspect the water service or sewer service to determine that the construction thereof
is in accordance with the specifications established by the village for the regulation of the waterworks or sewerage system, and specifically with respect to
the sewerage system, to provide for the expense of necessary construction of improvements to said system in order to meet all requirements to permit
new users to utilize the sewerage system of the village, all in accordance with the rules and regulations of the environmental protection agency of the state
of Illinois and all other regulatory agencies. (1994 Code)
8-3-1-4: WATER CONNECTION CHARGES:
All charges for making connection to the waterworks system of the village shall be payable at the time of any application and shall be in the following
amounts: (1994 Code)
A. Residential: Single-family residential and all multi-family residences (including, but not by way of limitation, all apartments, condominiums, duplexes or
townhouses):
Bedrooms Per Unit Fee
Up to and including 2 bedrooms $835.00
For each additional bedroom 150.00
B. Nonresidential: All commercial, institutional and industrial uses:
Tap Fee
Up to and including 11/2 inches $ 1,375.00
2 inches 2,425.00
3 inches 3,325.00
4 inches 5,125.00
6 inches 9,625.00
8 inches and larger 15,625.00
(Ord. 2006-1, 1-5-2006)
C. Reading Device; Water Meter Fees: For water meter reading devices (in addition to subsections A and B of this section), the applicant shall pay the
cost of the required water meter reading device as follows:
Fee
Reading device per unit $150.00
For water meters, the applicant shall pay in addition to the reading device fee the following water meter fee:
Meter Size Fee
3/4 inch $250.00
1 inch 300.00
11/2 inch 500.00
2 inch 650.00
Meter sizes in excess of two inches (2") will be determined on an actual cost plus handling fees basis. (Ord. 2011-25, 11-3-2011)
D. Special Fee For New Residential: In addition to the routine connection fee provided in subsection A of this section, a special water system connection
fee has been established for each new residential dwelling unit for all those premises connecting to the village of Streamwood water system in the
amount of one thousand two hundred thirty five dollars ($1,235.00). (Ord. 2006-1, 1-5-2006)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 259/498
8-3-1-5: SEWER CONNECTION CHARGES:
All charges for making connection to the sewer system of the village shall be payable at the time of any application and shall be in the following amounts:
(1994 Code)
Single-family residential $1,125.00
Multi-family residences:
For each 250 gallons of flow
per day
1,125.00
Each additional 250 gallons of
daily flow
1,125.00
Commercial, industrial or
institutional:
Up to 1,750 gallons of flow
each day
1,275.00
Each additional 250 gallons of
daily flow
1,275.00
All uses outside village limits To be determined by the village board and not to exceed the proportionate cost to the village of transporting
and treating the flows generated
(1994 Code; amd. Ord. 2006-1, 1-5-2006)
For the purposes of this section, it shall be presumed that two and one-half (21/2) persons generate flows of two hundred fifty (250) gallons per day;
provided, however, that for computing flows of commercial, institutional and industrial uses, each employee not living on the premises shall be presumed
to generate fifty (50) gallons per day of flows; except that, if such use operates on two (2) or more shifts, each employee shall be presumed to generate
thirty four (34) gallons per day of flows. (1994 Code)
8-3-1-6: MANDATORY CONNECTION:
It shall be the duty of the owner, occupant or party or parties in possession of any house, structure, factory, industrial or commercial establishment or any
other building of any other character located on property, to cause such house, structure, factory, industrial or commercial establishment or any other
building of any other character to be connected with the waterworks and sewerage system of the village within six (6) months from the effective date
hereof or within six (6) months from the date that water or sewer facilities become available to the property, whichever occurs last. Water and sewer shall
be deemed to be available when a building with an installed plumbing system and intended for human habitation or occupancy on premises adjacent or
abutting on the village water and sewer system shall have a connection to the village water and sewer system; provided, that such services are within two
hundred feet (200') of the building. (1994 Code)
8-3-1-7: VILLAGE SPECIFICATIONS:
The president and board of trustees are hereby authorized to make such rules and regulations consistent with this chapter for the connections to the
waterworks and sewerage system, specifying the types and sizes of pipes and all other appurtenances and extensions thereto and amend the same from
time to time as may be deemed necessary. All service pipes and connections to the combined waterworks and sewerage system shall comply with said
specifications and rules. Any person not complying with the specifications and rules for the connection to the waterworks and sewerage system shall be
subject to a penalty as hereinafter provided. (1994 Code)
8-3-2: WATER METERS:
A. Meter Required: All premises using water from the village waterworks must be equipped with a water meter supplied by the village. (1994 Code)
B. Reading Device: All connections to the village waterworks system must be metered with a meter and reading device furnished by the village, however,
the use and installation of reading devices will be at the discretion of the village. The cost of each such meter and reading device shall be paid by the
applicant as part of the permit fee. Such meter and reading device shall, however, be the property of the village. The cost and repair or replacement of
a meter or reading device shall be borne by the village except in the event that the repair or replacement was necessitated by the negligence or
intentional destruction or damage to the device by the user. (Ord. 2011-25, 11-3-2011)
C. Inspection Of Meters: If at any time a user contends that the meter is not registering correctly, he may request the village to test the meter and shall
deposit a fee of forty five dollars ($45.00). If the test shows the meter to be accurate in accordance with the latest specifications for testing, as adopted
by the American Waterworks Association, the village shall reinstall the meter and retain the forty five dollars ($45.00) deposited as costs. If the test
shows inaccuracy in accordance with said specifications, then the meter shall be repaired and reinstalled or replaced by another meter, and the forty
five dollar ($45.00) deposit shall be credited to the account of the applicant. The finance director, or some person designated by him, shall have primary
authority to adjust disputed bills for water and sewer service.
D. Frozen Meter; User Responsibility: If at any time a water meter freezes due to severe weather, the user shall be responsible for payment for the new
water meter and the installation thereof. (1994 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 260/498
8-3-3: DEPOSIT REQUIRED:
Upon application for service, a deposit with the Village is required to secure payment of bills, as follows:
A. Owner occupied, single-family and owner occupied, individually metered multi-family units are not required to make a deposit.
B. Master metered structures (includes multi-family where 1 meter services all units in a structure, industrial and commercial users):
Size Of Service
To The Structure Deposit
3/4 inch $ 50.00
1 inch 100.00
2 inches 200.00
3 inches 300.00
4 inches 400.00
5 inches 500.00
6 inches and over 600.00
C. In the event a former resident moves back into the Village, any outstanding water and sewer bills said resident has previously incurred that remain
outstanding must be paid in full before new service may begin. (Ord. 2017-13, 6-1-2017)
8-3-4: WATER AND SEWER RATES AND CHARGES:
8-3-4-1: RATES AND CHARGES ESTABLISHED:
A. Combined Water And Sewer Service: Combined water rates and sewer service for users within the corporate limits of the Village with a minimum
charge of two thousand (2,000) gallons:
EFFECTIVE JANUARY 1, 2017
Combined Water And
Sewer Per 1,000 Gallons
Residential:
Each 1,000 gallons $11.64
Commercial:
Each 1,000 gallons 10.24
Industrial:
Each 1,000 gallons 6.69
Other government entities:
Each 1,000 gallons 6.83
EFFECTIVE JANUARY 1, 2018
Combined Water And
Sewer Per 1,000 Gallons
Residential:
Each 1,000 gallons $12.10
Commercial:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 261/498
Each 1,000 gallons 10.65
Industrial:
Each 1,000 gallons 6.95
Other government entities:
Each 1,000 gallons 7.11
EFFECTIVE JANUARY 1, 2019
Combined Water And
Sewer Per 1,000 Gallons
Residential:
Each 1,000 gallons $12.59
Commercial:
Each 1,000 gallons 11.08
Industrial:
Each 1,000 gallons 7.23
Other government entities:
Each 1,000 gallons 7.39
(Ord. 2016-26, 12-15-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)
B. Additional Charges: In addition to the rates for water use charges set forth in subsection A of this section, there shall be an additional charge for water
usage per one thousand (1,000) gallons of water used as follows:
Effective dates of additional increases:
January 1, 2016 $1.80 per 1,000 gallons of water used
January 1, 2017 $1.80 per 1,000 gallons of water used
January 1, 2018 $1.80 per 1,000 gallons of water used
January 1, 2019 $1.80 per 1,000 gallons of water used
The foregoing additional water use surcharges are established as a result of the increased water rates imposed on the northwest suburban joint
action water agency by the city of Chicago and the surcharges imposed by this subsection B are subject to further increases in the event of
additional water rate increases imposed on the northwest suburban joint action water agency by the city of Chicago. (Ord. 2015-36, 12-3-2015, eff. 1-
1-2016)
C. Water Service Only: For any category of user listed in subsection A of this section (residential, commercial, industrial, other governmental entities) of
water service only within the corporate limits of the village, there shall be a charge or rate computed equal to the rate shown under "water" in each
category.
D. Sewer Service Only: For any category of user listed in subsection A of this section (residential, commercial, industrial, other governmental entities) of
sewer service only within the corporate limits of the village, there shall be a charge or rate computed equal to the rate shown under "sewer" in each
category.
E. Commercial And Industrial Users:
1. Any industrial user whose monthly water usage averages three million (3,000,000) gallons or more per month may apply to the public works director
to have its sewage discharge be metered and billed pursuant to the industrial sewer rate. In no event shall the monthly metered sewer charge be
less than eighty percent (80%) of the charges had the sewer services been billed based upon the water usage calculations for industrial users
averaging less than three million (3,000,000) gallons of water per month. The installation and maintenance of any sewer meter shall be at the
expense of the applicant and under the direction of the public works director.
2. Any commercial or industrial sewer user who is tributary to a village sewer line that connects to a municipal sewer system other than the village of
Streamwood shall pay sewer charges of no less than the rate the village is charged by the municipality whose system receives such sewage.
F. Automatic Sprinklers And Standpipe Connections:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 262/498
1. Automatic sprinklers and standpipe connections shall be charged a connection fee payable at the time of any application and shall be in the following
amounts:
4 inch connection to main $ 400.00
6 inch connection to main 600.00
8 inch connection to main 800.00
10 inch connection to main 1,000.00
12 inch connection to main 1,200.00
2. The minimum sprinkler connections allowed in the village shall be four inches (4").
G. Multiple Users:
1. In the event there may be more than one user served by a connection to any of the services supplied by the village as above referred to, such users
will pay the full fixed monthly rates for the particular services so availed of for each additional user; provided, however, that such charges shall not
apply to public or private schools or to municipal entities.
2. A "multiple user" is defined as any additional number of family or commercial units located on the same premises or being served through a single
water meter such as cottages, apartment buildings, more than one commercial unit in the same building or commercial and residential units located
in the same building. In all such cases, there shall be an additional fixed sewer service charge if sewer service is supplied, for each additional unit
connected to the system. Water and sewer usage shall be billed at the commercial rate without further consideration to the number of units
connected. (Ord. 2012-8, 2-16-2012)
H. Outside Corporate Limits:
1. The rates and charges to the residential class of users of the waterworks and sewerage system of the village whose premises are located outside of
the corporate limits of the village and that have entered into an approved preannexation agreement with the village shall be the same rates and
charges as those of residential users whose property is located within the corporate limits of the village.
2. Other than as provided in subsection H1 of this section, the rates and charges to the classes of users of the waterworks and sewage system of the
village whose premises are located outside of the corporate limits of the village shall be two hundred percent (200%) of the rates and charges to the
equivalent classes of users whose premises are located within the corporate limits of the village.
3. The rates and charges to the classes of users of the sewage system of the village whose premises are located outside of the corporate limits of the
village shall be forty five cents ($0.45) per one thousand (1,000) gallons with a fixed monthly charge of twenty four dollars ($24.00) allocated as
follows:
Operation, maintenance and repair $10.00
Local capital cost 14.00
(Ord. 2013-15, 6-6-2013)
I. Water Use For Construction: A permit fee of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) is required for any fire hydrant connection for construction use. In
addition, a deposit as follows is also required:
3/4 inch or 1 inch
meter
$300.00 plus an estimated amount based on $6.90 per 1,000 gallons of water used, as approved by the director of public
works.
2 inch or larger meter $1,000.00 plus an estimated amount based on $6.90 per 1,000 gallons of water used, as approved by the director of
public works.
(Ord. 2012-8, 2-16-2012)
8-3-4-2: REVIEW OF RATES AND CHARGES:
(Rep. by Ord. 2015-31, 11-19-2015, eff. 1-1-2016)
8-3-4-3: EFFECTIVE DATE OF RATES AND CHARGES:
The rates and charges provided for in this chapter shall take effect on the first day indicated in subsection 8-3-4-1A of this chapter. Billings subsequent to
that date will be prorated based upon calendar day to reflect the rate charge. (1994 Code)
8-3-5: BILLING PROCEDURES; DELINQUENCIES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 263/498
8-3-5-1: TIME OF BILLING; PAYMENT:
A. Liability For Payments: For the purposes of billing users of the combined waterworks and sewerage system of the village, the fiscal year of the village
shall be divided into twelve (12) monthly billing periods. The users of the system shall be billed for their monthly usage of the combined waterworks and
sewer for the monthly billing period. Bills for monthly usage of the combined waterworks and sewerage system shall be rendered on the first business
day of the month immediately following the expiration of the monthly period for which service was supplied. Payment for system usage and service
shall be due and must be received by the village no later than twenty (20) days after rendition of the bill and in the event of failure to pay such bill within
said period, an additional charge of ten percent (10%) shall be added to the bill. The owner of the premises, the occupant thereof, and the user of the
services shall be jointly and severally liable to pay for the service on such premises.
B. Change Of Residence By User: In the event that a residential user of the combined water and sewer service shall change his residence within the
village limits, the existing account for said user will be closed, a final bill issued, and a new account established in the name of the user at the new
residence. Water service at the new residence may be discontinued, as herein provided, in the event the final bill for the prior residence is not paid
within forty (40) days from the date of rendition of the bill.
C. Check Service Charge: See section 1-12-1 of this code. (Ord. 2011-25, 11-3-2011)
8-3-5-2: DELINQUENT BILLS, LIEN, WATER SHUTOFF:
A. In the event the charges for service, including any and all late payment penalties, remain unpaid after forty (40) days after rendition of the bill for such
service, such charges shall be deemed and are hereby declared to be delinquent and thereafter such delinquencies shall constitute liens upon the real
estate for which service is supplied. In addition to disconnection of service as provided by section 8-3-5-3 of this chapter, the village clerk is hereby
authorized and directed to file sworn statements showing such delinquencies in the office of the recorder of deeds of Cook County.
B. In the event monthly charges for service become delinquent, a notice of water shutoff shall be issued as provided by section 8-3-5-3 of this chapter and
an additional charge of five dollars ($5.00) shall be added to the bill. (Ord. 2011-25, 11-3-2011)
8-3-5-3: DISCONNECTION OF SERVICE, HEARING; RECONNECTION FEE:
A. Procedure: Whenever any bill under this chapter becomes delinquent and remains unpaid for a period of more than forty (40) days from the date the bill
was rendered, and the village has provided notice to the delinquent consumer of its intention to shut off the water supply to the consumer due to such
nonpayment and the village has provided the consumer with an opportunity for a hearing to present reasons why the water service should not be
disconnected, and the consumer either fails to request a hearing or fails to provide adequate reasons to prevent the water shutoff, then the water shall
be shut off from the premises of such delinquent consumer and the service shall not be resumed until the following has occurred:
1. All delinquent water bills and late payment penalties have been paid; and
2. A reconnection fee is paid. The reconnection charge shall be sixty dollars ($60.00) for the services of the village public works department in turning
the water off and on Mondays through Fridays, between the hours of eight thirty o'clock (8:30) A.M. and four o'clock (4:00) P.M., excluding holidays,
and one hundred twenty dollars ($120.00) if said reconnection is made after working hours, or on a Saturday, Sunday or holiday.
The director of finance or his/her designee shall cause all notices of water shutoff to be served by first class mail, postage prepaid, or personal
delivery or posted at the mailing address of the water consumer listed in the village water billing records not less than ten (10) days prior to the
scheduled date of the water shutoff. The director of finance or his/her designee shall act as a hearing officer with regard to water shutoff hearings.
The notice of water shutoff shall indicate the date of water shutoff, the amount of the delinquency which must be satisfied, the time, place and
manner in which the payment of such delinquent amount must be made, and the time, place and manner in which to request a hearing at which
time the consumer can provide the designated hearing officer with reasons why the consumer's water should not be shut off. All requests for
hearings must be in writing and must be received by the village during the ten (10) day period prior to the scheduled date of the water shutoff. The
notice of water shutoff shall conform in all other respects to those requirements set forth in section 3 of the rental property utility service act1.
Reasons which will prevent a water shutoff from occurring shall include, but not necessarily be limited to:
1. A mistake in the water bill or water bill amount;
2. Payment of the water bill amount shown as due and owing on the face of the water bill; and/or
3. Serious public health and safety hazard which will prevent the water shutoff.
If the hearing officer determines that the reasons presented by the consumer for not shutting off the water are valid, the hearing officer shall
provide the consumer with written notice of the hearing officer's decision as soon as possible but no later than seventy two (72) hours after
completion of the hearing, and the hearing officer shall cancel the water shutoff and shall order whatever village record corrections are necessary
to reflect the fact that the consumer is not subject to water shutoff at that time. No water shutoff shall occur during the pendency of a water shutoff
hearing.
No person owing water charges and moving to other premises within the village where there are water connections or where connections shall
afterwards be made, shall be supplied with water until such delinquencies are paid in full.
B. Notice Contents: The notice of disconnection of service or shutoff shall contain the following:
1. The balance due including any late payment charges;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 264/498
2. The date by which payment or other action must be made to avoid discontinuance of water service, and that discontinuance of water service shall
not be less than ten (10) business days after service of the notice of disconnection of service;
3. Notices shall be sent to the attention of the village finance director at 301 E. Irving Park Road, Streamwood, IL 60107, to request a hearing on the
discontinuance of water service;
4. That the customer has ten (10) business days from the date the notice of discontinuance was served to request, in writing, a hearing to contest water
service discontinuance; and
5. That there will be a standard charge of sixty dollars ($60.00) for reconnection of water service during normal village business hours and a standard
charge of one hundred twenty dollars ($120.00) for reconnection of water service after normal village business hours or on Saturdays, Sundays or
holidays.
C. Discontinuance Of Service:
1. If no request for a hearing is made as herein provided, service may thereafter be discontinued. No service shall be discontinued on a holiday or a
weekend. If a hearing is requested, service shall be continued pending the outcome of the hearing. The hearing shall be convened within ten (10)
days of the date the request for hearing is received by the village finance director.
2. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent discontinuance of water service for reasons of safety, health, or cooperation with other civil
authorities.
D. Hearings: The village finance director or his/her designee shall hear all matters relating to disputes or complaints regarding water and sewer billing. The
village finance director shall be authorized to act on behalf of the village in resolving all such disputes or complaints and shall have authority to order
that water service be discontinued and/or resumed. (Ord. 2011-25, 11-3-2011)
8-3-5-4: RENDITION OF BILLS:
It is hereby made the duty of the finance director of the village to render bills for service and for all rates and charges in connection therewith and to collect
all monies due thereon. (1994 Code)
8-3-6: WATERWORKS AND SEWERAGE SYSTEM REVENUES AND FUNDS:
8-3-6-1: SEPARATION OF REVENUES BY FINANCE DIRECTOR:
All revenues and monies derived from the operation of the combined waterworks and sewerage system shall be held by the finance director separate and
apart from his/her private funds and separate and apart from all other funds of the village, without any deductions whatever. (1994 Code)
8-3-6-2: DEPOSIT OF FUNDS:
All fees and charges described herein shall be paid into the waterworks and sewerage fund of the village. The finance director shall receive all such
revenues from the combined waterworks and sewerage system and all other funds and monies incident to the operation of such system as the same may
be delivered to him and deposit the same in a separate fund designated as the "waterworks and sewerage fund of the village of Streamwood" and said
director shall administer such fund in every respect in the manner provided by the provisions of 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-139-1 et seq., effective
July 1, 1961, and all laws amendatory thereof and supplementary thereto. (1994 Code)
8-3-6-3: RECORDS AND ACCOUNTS:
The finance director shall establish a proper system of accounts and shall keep proper books, records and accounts in which complete and correct entries
shall be made of all transactions relative to the combined waterworks and sewerage system, and at regular annual intervals, he shall cause an
independent auditing concern to make an audit of the books to show the receipts and disbursements of the combined waterworks and sewerage system.
(1994 Code)
8-3-7: NOTICE OF LIABILITY TO OWNER:
A copy of this chapter, properly certified by the village clerk, shall be filed in the office of the recorder of deeds of Cook County, and shall be deemed notice
to all owners of real estate of their liability for service supplied to any user of the combined waterworks and sewerage system of the village on their
premises. (1994 Code)
8-3-8: ACCESS OF EMPLOYEES:
Employees of the waterworks and sewerage system shall have the right of access to any premises served by the combined waterworks and sewerage
system for the purpose of reading water meters and all remote reading devices or systems at the regular prescribed intervals, or for the purpose of making
inspections and/or repairs in order to maintain same in good condition and provide for the protection of said system and the efficient management thereof.
Where such inspections or repairs are of an immediate or urgent nature, employees of the system shall arrange appointments for such inspections or
repairs at times mutually convenient to those persons, tenants or employees occupying the premises where such inspections and/or repairs are to be
undertaken. Any person refusing to allow said employees access to any premises served by the combined waterworks and sewerage system as aforesaid
shall be subject to a penalty as hereinafter provided. (1994 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 265/498
8-3-9: VILLAGE RIGHTS; NONLIABILITY:
A. Right To Shut Off Water: The village reserves the right to shut off water at any time in the mains for the purpose of repairing, cleaning, making
connections with or extensions to same, or for the concentrating of water in any part of the village in case of fire, and for restricting use of water in case
of deficiency in supply.
B. Liability: The village shall not be liable for any damages caused by a leak or break in any service pipe, or for damages caused by a failure to repair the
same promptly, nor shall the village be liable for any damage caused by the repair or installation of such pipes, or resulting therefrom. The village shall
further not be liable for the failure of the water supply, or by increase in the water pressure or decrease in the water pressure, pursuant to subsection A
of this section. (1994 Code)
8-3-10: RESALE OF WATER PROHIBITED:
No water shall be resold or distributed by the recipient thereof from the village water supply to any premises other than that for which application has been
made and the meter installed, except in case of emergency. (1994 Code)
8-3-11: EXTENSIONS TO ADJOINING PREMISES PROHIBITED:
No user shall be permitted to conduct a water service connection or extension across a lot to adjoining premises. (1994 Code)
8-3-12: SEPARATE PIPES FOR SEPARATE PREMISES:
It is hereby prohibited to conduct water pipes into any two (2) distinct premises or tenements unless separate and distinct stopcocks are installed on the
outside of each such premises. (1994 Code)
8-3-13: LAWN AND GARDEN SPRINKLING REGULATIONS:
A. Prohibition: It shall be unlawful for any person to sprinkle his lawn, or garden of a residence or other building, between the hours of eleven o'clock
(11:00) A.M. to six o'clock (6:00) P.M. Sprinkling during any other time period shall be in accordance with the following schedule:
1. All persons owning or controlling property bearing an odd numbered street address may sprinkle their lawn or garden on days having an odd
numbered calendar date.
2. All persons owning or controlling property bearing an even numbered street address may sprinkle their lawn or garden on days having an even
numbered calendar date.
B. Exceptions: Any person with a newly planted lawn or garden may notify the village and obtain permission to sprinkle for twenty (20) consecutive days.
C. Emergency: In the event of an emergency determined by the director of public works, all outside watering shall be prohibited. (1994 Code)
D. Penalty: Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be fined as set forth in section 1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 1998-7, 1-22-1998)
8-3-13-1: REQUIRED USE OF WATERSENSE PRODUCTS:
Pursuant to 17 Illinois administrative code 3730.307(c)(4) and subject to the Illinois plumbing code (77 Ill. adm. code 890) and the lawn irrigation contractor
and lawn sprinkler system registration code (77 Ill. adm. code 892), all new and replacement plumbing fixtures and irrigation controllers installed after the
effective date hereof shall bear the WaterSense label (as designated by the U.S. environmental protection agency WaterSense program), when such
labeled fixtures are available. (Ord. 2016-16, 7-21-2016)
8-3-14: OPENING VALVES PROHIBITED:
No service to any user shall be turned on or a valve opened by any person other than the duly authorized employee of the public works department of the
village. (1994 Code)
8-3-15: CESSPOOLS, SEPTIC OR SEWAGE TANKS, PRIVIES AND WELLS:
A. Construction Prohibited; Discontinuance Of Use Required: No cesspool, septic tank or other sewage tank, privy or well shall be constructed on property
to which village water and/or sewer is available. The use of all cesspools, septic or other sewage tanks, privies and wells heretofore constructed on
property to which public water and sewer becomes available shall be discontinued pursuant to section 8-3-1-6 of this chapter. All such abandoned
cesspools, septic or other sewage tanks, privy vaults and wells shall be cleared out to within not less than twenty four inches (24") of the ground
surface and refilled with earth, cinders, ashes or similar material.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 266/498
B. Public Nuisance: Any cesspool, septic or sewage tank, privy or well which shall be constructed or maintained on any property in violation with the
provisions of this chapter, shall be and is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. (1994 Code)
8-3-16: TAMPERING WITH OR DESTRUCTION OF SYSTEM PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person not authorized by the public works department to connect to, tamper with, alter, operate or injure any part of the village
waterworks or sewerage system or any water meter. (1994 Code)
8-3-17: CONNECTION OF SEWERS TO STORMWATER DRAINS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to connect or cause to be connected any drain carrying or to carry any toilet, sink, basin, septic tank, cesspool, industrial
waste or any fixture or device discharging polluting substances to any stormwater drain in the village. (1994 Code)
8-3-18: CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL:
8-3-18-1: COMPLIANCE WITH STATE PLUMBING CODE:
All plumbing installed within the village shall be installed in accordance with the Illinois plumbing code, 77 Illinois administrative code 890. If in accordance
with the Illinois plumbing code, an approved backflow prevention device is necessary for the safety of the public water supply system, the director of public
works will give notice to the water customer to install such an approved device immediately. The water customer shall, at his own expense, install such an
approved device at a location and in a manner in accordance with the Illinois plumbing code, Illinois environmental protection agency and all applicable
local regulations, and shall have inspections and tests made of such approved devices upon installation and as required by the Illinois plumbing code,
Illinois environmental protection agency and local regulations. (Ord. 1991-66, 11-21-1991; amd. Ord. 2016-10, 4-21-2016)
8-3-18-2: PRIVATE WATER SUPPLY; LOCAL AND STATE APPROVAL:
No person shall establish or permit to be established or maintain or permit to be maintained any connection whereby a private, auxiliary or emergency
water supply other than the regular public water supply of the village may enter the supply or distribution system of the village, unless such private,
auxiliary or emergency water supply and the method of connection and use of such supply shall have been approved in accordance with the Illinois
plumbing code (77 Ill. adm. code 890) and the Illinois environmental protection agency. (Ord. 1991-66, 11-21-1991; amd. Ord. 2016-10, 4-21-2016)
8-3-18-3: SURVEYS AND INVESTIGATIONS:
It shall be the duty of the director of public works to cause surveys and investigations to be made of commercial, industrial and other properties served by
the public water supply to determine whether actual or potential hazards to the public water supply may exist. Such surveys and investigations shall be
made a matter of public record and shall be repeated at least every two (2) years, or as often as the director of public works shall deem necessary.
Records of such surveys shall be maintained and available for review for a period of at least five (5) years. (Ord. 1991-66, 11-21-1991)
8-3-18-4: RIGHT OF ENTRY FOR INSPECTION:
The approved cross connection control device inspector shall have the right to enter at any reasonable time any property served by a connection to the
public water supply or distribution system of the village for the purpose of verifying the presence or absence of cross connections, and the director of
public works or his authorized agent, shall have the right to enter at any reasonable time any property served by a connection to the public water supply or
distribution system of the village for the purpose of verifying information submitted by the customer regarding the required cross connection control
inspection. On demand the owner, lessees or occupants of any property so served shall furnish to the director of public works any information which he
may request regarding the piping system or systems or water use on such property. The refusal of such information, shall, be deemed evidence of the
presence of improper connections as provided in this section 8-3-18. (Ord. 1991-66, 11-21-1991; amd. Ord. 2016-10, 4-21-2016)
8-3-18-5: DISCONTINUE WATER SERVICE FOR VIOLATION; RECONNECTION FEE:
The public works director of the village is hereby authorized and directed to discontinue, after reasonable notice to the occupant thereof, the water service
to any property wherein any connection in violation of the provisions of this section 8-3-18 is known to exist, and to take such other precautionary
measures as he may deem necessary to eliminate any danger of contamination of the public water supply distribution mains. Water service to such
property shall not be restored until such conditions have been eliminated or corrected in compliance with the provisions of this section 8-3-18, and until a
reconnection fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00) is paid to the village. Immediate disconnection with verbal notice can be effected when the director of
public works is assured that imminent danger of harmful contamination of the public water supply system exists. Such action shall be followed by written
notification of the cause of disconnection. Immediate disconnection without notice to any party can be effected to prevent actual or anticipated
contamination or pollution of the public water supply; provided that, in the reasonable opinion of the director of public works or the Illinois environmental
protection agency, such action is required to prevent actual or potential contamination or pollution of the public water supply. Neither the village, director of
public works, or its agents or assigns shall be liable to any customer for any injury, damages or lost revenues which may result from termination of said
customer's water supply in accordance with the terms of this section 8-3-18, whether or not said termination was with or without notice. (Ord. 1991-66, 11-
21-1991)
8-3-18-6: COST OF CLEANUP BORNE BY CONSUMER:
The consumer responsible for back siphoned or back pressured material or contamination through backflow, if contamination of the potable water supply
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 267/498
system occurs through an illegal cross connection or an improperly installed, maintained or repaired device, or a device which has been bypassed, must
bear the cost of cleanup of the potable water supply system. (Ord. 1991-66, 11-21-1991)
Chapter 4
STREET NAMING AND PROPERTY NUMBERING
8-4-1: JURISDICTION:
It shall be the responsibility of the Director of Public Works and/or the Village Engineer to control and approve all new street names and to issue address
numbers for any and all streets and properties, public and private, located within the Village limits. (1994 Code)
8-4-2: VILLAGE CENTER FOR NUMBERING:
The intersection of Schaumburg Road and Bartlett Road is designated as "0" for the purpose of numbering properties in the Village. A line shall extend
due east, west, north and south from this point. Any street which shall cross any one of the lines shall carry the appropriate prefix before the name. (1994
Code)
8-4-3: ISSUANCE:
Addresses shall be issued only after the receipt of an approved preliminary plat of subdivision or an approved site plan showing all the building units
involved in said plan. (1994 Code)
8-4-4: PERMITS:
All building permits for erecting, altering, replacing or demolition of any building or buildings shall not be issued by the Department of Community
Development without an approved street address issued by the Public Works Department. An occupancy permit shall not be issued for any building and/or
unit, new or used, that does not display the correct address. (1994 Code; amd. Ord. 1995-36, 6-22-1995)
8-4-5: MASTER LIST:
A master list of all street names shall be maintained by the Public Works Department, along with a map showing all thenumbered properties. The Village
Clerk shall keep a copy of the street names and the address map, which shall be open to inspection by the public. (1994 Code)
8-4-6: VANITY ADDRESS:
No vanity address or numbers shall be issued to any building, building unit, person or business at any time. (1994 Code)
Title 9
BUILDING REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
BUILDING CODE
9-1-1: BUILDING CODE ADOPTED:
For the purpose of establishing minimum regulations governing the design, construction, alteration, enlargement, repair, removal, demolition, equipment,
use and occupancy, location and maintenance of buildings and structures; providing for the issuance of permits, collection of fees, making of inspections;
providing penalties for the violation thereof; there is hereby adopted the international building code, 2012, published by the International Code Council,
including appendices B, F, H, I and J shall be henceforth known as the building code of the village of Streamwood, Illinois, together with all appendices,
except such portions thereof as are hereinafter expressly deleted, modified or amended. (Ord. 2015-11, 5-21-2015)
9-1-2: BUILDING CODE AMENDMENTS:
9-1-2-1: ADMINISTRATION:
AMENDMENT TO SECTION 101
GENERAL
Subsection 101.1 Title: Insert (village of Streamwood) under name of jurisdiction.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 268/498
Subsection 101.4.3 Plumbing:
Delete the words "international plumbing code" and insert the following words: "state of Illinois plumbing code".
AMENDMENT TO SECTION 103
DEPARTMENT OF BUILDING SAFETY
Subsection 103.1 Creation Of Enforcement Agency:
Delete this subsection in its entirety and insert the following:
The community development department in all instances of the code is hereby created and the official in charge thereof shall be known as the
building official.
Subsection 103.2 Appointment:
Delete this subsection in its entirety and insert the following:
The director of community development or other designated authorized individual is the officer charged with the administration and enforcement of
this code.
AMENDMENT TO SECTION 105
PERMITS
Subsection 105.1.3 Amusement Devices:
105.1.3 Amusement Devices: Prior to any mechanical amusement device, roller coaster, scenic railway, watershoot or other mechanical riding,
sailing, gliding or swinging device is erected, either in existing or new amusement parks, or places or sites where such devices are operated under
carnival, fair or similar auspices, a detailed plan shall be submitted to the building official for approval or rejection, and if approved, a permit shall be
procured by the person desiring to erect such device.
Subsection 105.2 Work Exempt From Permit:
Under "building" delete numbers: 1,2,3,4,5 and 6. Add sentence: Decorating or normal maintenance, unless the work involves alteration of existing
electrical or plumbing systems, installation of new electrical or plumbing, or structural modifications to the building.
Under "building", number 7, delete the word "cabinets", and "counter tops".
Under "building", number 9, after (18,925 l) delete the word "and", and at the end of sentence, add the words: "and fenced in accordance with the
code."
Subsection 105.5 Expiration:
105.5 Expiration:
Change where it states 180 days to 120 days and add the following:
Exception: Permits shall expire if the work has commenced but has not been completed within the following specified times:
Permits for: Room additions, detached garages, new single family and two family dwellings, and major remodeling projects will be valid for 12
months. For all other home and site improvements permits will be valid for 3 months.
All work for which a permit is issued shall be completed within 12 months of the date of issuance of the building permit. A fee of fifty
percent (50%) of the original permit fee shall be paid for the permit extension.
Extensions to this requirement may be granted by the director of community development for a period not to exceed one hundred twenty
(120) days upon demonstration of justifiable cause for the extension. Extensions shall be requested in writing and shall only be granted
upon demonstration by the applicant of justifiable cause. A request for an extension shall include the following:
(a) An explanation of the hardship which resulted in the work not being completed.
(b) A detailed description of all work which has not yet been completed and a time line for completion. No work shall be left incomplete
which may result in a life safety issue or result in a public nuisance or endangerment.
(c) A detailed description of how any unfinished portions of the building will be protected from outside elements so as not to cause
damage to the structure.
Subsection 105.6 Work Commencing Before Permit Issuance:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 269/498
Add sentence: Any person, firm or corporation that starts work on a project where a building permit is required by this code, without the permit being
issued, shall pay a late fee equal to fifty percent (50%) of the required permit fee in addition to the permit fee cost payable at the time of permit
issuance. The minimum late fee shall be ($50.00).
Subsection 105.8 Contractors; Fees:
105.8 Contractors: Fees And Requirements:
1. Each general contractor shall pay to the collector or code official of the village an annual registration fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00), term
of which annual registration fee shall commence on January 1 of the year in which such registration is issued. Each subcontractor shall pay a like
annual registration fee of seventy five ($75.00). A general contractor need not also secure a subcontractor's registration or pay a subcontractor's
registration fee but a subcontractor, if he becomes a general contractor, shall secure such general contractor's registration and pay such general
contractor's annual registration fee.
Add exception: A contractor registration fee shall not be required for plumbers, and fire alarm, contractors.
2. General contractor is defined as any person, firm or corporation contracting (either in writing or orally) for, and/or furnishing, building
construction work and/or fixtures, with respect to real estate in the village. A subcontractor shall be defined as any person, other than a prime
contractor, contracting with, or doing any work for, such prime contractor, and responsible for a portion of such construction work in the village. The
term "subcontractor" shall not include any regular employee of a prime contractor. Neither the term "general contractor" nor the term
"subcontractor" as used herein shall refer to any resident owner of real estate in the village or his immediate family, personally undertaking any
construction work or repairs on his own property in the village with the intent of living at the property for a minimum of six months.
3. A corporation which is either a general contractor or a subcontractor herein shall require only one registration but it shall not operate pursuant to
such registration until the names of all officers of the corporation are registered with the code official who may require such registration to be
brought up to date and current, at any time he may see fit. All such general contractors and subcontractors who are registered hereunder shall
cause their names to be registered with the code official. Anyone applying for a building permit under the ordinances of the village must list all
general contractors and subcontractors who are going to perform all of the construction work for which the building permit is sought and no
building permit shall be issued without such list being submitted.
4. It shall be unlawful for any person to perform any building construction work or do other acts allowed to be done herein by a licensed general
contractor or subcontractor as herein defined, without being registered and having paid in full the registration fee, all as is herein provided. It is
unlawful for any owner or applicant for a building permit to allow any unregistered general contractor or subcontractor, or any general contractor or
subcontractor not listed with the application for a building permit, to do any building construction work in the village.
5. All contractors and subcontractors applying for or renewing a registration under this section shall provide evidence of a registration and permit
bond and evidence of a certificate of insurance with the village as a certificate holder. The amount of the registration and permit bond shall be set
by the code official.
Subsection 105.8.1 Suspension And/Or Revocation Of Contractor's Registration:
105.8.1 Contractors: Suspension And/Or Revocation Of Registration:
The village's director of community development is authorized, for cause, to suspend and/or recommend the revocation of any building contractor's
registration.
A. Cause For Suspension And/Or Revocation. A contractor's registration may be suspended and/or revoked for any of the following:
1. Any sustained violation by the licensee of any applicable provision of title 9 of the village code;
2. The commission by the licensee, its employees or agents, of any acts or omissions that would constitute a violation of any consumer fraud
law of the state of Illinois, federal statute or village ordinance, including, but not limited to section 505/2Q(c) of the consumer fraud and deceptive
business practices act, (815 ILCS 505/2Q(c)) or the home repair fraud act (815 ILCS 515/1, et seq.);
3. Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application for such contractor's registration;
4. The entry of a final judgment or order by any court of competent jurisdiction, administrative agency or hearing officer that the licensee, its
employee(s) or agent(s):
(a) Have engaged in more than one (1) act during the performance of work authorized by the registration that constitutes a danger to the
public, health, safety or morals;
(b) Failure of the licensee to pay any fine, penalty or registration fee due and owing to the village within thirty (30) days of assessment;
(c) Refusal by the licensee, its employee(s) or agent(s), on at least two (2) occasions, to permit any inspection by a duly authorized code
enforcement officer or official or other village employee while in the performance of their duties of making any inspection under any village
ordinance;
(d) Failure by the licensee, its employee(s) or agent(s), on more than one occasion in any calendar year to apply for a required building permit
and work has been commenced by the licensee, its employee(s) or agent(s) without having applied for a building permit.
B. Suspension:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 270/498
1. The director of community development for the village is hereby authorized to summarily order the cessation of business operations and
suspend the registration issued of any licensed contractor when the director of community development has reasonable cause to believe the
licensee is in violation of any portion of subsection 105.8.1(A)1-4 inclusive.
C. Within three (3) business days after an order of cessation of business and suspension of the contractor's registration for reasons hereinabove
set forth, the contractor shall be served with a notice of hearing for the purpose of determining whether or not such licensee shall be suspended or
revoked. Notice of the hearing shall be in writing and shall set forth the basis for the order of cessation of business and registration suspension and
shall be served upon the licensee at the address provided by the licensee on its registration application. The notice of hearing shall be served by
personal service or first-class mail, postage prepaid. The notice of hearing shall further set forth a date and time certain for hearing to determine
whether the contractor's registration shall be suspended for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days or revoked. Any contractor whose registration is
revoked for cause may not reapply for any contractor's registration within the village for a period of one (1) year next following the date of the order
of revocation.
D. All hearings shall be commenced within seven (7) business days following the date of service of the notice of hearing. Service of the notice of
hearing by first-class mail, postage prepaid, shall be deemed complete two (2) days after mailing.
E. All hearings shall be recorded and shall be conducted by the village manager or his designee (the "hearing officer"). All licensees wishing to
contest the basis for the hearing may be represented by an attorney and shall be afforded an opportunity to present witnesses and relevant
evidence on its own behalf.
F. At the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall make a finding which sustains, modifies or rescinds the director of community
development's order to cease business and suspend the contractor's registration.
G. All decisions of the hearing officer shall be reduced to writing, designated findings, decision and order and shall be served upon the licensee
and director of community development within five (5) business days after the conclusion of the hearing. The findings of fact, decision and order,
shall specify the reasons for any imposed sanction including the nature of the violation giving rise to the original action by the director of
community development.
H. No suspension or revocation shall be imposed unless the violation(s) complained of are proved by the village by a preponderance of the
evidence.
I. The decision of the hearing officer shall be reviewable pursuant to the provisions of the Illinois administrative review law.
AMENDMENT TO SECTION 107
CONSTRUCTION DOCUMENTS
Subsection 107.1.1 Information On Construction Documents:
Add paragraph: For all projects that require an architect to complete the plans, construction documents shall be dimensioned and drawn on 36" by
24" paper. One complete electronic version (PDF format) of the final construction "as built" dimensions as approved by the building official shall be
submitted to the village of Streamwood prior to the issuance of the final occupancy.
Subsection 107.3.4.1 General:
Add sentences: All plans, computations and specifications for the new construction, remodeling and alterations of commercial, residential and
industrial buildings valued at over $10,000 shall be prepared by registered, professional architects. Plans shall be signed and sealed. Construction
valued at under $15,000 may require plans prepared by a registered professional, depending upon the structural alterations, at the discretion of the
code official.
AMENDMENT TO SECTION 109
FEES
Subsection 109.7 insert: (Building Permit Fee Schedule):
Permit Fees: General And Home Improvements
Air conditioner (new) 50.00
Air conditioner (replacement) 50.00
Amusement devices, mechanical riding, sliding, sailing or swinging:
Portable, for each assembly or installation 50.00
Permanent, installed or altered 150.00
Temporary seating stand 150.00
Basement (unfinished) per sq. ft. .30
Building (new construction) per sq. ft.
(minimum charge)
.50
50.00
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 271/498
Chimney (isolated or over 10 feet above roof) 50.00
Deck 50.00
Demolition 100.00
Driveway (new or extension) 50.00
Driveway commercial 50.00
Electrical 50.00
Fence 50.00
Final inspection 50.00
Fire escape (erection or alteration, up to 4 stories) 50.00
Each story above 4 50.00
Fireplace 50.00
Furnace 50.00
Garage, per sq. ft. (detached) .30
Hot water heater replacement 50.00
Kitchen hood & duct system, with Ansul 150.00
Mechanical fee (min) 50.00
Mold remediation 100.00
Moving building (per 1,000 cubic feet of volume or fractional part thereof of such building) 4.00
Occupancy permit:
Residential 50.00
Commercial-industrial 100.00
Patio 50.00
Plan examination, commercial 150.00
Plan examination, residential 50.00
Plan examination, new subdivision/residential - 0-100 dwelling units 150.00
Plan examination, new subdivision/residential - over 100 dwelling units 250.00
Platform (temporary) for public assembly 50.00
Porch or canopy 50.00
Power elevators, platforms or lifts, new construction 250.00
Power operated elevators, platforms or lifts, existing installation, semi- or annual inspection 50.00
Reinspection fee (minimum) 50.00
Remodeling or alterations, per sq. ft. .30
Roof/residential 50.00
Roof/commercial 50.00
Roof top HVAC unit 100.00
Room additions, per sq. ft. .40
Satellite dish 50.00
Shed or other detached accessory structure 50.00
Shoring, raising, underpinning or moving any building:
For each additional 1,000 sq. ft. of area or fractional part 100.00
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 272/498
Minimum charge 50.00
Siding 50.00
Solar installation 150.00
Swimming pool replacement 50.00
Swimming pool and electrical inspection 50.00
Tanks for flammable liquids: Capacity, 200 to 500 gallons 250.00
Each additional 500 gallons or fraction thereof 50.00
Walks (public or private) 50.00
Wind turbine 100.00
Window or door replacement 50.00
Wrecking any building or other structure not more than one story in height: For each 25 lineal feet of frontage or fractional part thereof 50.00
More than one story, for each 25 lineal feet of frontage or fractional part thereof 50.00
Reinspection charges: Whenever a reinspection on any phase of construction is required due to the original phase of construction not
being ready for inspection when requested by the builder, or contractor, there shall be an additional charge for:
First reinspection 50.00
Second reinspection 100.00
Subsection 109.7.1 Electrical Permit Fee Schedule:
Permit Fees:
1. The inspection fees for new electrical services shall be as follows:
0-100 ampere 100.00
101-200 ampere 200.00
400 ampere 250.00
600 ampere 400.00
800 ampere 450.00
1000 ampere 500.00
1200 ampere 550.00
1600 ampere 600.00
2000 ampere 650.00
2500 ampere 700.00
2. The inspection fees for the original installation in a residential occupancy shall be as follows: (Including all circuits, fixtures and receptacles, and
excluding electrical service)
0-1000 square feet 45.00
1001-1500 square feet 55.00
1501-2000 square feet 65.00
2001-2400 square feet 75.00
2401 square feet and over 85.00
3. Electrical Inspection Fees: The term circuit shall mean any set of branch circuit conductors which have been extended from a distribution center
occupying a single space in the panel to be utilized for the transmission of energy.
The inspection fees for 15 and 20 ampere-branch circuits shall be $7.00 per circuit for 1-50 circuits. Each additional circuit over 50 circuits shall be
$14.00 per circuit.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 273/498
The inspection fee for branch circuits exceeding 20 amperes shall be $15.00 per circuit.
4. The inspection fee for electric motors or current consuming devices other than lighting fixtures shall be as follows:
First motor or device 10.00
Each additional device 5.00
5. General Inspection Fees:
Standard fire/burglar alarm system 50.00
Emergency lighting system 50.00
Switchboard 50.00
Motor control center 50.00
Minimum electrical fee 50.00
C.B. and ham radio antennas 50.00
Visual communications system 50.00
Aural communications system 50.00
Subsection 109.7.2 Plumbing Permit Fees:
Permit Fees:
Each plumbing fixture 20.00
Each floor drain 20.00
Each clean-out 20.00
Each hose bib 20.00
Water softener 50.00
Water heater 50.00
Sump pump 50.00
Ejector pump 50.00
Lawn sprinklers (single-family) 50.00
Lawn sprinklers (commercial)-minimum base 50.00
Lawn sprinklers (commercial) per (1,000 s.f.) 10.00
Sewer line repair, replacement, clean-out 50.00
Plumbing fee (minimum) 50.00
Sewer inspection 50.00
Water inspection 50.00
Fire sprinkler system (per 1,000 s.f.) 10.00
Fire sprinkler system (minimum) 75.00
Reinspection fee 50.00
Subsection 109.7.3 Sign Permit Fees:
(Additional fees may be required for electrical inspections)
Permit Fees:
Non-illuminated signs 100.00
Additional square footage charge .40
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 274/498
Illuminated signs 100.00
Additional square footage charge .40
Canopies 100.00
Subsection 109.8 Reinspection Fees:
109.8 Reinspection Fees: Wherever a reinspection on any phase of construction is required due to the original phase of construction not being
ready for inspection when requested by the permit holder, builder or contractor, there shall be an additional fee to the permit holder for each
reinspection, based on most current permit and inspection fee schedule.
AMENDMENT TO SECTION 110
INSPECTIONS
Subsection 110.3.1 Footing And Foundation Inspections:
Add sentence: A soil test shall be performed on the bearing soil at the corners of all foundations, as required by the building official.
Subsection 110.3.9 Special Inspections:
Delete the paragraph in this subsection and insert the following:
Special Inspections: Special inspections shall be made in accordance with section 1704 and shall include the cost of third party plan review and
inspection services.
AMENDMENT TO SECTION 111
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY
Subsection 111.3 Temporary Occupancy:
Delete the section in its entirety and insert the following:
A temporary certificate of occupancy shall be issued for a maximum of six (6) months. To obtain a temporary certificate of occupancy the holder of
the permit shall meet the following minimum requirements:
1. Permit holder shall sign a written affidavit stipulating the remaining work to be done and/or deficiencies, which must be corrected. Such affidavit
may contain additional stipulations as from time to time be deemed in the best interest of the village of Streamwood by the code official. In addition
to any other cash deposit or letters of credit on file with the village of Streamwood, such affidavit shall be co-signed by the owner, contract
purchaser and/or the tenant; and
2. Post cash deposit in an amount equivalent to one and one-half (11/2) times the cost of completing and/or remedying all items stipulated in the
affidavit, providing, however, that such amount shall not be less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for a detached one-family dwelling. If
required, the amount of the deposit for more than one-family dwelling buildings shall be pro-rated by the village manager or his designee based on
the total dwelling units of the multiple occupancy building.
3. Failure of the permit holder of a temporary certificate of occupancy to accomplish all work necessary to obtain a final certificate of occupancy by
the date established by the code official shall result in automatic forfeiture of the related cash deposit. The village of Streamwood shall use such
forfeited funds to complete the work indicated on the affidavit attached to the temporary certificate of occupancy, which was issued for the
premises. Such forfeiture shall not impair the right of the village to enforce any and all remedies available to it by reason of any violation, including
the right to recover a fine or penalty or seek injunctive relief. Any balance remaining in the cash deposit not required to complete the work shall be
refunded to the depositor minus the appropriate fees outlined below.
4. Upon the issuance of a temporary certificate of occupancy an additional fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) for each inspection shall be required if more
than one inspection of the building or structure is requested to determine compliance to the code for final certificate of occupancy.
5. In addition, the depositor shall also be required to pay to the village five (5) percent of the amount of the cash deposit for administrative services
relating to the temporary certificate of occupancy procedures outlined herein.
Subsection 111.5 House Numbers:
111.5 House Numbers: Address Numbers: All lots, buildings and structures in the village of Streamwood shall be numbered in accordance with the
street numbering plan of the village, and the village clerk shall keep a chart showing the proper street number.
Subsection 111.5.1 Location Of House Numbers:
111.5.1 Locations:
1. Main Entrance: The main entrance of all buildings shall have a street address number visible from the street.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 275/498
2. Rear Entrance: The rear entrance of all buildings shall have a street address number, except single-family residential dwellings.
3. Multiple Doors: Doors located within the exterior perimeter of all buildings that are in addition to the main entrance or main rear entrance shall
be identified with address numbers or other approved designation by the code official. The additional doors do not have to be means of egress
doors, except detached one and two family dwellings.
4. Illumination: All required doors to be identified shall be provided with an electric photocell lighting to illuminate the exterior door entrance and
identification.
Subsection 111.5.2 Size Of House Numbers:
111.5.2 Size: Size Of Numbers: Address numbers shall be a contrasting color to the background and a minimum of four (4) inches in height, and a
minimum of one-half (1/2) inch stroke. The code official shall approve other identifying information on doors.
AMENDMENT TO SECTION 114
VIOLATIONS
Subsection 114.4 Violation Penalties:
Delete the paragraph in its entirety and insert the following:
114.4 Violation Penalties: Any person who shall violate a provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall
erect, construct, alter or repair a building or structure in violation of an approved plan or directive of the code official, or of a permit or certificate issued
under the provisions of this code, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of no more than $750.00 or less than $50.00. Each day that a
violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
AMENDMENT TO SECTION 115
STOP WORK ORDERS
Subsection 115.3 Unlawful Continuance:
Delete the text in this subsection in its entirety and insert the following:
115.3 Unlawful Continuance: Any person who shall continue any work in or about the structure after having been served with a stop work order, except
such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe conditions, shall be subject to a fine of not less than $50.00 or more than
$750.00.
ADD SECTION 117
WORKMANSHIP
Subsection 117.1 General Workmanship:
117.1 General: All work shall be conducted, installed and completed in a workmanlike and acceptable manner so as to secure the results intended
by this code.
AMENDMENT TO SECTION 202
DEFINITIONS
Amend High Rise Buildings to delete 75 feet and insert 50 feet in lieu thereof.
(Ord. 2015-11, 5-21-2015)
9-1-2-2: USE AND OCCUPANCY CLASSIFICATION:
AMENDMENT TO SECTION 310
RESIDENTIAL GROUP R
Subsection 310.4 Use Group R-2:
310.4 Use Group R-2 Structures: Dwelling units shall be separated by two-hour rated (vertical) walls, horizontal (floor) ceiling separation
assemblies. Vertical separation walls between dwellings, and dwelling and other use groups, shall be constructed of masonry or concrete. Horizontal
separation can be wood and/or drywall.
Subsection 310.5 Use Group R-3:
310.5 Use Group R-3 Structures: Each dwelling unit shall have an independent means of egress and is separated by a two-hour rated vertical
(walls) and horizontal (floor) ceiling separation assemblies. Vertical separation walls between dwellings, and dwellings and other use groups, shall be
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 276/498
constructed of masonry or concrete. Horizontal separations can be wood and drywall.
(Ord. 2015-11, 5-21-2015)
9-1-2-3: SPECIAL DETAILED REQUIREMENTS BASED ON USE AND OCCUPANCY:
AMENDMENT TO SECTION 403
HIGH-RISE BUILDINGS
Subsection 403.1 High-Rise Buildings:
Delete the text in this subsection in its entirety and insert the following:
403.1 Applicability: The provision of this section shall apply to all buildings having an overall building height to the highest roof level average height,
including penthouse roofs, located more than fifty (50) feet above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access.
AMENDMENT TO SECTION 406
MOTOR-VEHICLE-RELATED OCCUPANCIES
Subsection 406.3.6 Attached Garages:
406.3.6 Attached Garages: Private garages located beneath or adjacent to rooms in buildings of use groups R-1, R-2, R-3 or I-1 shall be separated
from adjacent interior spaces by fire partitions, floors and ceilings which are constructed with not less than a 1-hour fire resistance rating. The sills of
all door openings between the garage and adjacent interior spaces shall be raised not less than four (4) inches (102 mm) above the garage floor.
Attached private garages shall be completely separated from the adjacent interior spaces and the attic by no less than one-hour fire resistance rated
assembly. The door opening protectives shall be a minimum of one-hour fire resistance rating, including door hardware and self closer.
(Ord. 2015-11, 5-21-2015)
9-1-2-4: GENERAL BUILDING HEIGHTS AND AREAS:
AMENDMENT TO SECTION 507
UNLIMITED AREA BUILDINGS
Subsection 507.3 Sprinklered, One-Story:
Under "exceptions", delete number 2.
(Ord. 2015-11, 5-21-2015)
9-1-2-5: TYPES OF CONSTRUCTION:
AMENDMENT TO SECTION 601
TABLE 601
Table 601 Fire Resistance Rating Requirements For Building Elements (Hours):
Insert note "H" to table 601:
H. All dwelling unit separations shall have a minimum 2-hour fire resistance rating.
(Ord. 2015-11, 5-21-2015)
9-1-2-6: FIRE RESISTANCE RATED CONSTRUCTION:
AMENDMENT TO SECTION 705
FIRE WALLS
Subsection 705.3 Materials:
Delete the text in "exception" in its entirety.
AMENDMENT TO SECTION 718
CONCEALED SPACES
Subsection 718.3.2 Groups R-1, R-2, R-3 And R-4:
Add: Fire Stopping: All new pre-manufactured wood floor assemblies with open webs shall be fire stopped for each eight (8) feet of span with solid
fire stopping materials the full depth of joists according to subsection 718.2.1. Draft stopping shall be installed so that the horizontal floor areas do
not exceed 1,000 square feet in area.
(Ord. 2015-11, 5-21-2015)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 277/498
9-1-2-7: FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS:
AMENDMENT TO SECTION 903
AUTOMATIC SPRINKLER SYSTEMS
Subsection 903.2 Where Required: Delete subsection 903.2 and replace with the following:
Subsection 903.2 Where Required: Approved automatic sprinkler systems shall be provided throughout all new buildings and structures.
Exception:
Use Group U: An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided when the building area exceeds 1000 square feet.
Delete subsections 903.2.1 through 903.2.12.
Subsection 903.3.5 Water Supplies:
Change the wording "international plumbing code" to "Illinois state plumbing code."
Subsection 903.3.5.1.2 Residential Combination Services:
Combination water supplies shall only be used on existing structures and with approval of the building official.
Subsection 903.4 Sprinkler System Monitoring And Alarm:
Under "exceptions" delete number 2.
Subsection 903.4.1 Monitoring. Alarm, supervisory, and trouble signals shall be distinctly different and shall be automatically transmitted to the village
of Streamwood fire department alarm board at Northwest Central Dispatch in accordance with remote station system NfiPA 72C 72, 26.5 listed in
appendix A, chapter 35. The method of transmission shall be Keltron radio. It is the responsibility of the building owner to maintain this supervision
during the required life of the building. A certificate of occupancy (as defined in section 118.0) shall not be issued and no movement of supplies
and/or equipment into the building shall be permitted until the fire alarm system is fully functional and supervised.
AMENDMENT TO SECTION 905
STANDPIPE SYSTEMS
Subsection 905.3. Delete exception.
Subsection 905.3.1 Height: Class I standpipe systems shall be installed throughout buildings where the floor level of the highest story is located
more than 20 feet above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access, or where the floor level of the lowest story is located more than 20 feet
below the highest level of fire department vehicle access.
Subsection 905.3.4 Stages. Delete exception.
AMENDMENT TO SECTION 906
PORTABLE FIRE EXTINGUISHERS
Subsection 906.1 Where Required:
Delete 1. and replace with the following: 1. In call use groups.
Delete 2. and replace with the following: 2. A class K fire extinguisher shall be installed within 30 feet of commercial cooking equipment.
Subsection 906.2:
906.2 General Requirements: Portable fire extinguishers shall be selected and installed in accordance with this section and NFPA 10. All fire
extinguishers shall bear a current inspection label from a fire equipment distributor licensed by the office of Illinois state fire marshal.
AMENDMENT TO SECTION 907
FIRE ALARM AND DETECTION SYSTEMS
Subsection 907.2.1 Group A:
Delete this subsection in its entirety, except for "exceptions," and insert the following:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 278/498
A manual fire alarm system shall be installed in all occupancies of use group A.
Subsection 907.2.2 Group B:
Delete this subsection in its entirety, except for "exceptions," and insert the following:
A manual fire alarm system shall be installed in all group B occupancies.
Subsection 907.2.3 Group E:
Delete under "exceptions" number 1.
Subsection 907.2.4 Group F:
Delete this subsection in its entirety, except for "exceptions," and insert the following:
A manual fire alarm system shall be installed in all group F occupancies.
Subsection 907.2.7 Group M:
Delete this subsection in its entirety, except for "exceptions," and insert the following:
A manual fire alarm system shall be installed in all group M occupancies.
Subsection 907.2.13 High-Rise Buildings:
Delete where it reads "75 feet" and insert "50 feet."
Subsection 907.6.3 Zones:
Change where it reads "300 feet" to read "200 feet."
Subsection 907.6.5 Fire Alarm And Detection Systems:
907.6.5 Monitoring:
Delete this subsection in its entirety, except for "exceptions 1 and 3," and insert the following:
All required fire alarm systems shall have supervisory, trouble and fire condition signals transmitted to the village of Streamwood fire department
alarm board at Northwest Central Dispatch in accordance with remote station system NfiPA 72, 26.5 listed in chapter 35. The method of transmission
shall be Keltron radio. It is the responsibility of the building owner to maintain this supervision during the required life of the building. A certificate of
occupancy (as defined in section 118.0) shall not be issued and no movement of supplies and/or equipment into the building shall be permitted until
the fire alarm system is fully functional and supervised.
Add subsection 907.6.3.3 Multi-Tenant Buildings:
907.6.3.3 Multi-Tenant: All multi-tenant buildings shall annunciate each tenant space by a method approved by the fire official.
AMENDMENT TO SECTION 916
KEY BOXES
916.1 General: Key boxes shall be provided in all buildings in accordance with section 506 of the international fire code, as amended.
(Ord. 2015-11, 5-21-2015)
AMENDMENT TO SECTION 916
POST-FIRE SMOKE PURGE SYSTEMS
916.1 Scope And Purpose: The purpose of this section is to establish minimum requirements for the design and installation of post-fire smoke
purge systems, which are intended for the timely restoration of operations and overhaul activities once a fire is extinguished. Post-fire smoke purge
systems are not intended or designed as life safety systems and are not required to meet the provisions of section 909. Post-fire smoke purge
systems shall be required in:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 279/498
1. High-rise buildings subject to section 403.
2. Unlimited area buildings subject to section 507.
3. Buildings with any story exceeding 50,000 square feet (4645 m2) in floor area.
4. Building with spaces exceeding 100 feet (30 480 mm) from natural ventilation openings. Natural ventilation openings shall consist of operable
windows and doors of at least 5 percent of the floor area or roof vents per section 910.
5. High-piled stock or rack storage in accordance with the international fire code.
Exceptions: A post-fire smoke purge system is not required in R-2 occupancies where either of the following conditions exists:
1. Openable Windows. A post-fire smoke purge system is not required where every habitable room located in dwelling units is provided with
windows complying with chapter 12 and all of the following:
1.1. Minimum Window Area. Each required window shall provide at least 12 square feet (1.1 m2) of glazed area. The total area of all such
windows shall not be less than 10 percent of the floor area of the room or space served.
1.2. Minimum Openable Area. Each required window shall provide a minimum of 6 square feet (0.56 m2) of openable area. The total area of
all such openings shall not be less than 5 percent of the floor area of the room or space served. In addition, each required openable area shall
be:
1.2.1. Located wholly at least 30 inches (762 mm) above the finished floor; and
1.2.2. Fully openable to the minimum 6 square feet (0.56 m2), at all times and without limiting stops or devices. Such openings may be achieved
through the use of double-hung, sliding, or similar types of windows. However, in the event of the use of casement, hopper, pivot, or awning-type
windows, such windows shall satisfy the requirements of this section only when they open to at least 75 degrees.
2. Smoke-Proof Enclosures. A post-fire smoke purge system is not required where all exits are constructed as smoke-proof enclosures in
accordance with section 1019.1.8.
916.2 Post-Fire Smoke Purge Systems In Occupancy Groups Other Than R-2:
916.2.1 General Design Requirements: Post-fire smoke purge systems are permitted to use dedicated equipment, the normal building HVAC
system or other openings and shall have the capability to exhaust smoke from occupied spaces. Smoke removal may be by either mechanical or
natural ventilation, but shall be capable of removing cold smoke. Smoke removed from a space must be discharged to a safe location outside the
building and shall not be recirculated into the building in accordance with the mechanical code.
916.2.2 Exhaust Capability: The system shall have an air supply and smoke exhaust capability in accordance with table 916.2.2.1. The system
need not exhaust from all areas at the same time, but is permitted to be zoned, based on the largest fire area served. For the purpose of calculating
system size, the height of a compartment shall be considered to run from slab to slab and include the volume above suspended ceilings. Provisions
shall be made for sufficient make-up air. The provisions may include operable windows, doors, building leakage, or mechanical systems. In buildings
having occupied floors located less than 55 feet above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access, breakable windows may be utilized.
TABLE 916.2.2.1
CAPACITY REQUIREMENTS FOR POST-FIRE SMOKE PURGE SYSTEM
(other than R2)
Building Volume
(Cubic Feet)
Number Of Air
Changes Per Hour
Required Capacity
Less than 600,000 6
600,000-5,000,000 4
More than 5,000,000 2
916.2.3 Operation: The post-fire smoke purge system shall be operated by manual controls that are part of the fire command center, in accordance
with section 911, or fire alarm panel when a fire command center is not required. Such control center or panel shall display a graphic indicating the
portions of the building served by each post-fire smoke purge system. When a system is zoned into areas of operation less than the entire building,
each zone shall have an individual control. Fire department manual controls of post-fire smoke purge systems shall not override the manual or
automatic operation of the smoke control system. Such fire department manual controls shall override the fire shutdown signal from the fire alarm
system.
916.3 Post-Fire Smoke Purge Systems In Occupancy Group R-2: Post-fire smoke purge systems in R-2 occupancies shall comply with either
section 912.3.1 or 912.3.2. Smoke removed must be discharged to a safe location outside the building and shall not be recirculated into the building
in accordance with the international mechanical code.
916.3.1 Stair Ventilation: The top of all enclosed exit stairs shall be provided with a reversible fan system capable of introducing fresh air or
exhausting air at a rate of 6 air changes per hour or 1 cubic foot per minute per square foot (cfm/ft2) [0.00508 m3/(s.m2)], whichever is greater, based
on the area of the largest floor. Such system shall be operated by manual controls that are part of the fire command center, as per section 911, or fire
alarm panel when a fire command center is not required. Such control center or panel shall display a graphic indicating the portions of the building
served by each post-fire smoke purge system. The operation of such system shall be controlled by fire department personnel by manually opening
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 280/498
stair doors at the appropriate story.
916.3.2 Corridor Ventilation: The ducts and fans that provide fresh air supply to the public corridors in accordance with the mechanical code shall
be provided with reversible fans and duct sizes capable of introducing fresh air to or exhausting air from the corridor at a rate of 6 air changes per
hour or 1 cubic foot per minute per square foot (cfm/ft2) [0.00508 m3/(s.m2)], whichever is greater, based on the area of the largest apartment plus
the area of the public corridor. Such system shall be operated by manual controls that are part of the fire command center, as per section 911, or fire
alarm panel location when a fire command center is not required. Each floor to be ventilated shall be by individual controls. Such control center or
panel shall display a graphic indicating the portions of the building served by each post-fire smoke purge system.
916.4 Maintenance: The building owner shall maintain post-fire smoke exhaust systems in good operational condition. Records of annual testing
shall be maintained on the premises for inspection by fire department personnel.
(Ord. 2015-20, 8-6-2015)
9-1-2-8: MEANS OF EGRESS:
AMENDMENT TO SECTION 1006
GENERAL MEANS OF EGRESS
Subsection 1006.1:
1006.1.1 Illumination Emergency Power:
Add sentence: Emergency lighting shall be installed in all public restrooms, locker rooms, electrical rooms, and in all windowless areas.
AMENDMENT TO SECTION 1009
PANIC HARDWARE
Subsection 1009.1.9 Panic And Fire Exit Hardware:
Add sentence: Child-care facilities of use group I-2, shall be equipped with approved panic hardware in accordance with the provisions above.
Add subsection 1016.2.2 Travel Distance:
1016.2.2 Groups F-1 And S-2 Increase: The maximum exit access travel distance shall be 400 feet in group F-1 or S-1 occupancies where all of
the following conditions are met:
1. The portion of the building classified as group F-1 or S-1 is limited to one story in height.
2. The minimum height from the finished floor to the bottom of the ceiling or roof slab or deck is 24 feet.
3. The building is equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with section 903.3.1.1.
(Ord. 2015-11, 5-21-2015)
9-1-2-9: STRUCTURAL DESIGN:
AMENDMENT TO SECTION 1608
SNOW LOADS
Subsection 1608.2:
1608.2 Ground Snow Loads:
Add sentences: The 100-year mean recurrence interval shall be used for all buildings and structures. The village of Streamwood shall be considered
to be in the thirty (30) pound-force per square foot category in figure 1608.2. The snow load design used for temporary buildings shall be approved
by the building official.
AMENDMENT TO SECTION 1609
WIND LOADS
Subsection 1609.3:
1609.3 Basic Wind Speed:
Add sentence: The basic wind speed, in miles per hour, to be used within the village of Streamwood for buildings and structures shall be ninety (90)
mph as determined by figure 1112.3.2.
AMENDMENT TO SECTION 1805
DAMPPROOFING AND WATERPROOFING
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 281/498
Subsection 1805.4.4 Basements; Crawl Spaces:
1805.4.4 Basements And Crawl Spaces: Basement and crawl space foundations shall have approved subsoil foundation drain tile. Discharged in
an approved manner.
Subsection 1805.4.5 Prohibited Connections:
1805.4.5 Prohibited Connection: A subsoil foundation drain tile shall not be connected to the sanitary sewer line.
(Ord. 2015-11, 5-21-2015)
9-1-2-10: SOILS AND FOUNDATIONS:
AMENDMENT TO SECTION 1807
FOUNDATION WALLS
Subsection 1807.1 Foundation Walls:
Add sentences: The use of trenched foundations shall be determined by the recommendations of a geotechnical soil report attesting to the bearing
values of the soil and the use of trench foundations. The minimum trench width shall be twelve inches (12").
Subsection 1807.1.3 Rubble Stone:
Delete the text in this subsection in its entirety.
Subsection 1807.1.4 Wood Foundations:
Delete the text in this subsection it its entirety.
Subsection 1807.1.5 Concrete And Masonry Foundation Walls:
Add sentences: Masonry foundation walls shall not be used below grade. All foundation walls shall be of monolithically poured concrete. Trenched
footings must be poured the same day they are trenched; they must be reinforced.
AMENDMENT TO SECTION 1809
SHALLOW FOUNDATIONS
Subsection 1809.9 Masonry-Unit Footings:
Delete the text in this subsection in its entirety and insert the following:
Masonry - Unit footings are not allowed to be constructed.
(Ord. 2015-11, 5-21-2015)
9-1-2-11: WOOD:
AMENDMENT TO SECTION 2303
MINIMUM STANDARDS AND QUALITY
Subsection 2303.4.1 Design:
Add: Engineered Wood Products: All pre-manufactured wood floor assemblies shall meet the minimum live load deflection L/480. All trusses shall
have metal gussets. Floor trusses shall be designed for a floor load of L/480.
AMENDMENT TO SECTION 2304
GENERAL CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS
Subsection 2304.7.1 Structural Floor Sheathing:
Delete the text in this subsection in its entirety and insert the following:
All floor sheathing shall be a minimum where provided for; three-quarters (3/4") inch plywood tongue-and-groove joints.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 282/498
Subsection 2304.7.2 Structural Roof Sheathing:
Add sentence: Plywood provided for roof sheathing shall be a minimum of one-half (1/2) inch. OSB shall not be used for roof applications.
AMENDMENT TO SECTION 2308
CONVENTIONAL LIGHT-FRAME CONSTRUCTION
Insert subsection 2308.9.1.1:
2308.9.1.1 Bearing Walls: All bearing wall shall be constructed of a minimum two (2) inch by four (4) inch nominal lumber and shall have a minimum
of two (2), two inch (2") by four inch (4") nominal lumber top plates. Wall stud spacing shall not exceed sixteen inches (16") on center.
Subsection 2308.9.2.3 Nonbearing Walls And Partitions:
Insert the following:
Change: Where it reads 28" change to 24".
Studs in nonbearing walls and partitions shall be constructed according to the following:
1. Studs shall be of continuous lengths without splicing.
2. Walls six (6) feet or more of unsupported length containing openings shall be constructed as bearing wall according to section 1703.2.2.
3. Walls six (6) feet or more of unsupported length without openings shall have minimum nominal lumber of 2 inch by 4 inch and maximum spacing
of two (2) inch by four (4) inch lumber shall be sixteen (16) inches on center.
Subsection 2308.10.1 Wind Uplift:
Add sentence: Metal straps approved by the code official shall be used to secure the roof rafters or roof trusses to the wall top plate.
(Ord. 2015-11, 5-21-2015)
9-1-2-12: ELECTRICAL:
(Rep. by Ord. 2015-11, 5-21-2015)
9-1-2-13: PLUMBING SYSTEMS:
AMENDMENT TO SECTION 2901
GENERAL
Subsection 2901.1 General:
Add sentence: Shall be made to conform to the legally adopted Illinois plumbing code.
(Ord. 2015-11, 5-21-2015)
9-1-2-14: ELEVATORS AND CONVEYING SYSTEMS:
AMENDMENT TO SECTION 3002
EMERGENCY OPERATIONS
Subsection 3002.4 Emergency Medical Elevator:
3003.3 Emergency Medical: In all structures where passenger elevators are to be installed, at least one (1) elevator shall be provided with an
emergency medical elevator to accommodate a stretcher in the horizontal position.
Subsection 3002.4.1 Size:
3002.4.1 Size: The minimum distance between walls or between wall and door opening excluding return panels shall be designed with a dimension
to allow a medical stretcher to be placed within the elevator car in a horizontal position.
(Ord. 2015-11, 5-21-2015)
9-1-2-15: SIGNS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 283/498
AMENDMENT TO SECTION 3107
SIGNS
Subsection 3107.1 General:
Add sentence: If the work authorized under a permit has not been completed within forty-five (45) days after the date of issuance, the permit shall
become null and void.
Subsection 3107.2 Permit Revocation:
3107.2 Revocation Of Permit: All rights and privileges acquired under the provisions of this chapter, or any amendment thereto are mere licenses
revocable at any time by the president and board of trustees, and all such permits shall contain this provision.
The board of trustees is hereby authorized and empowered to revoke any permit issued under the provisions of this chapter upon failure of the
holder thereof to comply with any provision of this chapter.
Subsection 3107.3 Removal:
3107.3 Removal Of Certain Signs: If the owner of a sign shall discontinue business at the place where the sign is located, such sign shall be taken
down at the expense of the sign owner or property owner within twenty (20) days after such discontinuance of business. Such sign shall not be
erected elsewhere unless a permit is issued, pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, for the new installation.
Any sign now or hereafter existing which no longer advertises a bona fide business conducted, or a product sold, shall be taken down and removed
by the owner, agent or person having the beneficial use of the building or structure upon which sign may be found within twenty (20) days after
written notification from the administrator, and upon failure to comply with such notice within the time specified in such order, the administrator is
hereby authorized to cause removal of such sign, and any expense incident thereto shall be paid by the owner of the building or structure to which
such sign is attached.
Subsection 3107.4 Filing:
3107.4 Filing: Every person filing an application as provided in this chapter relative to the erection, alteration, change, repair, relocation or removal
of a sign that is to extend over any village street, easement or right of way, or for any sign to be placed on any village street, easement or right of way
shall, before the permit is granted, file with the administrator or his authorized representative, a continuing bond in a sum of not less than fifty
thousand dollars ($50,000.00) executed by the applicant and a surety company to be approved by the village and conditioned for the faithful
observance of the provisions of this chapter and all amendments thereto and of all laws and ordinances of the village relating to signs and which
shall indemnify and save harmless the village from any and all damages, judgments, costs or expenses which the village may incur or suffer by
reason of granting of said permit, which bond shall be in a form satisfactory to the village attorney. The administrator or his authorized representative
shall, for each sign erected, determine the amount of the bond or certificate of insurance necessary to indemnify and hold the village harmless based
on the location, type of sign and the liability that may result from the hazard created by the sign in question. A liability insurance policy issued by an
insurance company authorized to do business in this state conforming to this section may be permitted in lieu of a bond.
Subsection 3107.5 Electrical:
3107.5 Electrical: Portable signs shall not be illuminated.
(Ord. 2015-11, 5-21-2015)
9-1-2-16: SAFEGUARDS DURING CONSTRUCTION:
AMENDMENT TO SECTION 3303
DEMOLITION
Subsection 3303 Vacant Lot:
3303.4 Vacant Lot:
Add sentence: All vacant lots shall be seeded with grass and maintained properly.
Subsection 3303.8 General; Procedures:
3303.8 General Procedures And Requirements: Before proceeding with the wrecking or tearing down of any building or other structure more than
one thousand (1,000) cubic feet in size, a permit for such wrecking or tearing down shall first be obtained by the owner or his agent from the code
official, and it shall be unlawful to proceed with the wrecking or tearing down of any building or structure, or any structural part of such building or
structure, unless such permit shall have first been obtained. Application for such permit shall be made by the owner, or his agent, through the code
official, who shall issue such permit upon such application and the payment of the fee herein provided for.
Every application shall state the location and describe the building which it is proposed to wreck or tear down. Upon the issuance of said permit, such
building may be wrecked or torn down, provided that all the work done thereunder shall be subject to the supervision of the code official and to such
reasonable restrictions as he may impose in regard to elements of safety and health; and provided further, that the work shall be kept sprinkled and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 284/498
sufficient scaffolding shall be provided to insure safety to human life, and to comply with the provisions of the statutes of the state of Illinois
heretofore made and provided.
Wrecking Bond:
1. Before any permit is issued granting authority to wreck a building or structure for which such permit is required, the person engaged in the work
of wrecking the same shall file with the code official a bond with sureties to be approved by the village attorney to indemnify, keep and save
harmless the village against any loss, cost, damage, expense, judgment or liability of any kind whatsoever which the village may suffer, or which
may accrue against, be charged to, or be recovered from, the said village or any of its officials from or by reason or on account of accidents to
persons or property during any such wrecking operations, and from or by reason or account of anything done under or by virtue of any permits
granted or any such wrecking operation. Each bond shall be submitted to the village attorney for approval as to form.
2. Such bond in each case shall extend to and cover all such wrecking operations carried on through the permit or permits obtained thereunder by
such persons and no permit shall be issued for any wrecking work, except as hereinbefore otherwise provided. Said bond shall be in the penal
sum of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for all wrecking operations on such buildings and other structures not more than three (3)
stories in height. Said bond shall be in the penal sum of two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00) for all wrecking operations on such buildings
and other structures four (4) or more stories in height. There shall be an additional bond filed in the penal sum of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00)
conditioned upon the restoring and leveling of the premises upon which such wrecking operations have been completed.
3. Upon the filing of such bond or bonds, the person engaged in the work of wrecking such building and other structures, may obtain permits for
such wrecking operations as are authorized under said bond or bonds as hereinabove provided for; provided however, that in case of accident or
casualty in the progress of any wrecking operations carried on under any permit so issued, or the happening of any circumstance which might, in
the opinion of the code official, render such bond or bonds inadequate, the code official may, in his discretion require such additional bond as he
may deem necessary to fully protect the village from loss resulting from the issuance of such permit before he allows the work to proceed or before
any additional permits are issued by him.
AMENDMENT TO SECTION 3304
SITE WORK
Subsection 3304.1.5 Temporary Fencing:
Temporary fencing, a minimum of six (6) feet in height shall be placed around construction sites under the following conditions:
1. An excavation more than four (4) feet in depth is constructed.
2. Heavy equipment is used on the site.
3. Where required by the code official.
4. Exception: Residential subdivisions where there are no occupancies issued.
AMENDMENT TO SECTION 3305
SANITARY
3305.1 Facilities Required:
Delete "international plumbing code" and insert in lieu thereof "Illinois plumbing code."
(Ord. 2015-11, 5-21-2015)
9-1-2-17: EXISTING STRUCTURES:
AMENDMENT TO SECTION 3410
MOVED STRUCTURES
Subsection 3410.2 Moving Buildings:
3410.2 Moving Buildings: No person shall be permitted to move any building which has been damaged to an extent greater than fifty percent (50%)
of its fair market value by fire, decay or otherwise; nor shall it be permissible to move any frame building of such character as is prohibited to be
constructed within the village limits; nor shall it be permissible to move any building to a location at which the uses for such building is designed are
prohibited by the ordinances of the village. Permits for the moving of frame buildings, other than those of which the moving herein is prohibited, shall
be granted upon securing and filing the written consent of two-thirds (2/3) of the property owners occupying frontage on both sides of the street in the
block in which such building is to be moved. No permit shall be issued to move any building used or designed to be used for purposes for which
frontage consents are required until frontage consents in the block to which such building is to be moved have also been secured and filed as
required by the provisions of the ordinance of the village relating to such use.
No building used for residence or multiple dwelling purposes shall be moved from one lot to another or from one location to another upon the same
lots unless the space to be occupied on such lot shall comply with the provisions of the ordinances of the village.
(Ord. 2015-11, 5-21-2015)
Chapter 2
ELECTRICAL CODE
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 285/498
9-2-1: ELECTRICAL CODE ADOPTED:
The National Fire Protection Association standard 70 - 2011, national electrical code, published by the National Fire Protection Association is hereby
adopted and to be known as the electrical code for the village of Streamwood, Illinois. The purpose of this code is the practical safeguarding of persons
and property from hazards arising from the use of electricity. The electrical code shall be enforced for new and existing installation.
A. The regulations, provisions, conditions of terms of the national electrical code are hereby adopted by reference, as if fully set out herein, with the
changes, modifications, and exceptions as hereinafter set forth.
B. Information Annex H, Article 80 Administration And Enforcement is hereby adopted by reference, as if fully set out herein, with the changes,
modifications, and exceptions as hereinafter set forth. (Ord. 2015-11, 5-21-2015)
9-2-2: ELECTRICAL CODE AMENDMENTS:
9-2-2-1: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
AMENDMENT TO ARTICLE 80
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Subsection 80.2 Definitions:
Add definition: Electrical Contractor:
The term "electrical contractor" as used in this chapter shall be understood to mean any person engaged in the business of installing or altering, by
contract, electrical equipment for the utilization of electricity supplied for light, heat or power, not including radio apparatus or equipment for wireless
reception of sounds and signals, conductors and other equipment installed for or by public utilities including common carriers which are under the
jurisdiction of the Illinois commerce commission, for use in their operation as public utilities; but the term "electrical contractor" does not include
employees employed by such contractor to do or supervise such work.
Modify subsection 80.13 (13) Authority:
(13) Last sentence to read: The authority having jurisdiction shall be notified when the installation is ready for inspection and shall conduct the
inspection within 15 days.
Insert subsection 80.13 (17) and (18) Authority:
(17) Breaking Seals: The code official is hereby empowered to attach to electrical cabinets and equipment, any official notice or seal to prevent use
of electricity, and it shall be unlawful for any person to put or attach such seal, or to break, change, destroy, tear, mutilate, cover or otherwise deface
or injure any such official notice or seal posted by an inspector.
(18) Disturbance Of Existing Wiring: It shall be unlawful for any person regulated under this code in any way to cut, disturb, alter or change any
electrical wiring or to permit such electrical wiring to be cut, disturbed, altered or changed, unless done in conformity with the electrical regulations of
this code.
Subsection 80.15 Electrical Board:
Delete subsection in its entirety and insert:
80.15 Electrical Licensing:
1. Appointment: Before any permit to install or alter electrical work shall be issued to any person entitled to secure permits under the electrical
regulations of this code, he shall appoint or employ a person who may be himself or some other person who, for the purpose of the electrical
regulations of this code, shall be known as a supervising electrician. The person so appointed or employed to act as a supervising electrician shall,
before starting as such supervising electrician, be required to comply with subsection 3 of this section.
2. Application: Any person who has been appointed or employed to act as a supervising electrician for a registered electrical contractor, shall make
application to the code official, in writing, on a form to be furnished by the community development department.
3. Registration Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of an electrical contractor, as herein defined, without being
registered as an electrical contractor in the manner hereinafter set forth.
4. Application And Issuance Of Certificate: Any person desiring to engage in the business of an electrical contractor shall apply for registration to
the code official. Upon the filing of such application in proper form, and the payment of the registration fee as provided for in section 6 of this
chapter, the code official shall register the applicant as an electrical contractor, and shall issue to the applicant a certificate of registration which
shall authorize the applicant to engage in such business for the year in which it is issued. Provided, however, before any permits shall be issued to
such electrical contractor, he shall have complied with the sections of this chapter.
5. Expiration Of Certificate: The certificate of registration shall expire on December 31 of the year in which it is issued. A certificate of registration
shall not be transferable.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 286/498
6. Fee For Registration: The fee for registration as an electrical contractor shall be forty dollars ($40) per annum, which sum shall be paid by the
applicant to the code official in advance upon filing the application.
7. Qualifications: An applicant is duly licensed by a municipality that requires testing substantially in compliance with this code. The code official is
required to confirm with said municipality that said license is in good standing.
Subsection 80.19 Permits And Approvals:
Insert subsection 80.19(A)(3) Application:
(3) Permit Applications: The community development department shall issue permits for such installation and alteration of electrical equipment in
all cases where application for such permit shall be made in accordance with the rules and regulations applicable thereto; provided, however, that
no permit shall be issued for installing or altering by contract, electrical equipment, unless the person applying for such permit is registered as an
electrical contractor as required by this chapter, and further provided, that the inspection fee as provided for in this chapter shall have been paid in
advance upon filing the application.
Insert subsection 80.19(A)(4) Application:
(4) Permits Required: No electrical equipment shall be installed or altered except upon a permit first issued by the community development
department authorizing the installation, alteration or repair of electrical equipment.
Modify subsection 80.19(F)(3) Inspection And Approvals:
(3) Between the word "until" and "days" insert the number 2.
Insert subsection 80.19(F)(6) Inspection And Approvals:
(6) Reinspection: The code official is hereby empowered to reinspect any electrical equipment within the scope of the electrical regulations of this
code, and when said electrical equipment is found to be unsafe to life or property, shall notify, in writing, either the owner, his agent for the purpose
of managing, controlling or collecting rents or any other person managing, controlling, using or operating the same to place such electrical
equipment in safe and secure condition in compliance with the electrical regulations of this code within such time as the code official shall consider
just and reasonable, but in no event shall this time exceed fifteen (15) days from the date of such notice. Refusal to comply with the requirements
of such notice shall subject the person owning, managing, operating or using such electrical equipment to the penalties provided for in this code.
The code official of the community development department and the electrical inspectors are hereby empowered to cut off and stop current to any
electrical equipment found to be unsafe to life or property.
Insert subsection 80.19(G)(8)(9)(10)(11)(12)(13) Inspection And Approvals:
(8) Suspension Of Permit Privileges: Failure on the part of a registered electrical contractor to correct any defect, error or deficiency in any work
installed under the authority of a permit issued to him by the community development department within fifteen (15) calendar days after written
notification thereof by the said department or within such further reasonable time as may, upon request be prescribed, the code official shall,
without further notice, stop the issuance of permits to such registered electrical contractor until such corrections have been made, inspected and
approved. In addition thereto, the penalty provided in this chapter may be enforced.
(9) The code official is hereby empowered to suspend the permit privileges of any registered electrical contractor who shall fail to pay any just
indebtedness for inspection fees for electrical wires and apparatus as fixed by that part of this chapter dealing therewith, until such registered
electrical contractor shall discharge and pay to the village all fees then due and owing from such registered electrician.
(10) Revocation Of Permits: The community development department is authorized to revoke any permit or certificate obtained by fraud,
misrepresentation or in any way contrary to the provisions of the electrical regulations of this code, for the installation, alteration, repair and use of
any electrical equipment.
(11) Use Of Permit Issued To Another: It shall be unlawful for any person to install, alter or repair any electrical wires or apparatus by authority of a
permit issued to and for the use of some other person.
(12) Permit For Person Not Entitled To One: It shall be unlawful for any registered electrical contractor to secure or furnish a permit for the
installation, alteration and repair of electrical wires and apparatus to any person not entitled to such permit under the electrical regulations of this
electrical code.
(13) Revocation Of Permit Or Certificate: Any person violating any sections of this code shall be subject to the penalties provided for and in
addition thereto, the permit, certificate or any printed form issued to a registered electrical contractor shall be revoked by the community
development department. Notice of revocation shall be in writing to the person violating any of those sections.
Subsection 80.23 Notice Of Violations, Penalties:
Delete subsection 80.23(B)(3) in its entirety and insert:
(3) Any person, firm, or corporation who shall willfully violate any of the applicable provisions of this article shall be guilty of a petty offense and,
upon conviction or finding of liability thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) or more than seven hundred fifty
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 287/498
dollars ($750.00) for each offense, together with the costs of prosecution.
Where an electrical installation has been started prior to the issuance of a permit for such work, the normal permit fee as required by this code
shall be increased by fifty percent (50%).
Insert subsection 80.23(B)(4):
(4) Where a registered electrical contractor is found doing electrical work without a permit on three (3) separate occasions in one calendar year, a
hearing shall be held by the code official at which time the permit privileges of said electrical contractor may be suspended for a period of time not
to exceed one year.
Subsection 80.25 Connection To Electricity Supply:
Modify subsection 80.25(C) Notification:
Between the word "within" and "business" insert the number 15.
Subsection 80.27 Inspector's Qualifications:
Modify subsection 80.27(A) Certificate:
Between the word "of" and "shall" insert the words village of Streamwood.
Modify subsection 80.27(B)(3)(4) Experience:
(3) Between the word "of" and "relating" insert the words village of Streamwood.
(4) Between the word "least" and "years'" insert the number 5, and between the word "or" and "years" insert the number 5.
Subsection 80.29 Liability For Damages:
Modify 80.29 - Between the words "the" and "or" insert the words village of Streamwood.
Subsection 80.35 Effective Date:
Modify 80.35 - Between the word "effect" and "days" insert the word ten and the number 10.
(Ord. 2015-11, 5-21-2015)
9-2-2-2: RESERVED:
(Ord. 2015-11, 5-21-2015)
9-2-2-3: BRANCH CIRCUITS:
AMENDMENT TO ARTICLE 210
BRANCH CIRCUITS
Subsection 210.8 Ground-Fault Circuit-Interrupter Protection For Personnel:
Insert subsection 210.8(D) All Residential, Commercial And Industrial:
The load side of a ground-fault, circuit-interrupter receptacle shall not be used to protect required outlets in other rooms or locations.
Subsection 210.12 Arc-Fault Circuit-Interrupter Protection:
Add to subsection 210.12(B) Dwelling Unit Bedrooms:
Smoke detectors are not required to be AFCI protected and are to be installed on a general lighting circuit. All smoke detectors are to be installed in
accessible locations for maintenance and inspection.
Subsection 210.21 Outlet Devices:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 288/498
Insert subsection 210.21(B)(5) Receptacles:
Commercial and industrial building receptacles shall have a minimum rating of 20 amperes.
Subsection 210.50 Required Outlets - General:
Insert subsection 210.50(D) Commercial And Industrial:
In all office areas there shall be a minimum of 1 receptacle per wall.
Exception: Required receptacles may be deleted with the approval of the code official.
Subsection 210.52 Dwelling Unit Receptacle Outlets:
210.52(G) Basements And Garages:
Add sentence: In each attached and detached garage, one receptacle shall be installed on the ceiling above each overhead garage door to provide
power for a garage door opener.
Subsection 210.70 Lighting Outlets Required:
Insert subsection 210.70(D) Exterior, Attached Garage:
A minimum of one light fixture shall be installed on the exterior of an attached garage. The light shall be located adjacent to the overhead door and
positioned to illuminate the address on the building. The required light shall be controlled by a photocell permanently installed in the wiring system.
Lamp socket, screw-in photocells will not be accepted.
Insert subsection 210.70(E) Exterior, Detached Garage:
All detached garages shall have a minimum of one GFI receptacle in the garage and one light on the interior and one light on the exterior.
(Ord. 2015-11, 5-21-2015)
9-2-2-4: BRANCH CIRCUIT AND FEEDER CALCULATIONS:
AMENDMENT TO ARTICLE 220
BRANCH-CIRCUIT AND FEEDER CALCULATIONS
Subsection 220.12 General Lighting:
Add sentence: In a dwelling unit, the number of power consuming devices on a general lighting circuit shall not exceed the ampacity of the over
current protection device.
(Ord. 2015-11, 5-21-2015)
9-2-2-5: SERVICES:
AMENDMENT TO ARTICLE 230
SERVICES
Subsection 230.2 Number Of Services:
Insert 230.2(A)(7) Special Conditions:
No residential occupancy or property shall have more than one (1) service installed. There shall be no exception made to this ruling.
Subsection 230.23 Sizing And Rating:
Delete "exception" under 230.23(B) Minimum Size.
Subsection 230.43 Wiring Methods For 600 Volts, Nominal, Or Less:
Delete subsection in its entirety and insert:
Service entrance conductors shall be installed in accordance with the applicable requirements of this code covering the type of wiring method used
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 289/498
and limited to the following methods:
1. Rigid metal conduit.
2. Intermediate metal conduit.
3. Rigid non-metallic conduit sixteen (16) inches, below grade use only. Conduit must be concrete encased.
All service entrance conductors installed in commercial and industrial buildings shall be installed in a minimum of 2-inch trade size conduit.
All new utility service must be underground.
Exception: Overhead service may be allowed in industrial buildings with the approval of the authority having jurisdiction.
Subsection 230.70 General - Service Equipment - Disconnecting Means:
Delete in its entirety 230.70(A) Location and insert the following:
The service disconnecting means shall be located within five feet (5') of where the conduit enters the building, or it may be located on the exterior. All
buildings shall have a single point of service disconnect. Multiple service disconnects may be allowed with the approval of the authority having
jurisdiction.
Subsection 230.79 Rating Of Service Disconnecting Means:
230.79(C) One-Family Dwelling: Change the wording from not less than 100 amperes to 200 amperes.
Exception: Existing dwelling units, under 1,500 square feet, may be 100 amps at the discretion of the authority having jurisdiction.
230.79(D) All Others: Change to read: For all other installations, the service disconnecting means shall have a rating of not less than 100 amperes.
Multi-family residences shall have a minimum rating of 200 amperes.
Exception: Service equipment for special uses, such as, aerators, commercial fountains, sign boards, and similar uses, may be permitted to be
rated less than one hundred ampere, provided that written permission is obtained from the electrical inspector prior to the installation.
(Ord. 2015-11, 5-21-2015)
9-2-2-6: OVERCURRENT AND PROTECTION:
AMENDMENT TO ARTICLE 240
OVERCURRENT PROTECTION
Subsection 240.20 Ungrounded Conductors:
Insert subsections 240.20(D) and (E):
(D) Tandem circuit breakers are not permitted in new or existing applications.
(E) A circuit breaker or fuse-holder terminal shall not have more than one conductor connected to it, unless specifically listed for the application.
(Ord. 2015-11, 5-21-2015)
9-2-2-7: GROUNDING:
AMENDMENT TO ARTICLE 250
GROUNDING
Subsection 250.30 Grounding Separately Derived Alternating-Current Systems:
Add sentences: 250.30(A)(4) Grounding Electrode:
If available on the premises, the grounding electrode conductor shall be connected to the street side of the water meter.
A metal identification tag shall be installed where the grounding conductor is connected to the ground electrode with approved ground strap.
Subsection 250.50 Grounding Electrode System:
Add sentence: Bonding bushings shall be installed on all services, sized in conformance with table 250-94.
Subsection 250.52 Grounding Electrodes:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 290/498
Insert 250.52(A)(8) Grounding Electrode Conductor:
The grounding electrode conductor shall be copper.
Subsection 250.92 Services:
Insert subsection 250.92(A)(3) Grounding Electrode Conductor:
All grounding electrode conductors shall be installed in E.M.T., rigid heavy-wall conduit, or intermediate metal conduit. Ground clamp with approved
ground strap and metal identification tag required.
(Ord. 2015-11, 5-21-2015)
9-2-2-8: WIRING METHODS:
AMENDMENT TO ARTICLE 300
WIRING METHODS
Subsection 300.4 Protection Against Physical Damage:
Insert subsection 300.4(I):
All conductors and cables shall be run in electrical metallic tubing or rigid heavy-wall conduit in areas that are not accessible or in areas that may be
subject to physical damage.
Installation of low voltage wiring shall conform to the following requirements:
1) All low voltage wire shall be supported from the building structure only.
Note: This excludes all other piping systems such as electrical, plumbing, sheet metal ducts and fire suppression pipes.
2) All low voltage wire shall be secure with tie wraps, bridle rings or approved hangers in a manner which prevents loose or sagging wires.
3) All low voltage wire shall be secured approximately every five feet.
4) All low voltage wire in concealed spaces such as walls and non-accessible ceilings shall be installed in metal conduit or flexible metal conduit.
5) All low voltage wiring shall be installed in a trunk and branch system perpendicular to building lines.
6) All low voltage wiring in plenums shall be rated for use in plenum areas and secured with plenum rated straps.
7) Mechanical protection shall be provided for wiring in utility areas and habitable areas where subject to physical damage.
8) Wall penetrations shall require sleeves for wires and fire stopping sealant.
9) Permits shall be required for all commercial low voltage installations - for example: telephone, computer cable, sound systems, visual
communication, and aural communication systems.
10) Before Securing A Final Inspection: All abandoned cabling shall be removed to facilitate reduced fire load and maintain installation in a neat
and workmanship like manner. It shall be the responsibility of each contractor to contact this office prior to ceiling closure to schedule an inspection
and insure removal of all cable not in use.
(Ord. 2015-11, 5-21-2015)
9-2-2-9: CONDUCTORS FOR GENERAL WIRING:
AMENDMENT TO ARTICLE 310
CONDUCTORS FOR GENERAL WIRING
Subsection 310.106 Conductors:
310.106(B) Conductor Material:
Add sentence: All conductors in this article shall be copper. Exception: Utility run conductors.
Delete subsection 310.15(B)(7) 120/240-Volt, 3-Wire, Single-Phase Dwelling Services And Feeders in its entirety.
(Ord. 2015-11, 5-21-2015)
9-2-2-10: OUTLET, DEVICE, BOXES AND FITTINGS:
AMENDMENT TO ARTICLE 314
OUTLET, DEVICE, PULL AND JUNCTION BOXES; CONDUIT BODIES; FITTINGS; AND MANHOLES
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 291/498
Delete subsection 314.3 Nonmetallic Boxes.
Add a new section:
Deep junction boxes 4" x 4" x 21/8" shall be required for kitchens, bathrooms, GFCI receptacles and home run junction boxes.
(Ord. 2015-11, 5-21-2015)
9-2-2-11: ARMORED CABLE:
AMENDMENT TO ARTICLE 320
ARMORED CABLE: TYPE AC
Article 320 Armored Cable:
Delete the text in this section in its entirety and insert the following:
320 Armored Cable: Armored cable may be only used with the written approval of the electrical inspector.
(Ord. 2015-11, 5-21-2015)
9-2-2-12: METAL CLAD CABLE:
AMENDMENT TO ARTICLE 330
METAL-CLAD CABLE: TYPE MV
Delete article 330 Metal-Clad Cable.
(Ord. 2015-11, 5-21-2015)
9-2-2-13: NONMETALLIC SHEATHED CABLE:
AMENDMENT TO ARTICLE 334
NONMETALLIC-SHEATHED CABLE: TYPES NM, NMC, AND NMS
Delete article 334 Nonmetallic-Sheathed Cable.
(Ord. 2015-11, 5-21-2015)
9-2-2-14: SERVICE ENTRANCE CABLE:
AMENDMENT TO ARTICLE 338
SERVICE ENTRANCE CABLE: TYPES SE AND USE
Delete article 338 Service Entrance Cable.
(Ord. 2015-11, 5-21-2015)
9-2-2-15: UNDERGROUND FEEDER CABLE:
AMENDMENT TO ARTICLE 340
UNDERGROUND FEEDER CABLE: TYPES UF
Delete article 340 Underground Feeder Cable.
(Ord. 2015-11, 5-21-2015)
9-2-2-16: FLEXIBLE METAL CONDUIT:
AMENDMENT TO ARTICLE 348
FLEXIBLE METAL CONDUIT: TYPE FMC
Subsection 348.20 Size:
Insert subsection 348.20(A)(5)(a)(b)(c)
(a) 1/2" flexible metal conduit (Greenfield) shall be permitted for the connection of motor driven devices. 3/8" flexible metal conduit shall be
permitted for lighting fixtures where flexibility of location is required, for "lay-in" type ceiling lighting fixtures, or baseboard heaters. In all
installations, the length shall be kept as short as possible, but shall not exceed six feet (6') in total length from the junction box to the device being
served. It may not be looped from one junction box or fixture to another.
Exception: 1/2" flexible metal conduit may be permitted to exceed six feet (6') in length, but not more than nine feet (9') in length, where it is
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 292/498
necessary to finish an existing wall or enclosed area in existing occupancies.
(b) All flexible metal conduit installations shall contain a green insulated ground conductor of the proper size.
(c) 3/8" flexible metal conduit may be permitted for the connection of residential dishwashers and garbage disposals.
(Ord. 2015-11, 5-21-2015)
9-2-2-17: RIGID NONMETALLIC CONDUIT:
AMENDMENT TO ARTICLE 352
RIGID NONMETALLIC CONDUIT: TYPE RNC
Subsection 352.10 Uses Permitted:
352.10(A) Concealed:
Add sentence: In areas such as in concrete slabs at finished grade level or below, or in a location where a conduit system is required and will be in
direct contact with the earth.
Subsection 352.10 Uses Permitted:
352.10(G) Underground Installations:
Add sentence: In slabs or below slab areas a full radius ninety (90) degree bend shall be used where the conduit exits the slab. The ninety (90)
degree bend shall be rigid metal or intermediate metallic conduit.
Subsection 352.10 Uses Permitted:
Insert subsection 352.10(I) Service Entrance Locations:
Where rigid nonmetallic conduit is used for service entrance conductors, the conduit shall be completely encased in four inches (4") of concrete.
(Ord. 2015-11, 5-21-2015)
9-2-2-18: LIQUIDTIGHT FLEXIBLE NONMETALLIC CONDUIT:
AMENDMENT TO ARTICLE 356
LIQUIDTIGHT FLEXIBLE NONMETALLIC CONDUIT: TYPE LFNC
Subsection 356.10 Uses Permitted:
Insert subsection 356.10(7):
Liquidtight flexible nonmetallic conduit (LFNC) with proper sized equipment grounding conductor is permitted to be installed between AC disconnect
and AC condensing unit.
(Ord. 2015-11, 5-21-2015)
9-2-2-19: ELECTRICAL METALLIC CONDUIT:
AMENDMENT TO ARTICLE 358
ELECTRICAL METALLIC CONDUIT: TYPE EMT
Subsection 358.30(C) Uses Permitted:
Insert subsection 358.30(C):
Minimum clearance for EMT to residential duct work shall be 1/2" clearance.
(Ord. 2015-11, 5-21-2015)
9-2-2-20: ELECTRICAL NONMETALLIC TUBING:
AMENDMENT TO ARTICLE 362
ELECTRICAL NONMETALLIC TUBING: TYPE ENT
Delete article 362 Electrical Nonmetallic Tubing.
(Ord. 2015-11, 5-21-2015)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 293/498
9-2-2-21: CONCEALED KNOB AND TUBE WIRING:
AMENDMENT TO ARTICLE 394
CONCEALED KNOB-AND-TUBE WIRING
Delete article 394 Concealed Knob-And-Tube Wiring.
(Ord. 2015-11, 5-21-2015)
9-2-2-22: SWITCHES:
AMENDMENT TO ARTICLE 404
SWITCHES
Subsection 404.8 Accessibility And Grouping:
Insert subsection 404.8(D):
Switches located in bathrooms shall be installed so that they are a minimum of four feet (4') from shower stalls, bathtubs and whirlpool tubs.
(Ord. 2015-11, 5-21-2015)
9-2-2-23: SWITCHBOARDS AND PANELBOARDS:
AMENDMENT TO ARTICLE 408
SWITCHBOARDS AND PANELBOARDS
Subsection 408.20 Location Of Switchboards:
Add sentence: Panelboards shall not be located in bathrooms or closets. In all commercial buildings, industrial buildings, and residential buildings
where vaults, transformers, electrical service equipment and sub feed service equipment are located and rated at six hundred (600) amperes or
more, or transformers rated at more than (200) KVA, shall be grouped and installed in an approved electrical closet and/or switchgear room so
designed and designated for the purpose.
Such an electrical closet shall be for the exclusive use of the electrical equipment (see exceptions) and/or electrical system, and shall be so designed
and constructed as to provide the required working space around and/or in front of all of the electrical equipment.
Exceptions:
#1) Fire alarm or any other system install for life safety.
#2) Systems installed in junction with lighting or H.V.A.C equipment for energy management.
Subsection 408.54 Number Of Overcurrent Devices On One Panelboard:
Insert the following paragraphs: Panelboards in single-family, detached residential units shall have a minimum of thirty (30) circuit spaces. Other
dwelling units shall have a minimum of twenty (20) spaces.
In all new panelboard installations there shall be a minimum of four (4) unused spaces for overcurrent devices. These spaces are to allow for future
expansion of the electrical system.
(Ord. 2015-11, 5-21-2015)
9-2-2-24: LUMINARIES (LIGHTING FIXTURES), LAMPHOLDERS, AND LAMPS, ETC.:
AMENDMENT TO ARTICLE 410
LUMINARIES (LIGHTING FIXTURES), LAMPHOLDERS, AND LAMPS, ETC.
Subsection 410.8 Luminaries (Fixtures) In Clothes Closets:
Insert subsection 410.8(E):
All closets shall be provided with a ceiling light fixture. The fixture shall have an integral LED or fluorescent luminary. All closet lights shall be
controlled from a wall switch.
Exception: Kitchen pantry cabinets and linen closet. The depth not to exceed sixteen inches (16") in linen closet.
Subsection 410.130 Special Provisions For Electrical Discharge Lighting Under 1000 Volts. General:
Insert subsection 410.130(H):
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 294/498
Inline Fuses: Inline fuses shall be installed in all commercial and industrial fluorescent lighting fixtures. The fuse size shall be selected based on the
manufacturer's recommendations.
(Ord. 2015-11, 5-21-2015)
9-2-2-25: SWIMMING POOLS, FOUNTAINS:
AMENDMENT TO ARTICLE 680
SWIMMING POOLS, FOUNTAINS
Subsection 680.22 Area Lighting, Receptacles, And Equipment:
Add subsection 680.22(A)(6) Receptacle Covers:
All exterior receptacles shall have a weatherproof cover that covers the receptacle while it's in use.
Subsection 680.31 Pumps:
Add sentence: Extension cords shall not be used to connect swimming pool apparatus.
(Ord. 2015-11, 5-21-2015)
9-2-2-26: EMERGENCY SYSTEMS:
AMENDMENT TO ARTICLE 700
EMERGENCY SYSTEMS
Subsection 700.3 Equipment Approvals:
Add sentence to subsection 700.3 Equipment Approvals:
All emergency light and exit light packs shall be LED type or approved equivalent.
(Ord. 2015-11, 5-21-2015)
Chapter 3
PLUMBING CODE
9-3-1: PLUMBING CODE ADOPTED:
The village of Streamwood hereby adopts as reference the Illinois state plumbing code hereby known as the plumbing code of the village of Streamwood.
The plumbing code is a minimum code of standards regulating plumbing and the fixtures, materials, design and installation methods of plumbing systems.
The regulations are published by the Illinois department of public health. (Ord. 2015-11, 5-21-2015)
Chapter 4
MECHANICAL CODE
9-4-1: MECHANICAL CODE ADOPTED:
This code is hereby amended so that said building code incorporates by reference the international mechanical code, 2012 edition, and appendix A, and
each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of the same are hereby specifically adopted by reference, as if fully set out herein. (Ord.
2015-11, 5-21-2015)
9-4-2: MECHANICAL CODE AMENDMENTS:
9-4-2-1: ADMINISTRATION:
AMENDMENT TO SECTION 101
GENERAL
Subsection 101.1 Title:
Insert (village of Streamwood) under name of jurisdiction.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 295/498
AMENDMENT TO SECTION 103
DEPARTMENT OF MECHANICAL INSPECTION
Subsection 103.1 General:
Delete this subsection in its entirety and insert the following:
The community development department shall be the enforcement agency and for the purpose of this code the community development department
director shall be known as the building official.
AMENDMENT TO SECTION 106
PERMITS
Subsection 106.4.3.1 Expiration:
Add paragraph: Permits shall expire if the work has commenced but has not been completed within the following specified times:
Permits for: Room additions, detached garages, new single family and two family dwellings, and major remodeling projects will be valid for 18
months. For all other home and site improvements, permits will be valid for 6 months. Where a driveway must be removed to allow for a new
driveway, this work shall be completed within 6 months.
Subsection 106.5.2 Fee Schedule:
Add sentence: See 2012 international building code, section 109.7 - schedule of permit fees.
Subsection 106.5.3 Fee Refunds:
Delete this subsection in its entirety.
AMENDMENT TO SECTION 108
VIOLATIONS
Subsection 108.4 Violation Penalties:
Delete this subsection in its entirety and insert the following:
Any person who shall continue any work in or about the structure after having been served with a stop order, except such work as that person is
directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe conditions, shall be liable to a fine of not less than $50.00 or more than $750.00.
Subsection 108.5 Stop Work Orders:
Delete this subsection in its entirety and insert the following:
Unlawful Continuance: Any person who shall continue any work in or about the structure after having been served with a stop work order, except
such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe conditions, shall be liable to a fine of not less than $50.00 or more
than $750.00.
(Ord. 2015-11, 5-21-2015)
9-4-2-2: GENERAL REGULATIONS:
AMENDMENT TO SECTION 301
GENERAL
Subsection 301.11 Plumbing Connections:
301.11 Plumbing Connections: Delete the words "international plumbing code" and insert the following words: "state of Illinois plumbing code 2004
edition."
Subsection 301.19 Gas Meter:
301.19 Gas Meter Protection: Where gas meters and/or valving are subject to vehicular damage, suitable barriers shall be installed to assure total
protection. This protection shall be approved by the authority having jurisdiction.
Subsection 301.20 Identification:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 296/498
301.20 Identification: Where gas meters or electrical meters are installed in banks or series of meters serving more than one occupancy, the
individual meters shall be marked indicating the address or area being served. These markings shall be permanent and not subject to weather
deterioration.
(Ord. 2015-11, 5-21-2015)
9-4-2-3: EXHAUST SYSTEMS:
AMENDMENT TO SECTION 501
GENERAL
Subsection 501.6 Ductwork:
501.6 Exhaust Ductwork: All ductwork for exhaust fans shall be of a non-combustible material.
(Ord. 2015-11, 5-21-2015)
9-4-2-4: DUCT SYSTEMS:
AMENDMENT TO SECTION 603
DUCT CONSTRUCTION AND INSTALLATION
Subsection 603.16 Return Air:
603.16 Return Air: In all residential use groups, return air ducts shall be installed in bedrooms.
Subsection 603.20 Ductwork In Slabs:
603.20 Ductwork In Slabs: Water seepage into any heating duct, cooling duct, make up air duct, air return duct and the like, is a violation of this
chapter and shall be the responsibility of the developer, contractor, and/or subcontractor, to fully comply with this section and/or other adopted village
codes or ordinances not mentioned in this section.
(Ord. 2015-11, 5-21-2015)
Chapter 5
RESIDENTIAL CODE
9-5-1: RESIDENTIAL CODE ADOPTED:
The village building code is hereby amended so that said building code incorporates by reference the international residential code, 2012 edition, and each
and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of the same are, except as hereinafter amended or modified, hereby specifically adopted by
reference, as if fully set out herein. (Ord. 2015-11, 5-21-2015)
9-5-2: RESIDENTIAL CODE AMENDMENTS:
9-5-2-1: ADMINISTRATION:
AMENDMENT TO SECTION R-101
TITLE, SCOPE AND PURPOSE
Subsection R-101.1 Title:
Add: Where it indicates [Name Of Jurisdiction] insert: village of Streamwood.
AMENDMENT TO SECTION R-103
DEPARTMENT OF BUILDING SAFETY
Delete subsections R-103.1 and R-103.2 in their entirety and replace with the following:
Subsection R-103.1 Creation Of Enforcement Agency:
The community development department shall be the enforcement agency and for the purpose of this code the community development director
shall be known as the building official.
Subsection R-103.2 Appointment:
The community development director shall be appointed by the village manager in accordance with section 1-7-2 of the village code.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 297/498
AMENDMENT TO SECTION R-104
DUTIES AND POWERS OF THE BUILDING OFFICIAL
Subsection R-104.9 Approved Materials And Equipment:
Add sentence: Prefabricated construction assemblies must be approved by the building official prior to the time the building permit is issued.
AMENDMENT TO SECTION R-105
PERMITS
Subsection R-105.2 Work Exempt From Permit:
Building: Delete the following in its entirety:
Numbers: 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 and 10.
Mechanical: Delete the following in its entirety:
Numbers: 4 and 7.
Subsection R-105.3.1.2 Existing Buildings Or Structures:
Add subsection: Substantially damaged or improved existing buildings and structures.
For applications for reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of existing buildings or structures the building official shall examine
or cause to be examined the construction documents and shall prepare a finding with regard to the value of the proposed work. The requirements for
the proposed improvements shall be as follows.
1. For buildings that have sustained damage of any origin, the value of the proposed work shall include the cost to repair the building or structure
to its pre-damage condition. If the building official finds that the value of proposed work equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the
building or structure, the entire building or structure shall be brought into compliance with the code requirements for a new structure.
2. For buildings that are being substantially improved or expanded, the value of the proposed work shall include the cost to repair the building or
structure to its pre-construction condition. If the building official finds that the value of proposed work equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market
value of the building or structure, the entire building or structure shall be brought into compliance with the code requirements for a new structure.
Additions to existing structures that are valued at less than 50 percent do not have to have a fire sprinkler system installed unless the existing
building is sprinklered.
Subsection R-105.5 Expiration:
Exception: Permits shall expire if the work has commenced but has not been completed within the following specified times:
Permits for: Room additions, detached garages, new single family and two family dwellings, and major remodeling projects will be valid for 12
months. For all other home and site improvements permits will be valid for 3 months.
All work for which a permit is issued shall be completed within 12 months of the date of issuance of the building permit. A fee of fifty percent (50%) of
the original permit fee shall be paid for the permit extension.
Extensions to this requirement may be granted by the director of community development for a period not to exceed one hundred twenty (120) days
upon demonstration of justifiable cause for the extension. Extensions shall be requested in writing and shall only be granted upon demonstration by
the applicant of justifiable cause. A request for an extension shall include the following:
(a) An explanation of the hardship which resulted in the work not being completed.
(b) A detailed description of all work which has not yet been completed and a time line for completion. No work shall be left incomplete which may
result in a life safety issue or result in a public nuisance or endangerment.
(c) A detailed description of how any unfinished portions of the building will be protected from outside elements so as not to cause damage to the
structure.
Subsection 105.6 Work Commencing Before Permit Issuance:
Add sentence: Any person, firm or corporation that starts work on a project where a building permit is required by this code, without the permit being
issued, shall pay a penalty of fifty percent (50%) of the required permit fee at the time of permit issuance.
AMENDMENT TO SECTION R-106
CONSTRUCTION DOCUMENTS
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 298/498
Subsection R-106.1 Submitted Documents:
Add sentences: Plans for the construction of new residential homes and remodeling projects valued at over $10,000 shall be prepared by a
registered structural engineer or architect. The valuation of the project may be confirmed by the building official. The plans shall be signed and
sealed by the registered professional.
Add paragraph: Applications for a building permit for a deck, room addition, patio, porch, gazebo, or any other accessory structure added to a
residential structure shall be accompanied by:
1. The proposed structure drawn on a full sized copy of a registered plat of survey of the property (usual scale 1:20 or 1:30) also showing the
location of any electric meter; location of any electric service line; location of all basement escape windows; and any additional accessory
structures not shown on that recorded plat of survey.
2. A construction plan of the proposed deck, addition, patio etc., as specified in the application package.
Add paragraph: No portion of the structure shall obstruct any electric facility, including access to the meter or the underground service line.
AMENDMENT TO SECTION R-107
TEMPORARY STRUCTURES AND USES
Subsection R-107.1.1 Information On Construction Documents:
Add paragraph: Construction documents shall be dimensioned and drawn on 36" x 24" paper. One complete electronic version (PDF format) of the
final construction "as built" dimensions as approved by the building official shall be submitted to the village of Streamwood prior to issuance of the
final occupancy.
AMENDMENT TO SECTION R-108
FEES
Subsection R-108.2 Schedule Of Permit Fees:
Add sentence: See 2012 international building code, section 108.2 - schedule of permit fees.
AMENDMENT TO SECTION R-109
INSPECTIONS
Insert subsection R-109.1.4.1 Insulation Inspection:
R-109.1.4.1 Insulation Inspection: An insulation inspection shall be performed before any insulation is covered.
Subsection R-109.3 Inspection Requests:
Add sentence: All inspection requests shall be made with a minimum of 24 hours' notice.
AMENDMENT TO SECTION R-110
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY
Subsection R-110.4 Temporary Occupancy: Delete the text in this subsection in its entirety and insert the following:
1. Upon request by the holder of a building permit, the director of community development may issue a temporary occupancy permit for complete or
partial occupancy of a building, providing the interior of the building on the premises complies with the village building code, and such temporary
occupancy or use will not jeopardize life or property. Such temporary occupancy permits shall be issued to cover a permit of six (6) months. To obtain
a temporary occupancy permit, the holder of a building permit must:
a. Sign a written affidavit stipulating remaining work to be done and/or deficiencies which must be corrected. Such affidavit may contain additional
stipulations as may from time to time be deemed in the best interest of the village by the director of community development. In addition to any
other cash deposit or letters of credit on file with the village, such affidavit shall be co-signed by the owner, contract purchaser and/or tenant; and
b. Post an additional cash deposit in an amount equivalent to one and one half (1.5) times the cost of completing and/or remedying all items
stipulated in the affidavit; providing, however, that such amount shall not be less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for a single-family
structure. If required, the amount of the deposit shall be pro-rated by the village manager among the total units of multiple occupancy structures.
2. Failure by the holder of a temporary occupancy permit to accomplish all work necessary to obtain a final certificate of occupancy by the date
established by the director of community development shall result in automatic forfeiture of the related cash deposit. The director of community
development shall use forfeited funds to complete the work indicated on the affidavit attached to the temporary occupancy permit which was issued
for the premises. Such forfeiture shall not impair the right of the village to enforce any and all remedies available to it by reason of any violation,
including the right to recover a fine or penalty or seek injunctive relief. Any balance remaining in the cash deposit not required to complete the work
shall be refunded to the depositor.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 299/498
3. Upon the issuance of a temporary occupancy permit, an additional fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) shall be required for the second and each
succeeding inspection of a structure to determine compliance with code.
4. In addition, the depositor shall also be required to pay the village five percent (5%) of the amount of the cash deposit for administrative overhead
relating to the temporary occupancy procedure outlined herein.
AMENDMENT TO SECTION R-112
BOARD OF APPEALS
Subsection R-112.2.1 Determination Of Substantial Improvement In Areas Prone To Flooding:
Delete this subsection in its entirety.
Subsection R-112.2.2 Criteria For Issuance Of A Variance For Areas Prone To Flooding:
Delete this subsection in its entirety.
AMENDMENT TO SECTION R-113
VIOLATIONS
Subsection R-113.4 Violation Penalties: Delete the text in this subsection in its entirety and insert the following:
R-113.4 Violation Penalties: Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this code shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and each
such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the
provisions of this code is committed, continued or permitted, and upon conviction of any such violation such person shall be punishable by a fine.
The fine shall not be less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than seven hundred-fifty dollars ($750.00) per offense.
(Ord. 2015-11, 5-21-2015)
9-5-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
AMENDMENT TO SECTION R-202
DEFINITIONS
Section R-202 Building Official:
Delete the definition "building official" and insert the following: Building Official: The director of community development or other designated
authorized individual is the officer charged with the administration and enforcement of this code.
Section R-202 Porch:
Insert the following definition: Porch: A building with a permanent roof, without glazing.
Section R-202 Room Addition:
Insert the following definition: Room Addition: A building intended to be used for human habitation, for living, sleeping, cooking, or eating purposes
with solid flooring and permanent glazing.
Section R-202 Bedroom:
Insert the following definition: Bedroom: A room planned and used for sleeping purposes, separated from other rooms by a door. A bedroom will
have windows, closet and is physically separate from other rooms.
(Ord. 2015-11, 5-21-2015)
9-5-2-3: GARAGES AND CARPORTS:
AMENDMENT TO SECTION R-302
DWELLING UNIT SEPARATION
R-302.1.1 Sprinkler Systems: All dwelling units shall be protected by an automatic sprinkler system in conformance with the 2012 international building
code.
Exception: A residential sprinkler system installed in accordance with section 903.3.1.2 shall be allowed in buildings, or portions thereof.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 300/498
Subsection R-302.2 Townhouses:
Exception: Add sentence to first paragraph under exception: The vertical separation walls between dwellings shall be constructed of masonry or
concrete with a minimum of two-hour, UL listed assembly.
Subsection R-302.3 Two-Family Dwellings:
First paragraph - Delete where it reads: 1-hour fire-resistive rating and replace with 2-hour fire-resistive rating.
Delete "exceptions" in its entirety.
AMENDMENT TO SECTION R-302.6
DWELLING/GARAGE FIRE SEPARATION
Table R-302.6 Replace existing table with table below:
DWELLING/GARAGE SEPARATION
Separation Material
From the residence and attics Not less than 5/8-inch type X gypsum board or equivalent applied to the garage and
house side or 2 layers on the garage side
From all habitable rooms above the garage Not less than 2 layers 5/8-inch type X gypsum board or equivalent
Structure(s) supporting floor/ceiling assemblies used for
separation required by this section
Not less than 2 layers 5/8-inch gypsum board or equivalent
Garages located less than 10 feet from a dwelling unit on the
same lot
Not less than 5/8-inch type X gypsum board or equivalent applied to the interior side
of exterior walls that are within this area
Subsection R-302.6.1 Separation Required: Delete the text in this subsection in its entirety and insert the following:
The garage shall be completely separated from the residence and its attic area per table 302.6. Access hatches shall be metal and of a fire-rated
construction.
(Ord. 2015-11, 5-21-2015)
9-5-2-4: BUILDING PLANNING:
AMENDMENT TO SECTION R-309
GAS CURB
Subsection R-309.6.1 Gas Curb: A 4-inch minimum high concrete gas curb shall be installed against all living areas.
AMENDMENT TO SECTION R-310
EMERGENCY ESCAPE AND RESCUE OPENINGS
Subsection R-310.1:
Exception: An escape window shall not be required in the room when a door is provided.
AMENDMENT TO SECTION R-312
GUARDS
Subsection R-312.1.1 Guards: Change 30 inches to 18 inches.
AMENDMENT TO SECTION R-315
SMOKE ALARMS CARBON MONOXIDE DETECTORS
Subsection R-315.5 Carbon Monoxide Detectors:
Carbon monoxide detectors shall be installed in all units in conformance with the state of Illinois public act 094-0741.
AMENDMENT TO SECTION R-321
SITE ADDRESS
Subsection R-321.2:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 301/498
R-321.2 House Numbers: All lots, buildings and structures in the village of Streamwood shall be numbered in accordance with the street numbering
plan of the village, and the village clerk shall keep a chart showing the proper street number.
Subsection R-321.3:
R-321.3 Locations: 1) Main entrance: The main entrance of all buildings shall have a street address number visible from the street. 2) The rear
entrance of all multi-family dwelling units shall have the address posted with a minimum height of three (3) inches.
Subsection R-321.4:
R-321.4 Size Of Numbers: Address numbers shall be contrasting in color to the background, a minimum of four (4) inches in height, and a minimum
of one-half inch stroke. Other identifying information on doors shall be approved by the code official.
NEW SECTION R-324
EXTERIOR STRUCTURE
Add new subsection R-324 Exterior Structure:
1. No permit shall be issued for new roofing or siding unless the roofing material or siding, as the case may be, on the entire structure is replaced.
Where the structure consists of multi dwelling units, the improvement for all of the dwelling units shall be replaced at the same time whenever
possible. Where the covenants and restrictions on the property require the exterior of the units to have consistent colors and materials, every attempt
shall be made to match the existing colors and materials. If the entire multi-family structure is not replaced at the same time, and subject to
subsection 2 herein, a letter of approval is required by the other dwelling unit owners or the association prior to the permit being issued.
2. Exceptions: In addition to any other requirements contained herein, permits for partial replacement of roofing and/or siding in all structures may be
allowed with written approval of the building official when the following conditions are met:
1. A siding evaluation report is submitted from ITEL Laboratories, Inc.
2. The report shall indicate that the original product is still available.
3. The report shall indicate that the color match is a 1 or 2 value on the siding match chart.
4. No less than one side of the structure is going to be replaced.
(Ord. 2015-11, 5-21-2015)
9-5-2-5: FOUNDATIONS:
AMENDMENT TO SECTION R-401
GENERAL
Subsection R-401.1 Application: Delete subsection in its entirety and insert the following:
The provisions of this chapter shall control the design and construction of the foundation and foundation spaces for all buildings. Wood foundations
shall not be used except for detached sheds.
AMENDMENT TO SECTION R-402
MATERIALS
Delete subsections R-402.1, Wood Foundations; R-402.1.1 Fasteners; and R-402.1.2 Wood Treatment.
Subsection R-402.2 Concrete: Delete the text and table in this section in its entirety and insert the following:
R-402.2 Concrete: All concrete used for footings, foundations, basement slabs, interior slabs on grade, garage floors, driveways, patios, sidewalks,
service walks and steps shall have a minimum compressive strength of 3,500 p.s.i. at 28 days or 6-bag mix. In addition, all concrete shall be air
entrained. Total air content (percent by volume of concrete) shall be not less than 5 percent (5%) or more than seven percent (7%).
AMENDMENT TO SECTION R-403
FOOTINGS
Subsection R-403.1 General: Delete the text in this subsection in its entirety and insert the following:
All exterior walls, bearing walls, columns and piers shall be supported on continuous solid masonry or concrete footings, or other approved structural
systems which shall be of sufficient design to support safely the loads imposed as determined from the character of the soil, and shall in all cases
extend below the frost line. Minimum sizes for concrete footings shall be as set forth in figure no. R-403.1 unless designed by a licensed architect or
structural engineer and shall be determined by the recommendations of a geotechnical soil report attesting to the bearing values of the soil and the
use of trenched foundations. The code official may require a field soil test to be performed to verify the bearing capacity of the soil.
The foundation requirements for residential, detached garages and sheds over 120 square feet in size shall be a twenty inch (20") wide by fourteen
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 302/498
inch (14") deep continuous concrete footing with a minimum of two (2) reinforcement bars evenly spaced within the footing.
A minimum of a continuous 10 inch (10") wide, 42 inch (42") deep foundation belled to 12" min. is required for all room additions, on concrete slabs,
in which the bottom of the floor joist is located less than 30 inches (30") above grade. Pier foundations where permitted for room additions and
porches with permanent roofs shall be a minimum of twelve inches (12") in diameter and extend 42 inches (42") deep.
The top surface of footings shall be level. The bottom surface of footings may have a slope not exceeding 1 in 10. Footings shall be stepped where it
is necessary to change the elevation of the top surface of the footings or where the slope of the bottom surface of the footing will exceed 1 in 10.
Structural slabs-on-ground and mat-type footings for dwellings located on expansive soils shall be designed and installed in accordance with PTI
"post-tensioned slabs-on-ground" or WRI "design of slabs-on-ground foundations" listed in section S-26.303, or in accordance with other approved
methods.
All crack, concrete separation, and the like, shall be permanently closed with an approved epoxy type material in all concrete slabs or concrete
foundations.
AMENDMENT TO SECTION R-404
FOUNDATION WALLS
Subsection R-404.1 Masonry Foundation Walls:
Add sentence: Concrete masonry foundation walls shall not be used.
Table no. R-404.1.1(1):
Under "Plain Concrete And Plain Masonry Foundation Walls" delete the following:
Plain masonry columns of table.
Section R-404.2 Wood Foundation Walls:
Delete the text in this subsection in its entirety.
Delete subsections R-404.2.1 Wood Grade; R-404.2.2 Stud Size; and R-404.2.3 Height Of Backfill and R-404.2.6 Fastening in their entirety.
AMENDMENT TO SECTION R-405
FOUNDATION DRAINAGE
Section R-405.2 Wood Foundations: Delete the text in this subsection in its entirety.
Delete subsections R-405.2.1 Base; R-405.2.2 Moisture Barrier; and R-405.3.2 Drainage System in their entirety.
AMENDMENT TO SECTION R-408
UNDER-FLOOR SPACE
Subsection R-408.2 Opening For Under-Floor Ventilation:
Delete under "exceptions" - items no. 1 through items no. 4.
Insert subsection R-408.8 Vapor Barrier:
R-408.8 Vapor Barrier:
In all crawl spaces a vapor barrier is required. A two-inch (2") slush coat of concrete is required on the floor of the crawl space. All crawl spaces shall
have an approved sump pit and pump installed to drain any ground water to the exterior.
(Ord. 2015-11, 5-21-2015)
9-5-2-6: FLOORS:
AMENDMENT TO SECTION R-502
WOOD FLOOR FRAMING
Insert subsection R-502.14 Engineered Wood Products Spacing:
R-502.14 Engineered Wood Products Spacing: All pre-manufactured wood floor assemblies shall meet the minimum live load deflection L/480. All
trusses shall have metal gussets. Floor trusses shall be designed for a floor load of L/480.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 303/498
AMENDMENT TO SECTION R-503
FLOOR SHEATHING
Subsection R-503.1 Lumber Sheathing:
Add the following sentence: A minimum of 3/4" tongue and groove plywood or OSB sub-floor nailed and glued to floor joists shall be provided except
as shown for larger thickness.
Subsection R-503.3 Particleboard: Delete the text in this subsection in its entirety and insert the following:
R-503.3 Particleboard: Particleboard shall not be used for floor underlayment and sub-floor and combined sub-floor-underlayment.
R-503.4 Engineered Wood Products Spacing: All pre-manufactured wood floor assemblies shall meet the minimum live load deflection L/480. All
trusses shall have metal gussets. Floor trusses shall be designed for a floor load of L/480.
AMENDMENT TO SECTION R-504
PRESSURE PRESERVATIVELY TREATED-WOOD FLOORS (ON GROUND)
Subsection R-504 Pressure Preservatively Treated-Wood Floors (On Ground):
Delete the text in this subsection in its entirety.
AMENDMENT TO SECTION R-506
CONCRETE FLOORS (ON GROUND)
Subsection R-506.2.2 Base:
Delete the text in "exception" in this subsection in its entirety.
(Ord. 2015-11, 5-21-2015)
9-5-2-7: WALL CONSTRUCTION:
AMENDMENT TO SECTION R-602
WOOD WALL FRAMING
Subsection R-602.3.1 Stud Spacing:
Add sentence: Stud spacing in bearing walls shall be a minimum of 16" on center in all instances.
Exception: The building official may approve spacing greater than 16" on center in unusual circumstances with an architectural structural engineer's
approval.
Exception: Accessory structures that are 175 sq ft or less in area may have wall studs a minimum of 24 inches on center.
Subsection R-602.5 Interior Nonbearing Walls:
R-602.5 Interior Nonbearing Walls:
Delete the first sentence in its entirety and insert the following:
All interior non-load bearing partitions shall be a minimum 2 x 4, 16" on center construction.
Subsection R-602.9 Cripple Walls:
Add sentence: Foundation cripple walls shall be framed of studs having the size required for an additional story.
AMENDMENT TO SECTION R-606
GENERAL MASONRY CONSTRUCTION
Subsection R-606.1.1 Professional Registration Not Required:
Delete this subsection in its entirety.
AMENDMENT TO SECTION R-612
EXTERIOR WINDOWS AND DOORS
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 304/498
Subsection R-612.2 Performance:
Add sentences: All glass in habitable areas shall be double glazed or insulated glass. Frames, jambs, and thresholds, if other than wood, shall have
a thermal barrier. All doors shall be double glazed or insulated glass. Frames, jambs, and thresholds, if other than wood, shall have a thermal barrier.
Subsection R-612.2.1 Guards: Amend by adding the following:
Insect screens for double hung windows shall cover the entire window. Exception: Half screens may be used where the screen locks in place and
has weather-stripping to create a tight seal.
(Ord. 2015-11, 5-21-2015)
9-5-2-8: WALL COVERINGS:
AMENDMENT TO SECTION R-702
WALL COVERING
Subsection R-702.3.5 Application:
Add sentence: Drywall placed on ceilings with joists at 24 inches on center shall have a minimum thickness of 5/8".
(Ord. 2015-11, 5-21-2015)
9-5-2-9: EXTERIOR COVERINGS:
AMENDMENT TO SECTION R-703
WATER RESISTIVE BARRIER
Subsection R-703.2 Weather-Resistant Sheathing Paper:
Delete under "exception" such felt or membrane may be omitted in the following situations. Numbers 1 through 4.
Add subsection R-703.2.1:
All structures shall be covered with a minimum of 1/2" plywood or OSB sheathing minimum. All exterior wall surfaces shall be covered with an
approved water repellant membrane (Tyvek) or approved equivalent. The membrane shall be installed with the minimal number of seams. All seams
shall be lapped a minimum of six inches (6") and be fastened with manufacturer's approved tape.
Add exception: Rigid foam panels may be used if required to meet requirements of the IECC. (Cellulose fiber panels are not allowed).
Subsection R-703.9.5 Exterior Insulation Finish System (EIFS):
If any exterior insulation finish system (EIFS) is installed on any portion of a dwelling unit for an exterior covering, a certification of proper installation
shall be required to be submitted as a special inspection. Before permit issuance, a statement of special inspections prepared by the registered
design professional shall be submitted detailing the individuals and approved agencies intended to be retained for conducting these inspections. This
report and signed certification shall be submitted to the village of Streamwood before any occupancy will be granted.
(Ord. 2015-11, 5-21-2015)
9-5-2-10: ROOF-CEILING CONSTRUCTION:
AMENDMENT TO SECTION R-801
GENERAL
Subsection R-801.3 Roof Drainage:
Add sentence: All downspouts shall discharge onto splash blocks or other material approved by the building official.
Subsection R-801.4 Roof Slope:
R-801.4 Roof Slope: All residential structures and additions to existing structures shall have a roof pitch of 3-12 or greater.
Exceptions:
1. Factory manufactured sunrooms with metal or rubber roof systems.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 305/498
2. Additions to existing structures where the existing roof pitch is less than 3-12 with the approval of the building official.
AMENDMENT TO SECTION R-802
WOOD ROOF FRAMING
Subsection R-802.11 Roof Tie-Down:
Add sentence: Hurricane anchors shall be used to tie all trusses to exterior walls in all structures.
Add exception: Detached accessory structures.
AMENDMENT TO SECTION R-803
ROOF SHEATHING
Subsection R-803.2.1 Identification And Grade:
Add sentence: Roofs shall be constructed of a minimum of 1/2" thick, 3-ply CDX plywood. Chipboard (OSB) or particleboard shall not be used in roof
applications.
Subsection R-803.2.1.1 Exposure Durability:
Add sentence: Particleboard shall not be used for roof sheathing.
(Ord. 2015-11, 5-21-2015)
9-5-2-11: ROOF ASSEMBLIES:
AMENDMENT TO SECTION R-903
WEATHER PROTECTION
Insert subsection R-903.5:
R-903.5 All wood soffit fascia materials shall be primed on all sides prior to installation.
Exception: Treated lumber.
Insert subsection R-903.6 Gutters And Downspouts:
All structures shall be provided with gutters and downspouts unless omission is specifically permitted by the building official.
AMENDMENT TO SECTION R-905
REQUIREMENTS FOR ROOF COVERINGS
Subsection R-905.2.7.1 Ice Protection:
Delete subsection in its entirety and insert the following:
All roofs of permanently heated structures shall have an ice barrier that consists of a self-adhering polymer modified bitumen sheet, in lieu of normal
underlayment and extend from the eaves edge to a point at least twenty-four inches (24") inside the exterior wall line of the building and a minimum
of twenty-four inches (24") on each side of any valley.
Subsection R-905.2.8.1 Base And Cap Flashing:
Add sentence: All asphalt shingled roofs shall have a drip edge installed along the bottom of all roof edges and along all gable ends.
Add exception: Where the gutter system supplies an approved flashing to take the place of a drip edge along the bottom roof edge.
(Ord. 2015-11, 5-21-2015)
9-5-2-12: CHIMNEYS AND FIREPLACES:
AMENDMENT TO SECTION R-1004
FACTORY-BUILT FIREPLACES
Subsection R-1004.4 Unvented Gas Log Heaters:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 306/498
Delete this subsection in its entirety and insert the following:
Unvented fireplaces are not permitted to be installed under any circumstances.
AMENDMENT TO SECTION R-1006
EXTERIOR AIR SUPPLY
Subsection R-1006.1 Exterior Air:
Delete wording: "unless the room is mechanically ventilated and controlled so that the indoor pressure is neutral or positive".
Add sentence: Factory-built or masonry fireplaces covered in this chapter shall be equipped with an exterior air supply to assure proper fuel
combustion.
Insert section R-1006.6 Spark Arrestor:
All fireplace chimneys shall have an approved spark arrestor installed.
(Ord. 2015-11, 5-21-2015)
9-5-2-13: ENERGY EFFICIENCY:
AMENDMENT TO SECTION N-1102
BUILDING ENVELOPE
Subsection N-1102.1.5 Exterior Walls:
Add sentence: The minimum R-value of wall insulation shall be per the latest energy code adopted by the state of Illinois. The total wall R-value shall
be as listed in the code.
Subsection N-1102.1.6 Ceilings:
Add sentence: The minimum R-value of roof/ceiling insulation shall be per the latest energy code adopted by the state of Illinois. The total R-value of
the roof/ceiling assembly shall be as listed in the code.
Subsection N-1102.1.7 Floors:
Add sentence: The minimum R-value of floors over unheated spaces shall be per the latest energy code adopted by the state of Illinois. The total Rvalue
of the floor assembly shall be as listed in the code.
(Ord. 2015-11, 5-21-2015)
9-5-2-14: EXHAUST SYSTEMS:
AMENDMENT TO SECTION M-1503
RANGE HOODS
Subsection M-1503.1 General:
Delete "exception" in its entirety.
(Ord. 2015-11, 5-21-2015)
9-5-2-15: DUCT SYSTEMS:
AMENDMENT TO SECTION M-1601
DUCT CONSTRUCTION
Subsection M-1601.1.1 Duct Construction:
Delete no. 5 & no. 7.
Insert sentence: Metallic duct must be installed in stud wall cavities.
Subsection M-1601.4.1 Joints And Seams:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 307/498
Add sentence: Duct tape shall not be used.
AMENDMENT TO SECTION M-1602
RETURN AIR
Subsection M-1602.4 Return Air Required:
M-1602.5 Return Air Required: An individual return air duct shall be provided in each bedroom.
NEW SECTION M-1603
KITCHEN AND BATHROOM EXHAUST
Add new subsection M-1603.1 Exhaust Ductwork:
All exhaust ductwork shall be installed with solid metal ductwork terminating with individual vents to the exterior. All ductwork shall be insulated in
unheated spaces. A minimum of three feet (3') of metal flexible ductwork may be used at the bathroom fan where approved by the building official. All
wall vent caps shall have a built-in back-draft damper and screening on the exterior. Ductwork installed in un-conditioned spaces shall be insulated
with approved insulation. Exception: Interior vented range hoods may be permitted by the code official in cases where it is not possible to vent to the
exterior.
(Ord. 2015-11, 5-21-2015)
9-5-2-16: APPLIANCE LOCATION:
AMENDMENT TO SECTION G-2406(303)
APPLIANCE LOCATION
Subsection G-2406.2 (303.2) Prohibited Locations:
Exceptions: Delete numbers 3 and 4.
(Ord. 2015-11, 5-21-2015)
9-5-2-17: ROOF ASSEMBLIES; GUTTERS AND DOWNSPOUTS:
AMENDMENT TO CHAPTER 9
WEATHER PROTECTION
Subsection R-903.5 Gutters And Downspouts:
All structures shall be provided with gutters and downspouts unless omission is specifically permitted by the building official.
(Ord. 2015-11, 5-21-2015)
9-5-2-18: CLOTHES DRYER EXHAUST:
AMENDMENT TO SECTION G-2439(613)
CLOTHES DRYER EXHAUST
Subsection G-2439.5.4(613.6) Clothes Dryer Ducts:
Add sentence: Transition ducts shall not be plastic.
(Ord. 2015-11, 5-21-2015)
9-5-2-19: PLUMBING ADMINISTRATION:
AMENDMENT TO CHAPTER 25
GENERAL PLUMBING REQUIREMENTS AND DEFINITIONS
Delete chapter 25:
Delete chapter 25 in its entirety and insert the following:
Section P-2501.1 Scope: All plumbing in one and two family dwellings shall be installed in accordance with the Illinois state plumbing code.
AMENDMENT TO CHAPTER 26
GENERAL PLUMBING REQUIREMENTS
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 308/498
Delete chapter 26 General Plumbing Requirements.
AMENDMENT TO CHAPTER 27
PLUMBING FIXTURES
Delete chapter 27 Plumbing Fixtures.
AMENDMENT TO CHAPTER 28
WATER HEATERS
Delete chapter 28 Water Heaters.
AMENDMENT TO CHAPTER 29
WATER SUPPLY AND DISTRIBUTION
Delete chapter 29 Water Supply And Distribution.
AMENDMENT TO CHAPTER 30
SANITARY DRAINAGE
Delete chapter 30 Sanitary Drainage.
AMENDMENT TO CHAPTER 31
VENTS
Delete chapter 31 Vents.
AMENDMENT TO CHAPTER 32
TRAPS
Delete chapter 32 Traps.
AMENDMENT TO CHAPTER 34
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
Delete chapter 34 General Requirements and insert the following:
Subsection E-3401.1 Applicability: All electrical systems shall meet the requirements of NFPA 70, the electrical code, 2011 edition.
AMENDMENT TO CHAPTER 35
ELECTRICAL DEFINITIONS
Delete chapter 35 Electrical Definitions.
AMENDMENT TO CHAPTER 36
SERVICES
Delete chapter 36 Services.
AMENDMENT TO CHAPTER 37
BRANCH CIRCUIT AND FEEDER REQUIREMENTS
Delete chapter 37 Branch Circuit And Feeder Requirements.
AMENDMENT TO CHAPTER 38
WIRING METHODS
Delete chapter 38 Wiring Methods.
AMENDMENT TO CHAPTER 39
POWER AND LIGHTING DISTRIBUTION
Delete chapter 39 Power And Lighting Distribution.
AMENDMENT TO CHAPTER 40
DEVICES AND LIGHTING FIXTURES
Delete chapter 40 Devices And Lighting Fixtures.
AMENDMENT TO CHAPTER 41
APPLIANCE INSTALLATION
Delete chapter 41 Appliance Installation.
AMENDMENT TO CHAPTER 42
SWIMMING POOLS
Delete chapter 42 Swimming Pools.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 309/498
AMENDMENT TO CHAPTER 43
CLASS 2 REMOTE-CONTROL, SIGNALING AND POWER-LIMITED CIRCUITS
Delete chapter 43 Class 2 Remote-Control, Signaling And Power-Limited Circuits.
(Ord. 2015-11, 5-21-2015)
Chapter 6
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
9-6-1: PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE ADOPTED:
The village building code is hereby amended so that said building code incorporates by reference the ICC international property maintenance code, 2012
edition, and each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of the same are, except as hereinafter amended or modified, hereby
specifically adopted by reference as if fully set out herein. (Ord. 2015-11, 5-21-2015)
9-6-2: PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE AMENDMENTS:
9-6-2-1: ADMINISTRATION:
AMENDMENT TO SECTION 101
GENERAL
Subsection 101.1 Title:
Delete the text in this subsection in its entirety and insert the following:
These regulations shall be known as the property maintenance code of the village of Streamwood hereinafter referred to as this code.
AMENDMENT TO SECTION 103
DEPARTMENT OF PROPERTY MAINTENANCE INSPECTION
Subsection 103.1 General:
Delete where it reads: "department of property maintenance inspection" and insert the words: "community development department."
Add subsection 103.4 Liability Of Officers:
Add sentences: No provision of this village code designating the duties of any officer or employee shall be so construed as to make such officer or
employee liable for any fine or penalty provided for a failure to perform such duty unless the intention of the board of trustees to impose such fine or
penalty on such officer or employee is specifically and clearly expressed in the section creating the duty.
AMENDMENT TO SECTION 106
VIOLATIONS
Subsection 106.4 Violation Penalties:
Delete the text in this subsection in its entirety and insert the following:
Any person, firm or corporation, who shall violate any provision of this code, shall upon conviction or finding of guilty or liable by a court or
administrative hearing officer thereof, be subject to a fine of not less than $50.00 or more than $750.00, at the discretion of the judge or
administrative hearing officer. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served, in accordance with the terms and provisions
hereof, shall be deemed a separate offense.
Subsection 106.4.1 Application Of Provisions:
Add new subsection: The penalty provided in this chapter shall be applicable to every section of this village code the same as though it were a part of
each and every separate section. Any person convicted of a violation of any section of this village code where any duty is prescribed or obligation
imposed, or where any action which is of a continuing nature is forbidden or is declared to be unlawful shall be deemed guilty of such offense. A
separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day such duty or obligation remains unperformed or such act continues, unless otherwise
specifically provided in this village code.
In all cases where the same offense is made punishable or is created by different clauses or sections of this village code, the prosecuting officer may
elect under which to proceed; but not more than one recovery shall be had against the same person for the same offense; provided, that the
revocation of a license or permit shall not be considered a recovery or penalty so as to bar any other penalty being enforced.
Whenever the doing of any act or the omission to do any act constitutes a breach of any section or provision of this village code and there shall be no
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 310/498
fine or penalty specifically declared for such breach, the provisions of this chapter shall apply.
(Ord. 2015-11, 5-21-2015)
9-6-2-2: STOP WORK ORDER:
AMENDMENT TO SECTION 112
STOP WORK ORDER
Subsection 112.4 Failure To Comply:
Insert $50.00 and $750.00
(Ord. 2015-11, 5-21-2015)
9-6-2-3: DEFINITIONS:
AMENDMENT TO SECTION 201
GENERAL
Subsection 201.3 Terms Defined In Other Codes:
Delete the following words: "international zoning code" and insert the words: "village of Streamwood zoning code." Delete the following words:
"international plumbing code" and insert the words: "Illinois plumbing code." Delete the following words: "ICC electrical code" and insert the following
words: "NEC 2011."
(Ord. 2015-11, 5-21-2015)
9-6-2-4: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
AMENDMENT TO SECTION 302
EXTERIOR PROPERTY AREAS
Subsection 302.4 Weeds:
Insert the following:
Six inches (6").
Subsection 302.9 Defacement Of Property:
Add to last sentence: "within forty-eight (48) hours of notification by the code official".
AMENDMENT TO SECTION 304
EXTERIOR STRUCTURE
Subsection 304.14 Insect Screens:
Delete the text in this section in its entirety and insert the following:
PM-304.14 Insect Screens: At all times, every door, window and other outside opening used or required for ventilation purposes serving any
building containing habitable rooms, food preparation areas, food service areas, or any areas where products used in food for human consumption
are processed, manufactured, packaged or stored, shall be supplied with approved tightly fitting screens of not less than 16 mesh per inch and every
swinging door shall have a self-closing device in good working condition.
Exception: Screen doors shall not be required for out-swinging doors or other types of openings which make screening impractical, provided other
approved means, such as air curtains or insect repellent fans are employed.
Add new subsection:
PM-304.14.1 Window Covering: The exterior of a window or door shall not be covered with plastic sheathing or plywood.
AMENDMENT TO SECTION 308
RUBBISH AND GARBAGE
Subsection 308.3.1 Garbage Facilities:
Delete the words: "an approved incinerator unit in the structure available to the occupants in each dwelling unit".
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 311/498
AMENDMENT TO SECTION 404
OCCUPANCY LIMITATIONS
Subsection 404.1 Privacy:
In the first sentence, delete the words: "rooming units".
(Ord. 2015-11, 5-21-2015)
9-6-2-5: PLUMBING FACILITIES AND FIXTURE REQUIREMENTS:
AMENDMENT TO SECTION 502
REQUIRED FACILITIES
Subsection 502.2 Rooming Houses:
Delete this section in its entirety.
AMENDMENT TO SECTION 503
TOILET ROOMS
Subsection 503.2 Locations:
In the first sentence, delete the words: "rooming units".
AMENDMENT TO SECTION 505
WATER SYSTEM
Subsection 505.1 General:
Delete the words "international plumbing code" and insert the following: "state of Illinois plumbing code".
Subsection 505.4 Water Heating Facilities:
Change the wording where it reads: "not less than 110°F" to "not more than 120°F".
(Ord. 2015-11, 5-21-2015)
9-6-2-6: MECHANICAL AND ELECTRICAL REQUIREMENTS:
AMENDMENT TO SECTION 601
GENERAL
Subsection 601.3 General:
Add new section:
All rental properties located within the boundaries of the village of Streamwood shall be required to be in conformance with the most recently adopted
national electrical code and village adopted electrical codes and ordinances as listed below. A registered electrical contractor shall obtain a permit to
upgrade, repair or correct code violations.
(1) Furnaces shall be checked and cleaned and certified by a licensed heating, ventilation and air conditioning (HVAC) contractor to be in safe
working condition.
(2) All receptacles in bathrooms, garages, exterior and above kitchen countertops shall be ground fault circuit interrupter (GFCI) protected.
(3) All painted over receptacles and switches shall be replaced.
(4) Smoke detectors shall be installed on each level of a home, in each bedroom and within fifteen feet (15') of all bedrooms. Smoke and carbon
monoxide detectors shall be installed according to information provided in the Illinois carbon monoxide alarm detector act.
(5) Outside weatherproof (WP) receptacles shall be GFCI protected.
(6) All clothes closet lights shall be surface mounted or recessed with a completely enclosed lamp.
AMENDMENT TO SECTION 602
HEATING FACILITIES
Subsection 602.2 Residential Occupancies:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 312/498
Delete the text in this subsection in its entirety and insert the following:
Every dwelling shall be provided with heating facilities capable of maintaining a room temperature of 65 degrees F. (18 degrees C.) at a level of 3
feet (914 mm) above the floor and a distance of 3 feet (914 mm) from the exterior walls in all habitable rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms based on
the outside design temperature required for the locality by the mechanical code listed in appendix A.
Subsection 602.3 Heat Supply:
Delete the text in this subsection in its entirety and insert the following:
Every owner and operator of any building who rents, leases or lets one or more dwelling unit, rooming unit, dormitory or guest room on terms, either
express or implied, to furnish heat to the occupants thereof shall supply sufficient heat during the period from September 1st to May 1st to maintain a
room temperature of not less than 65 degrees F. (18 degrees C.) in all habitable rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms during the hours between 6:30
A.M. and 10:30 P.M. of each day and not less than 60 degrees F. (16 degrees C.) during other hours. The temperature shall be measured at a point
3 feet (914 mm) above the floor and 3 feet (914 mm) from the exterior walls. When the outdoor temperature is below the outdoor design temperature
required for the locality by the mechanical code listed in appendix A, the owner or operator shall not be required to maintain the minimum room
temperatures, provided the heating system is operating at full capacity, with supply valves and dampers in a full open position.
Subsection 602.4 Occupiable Work Spaces:
Delete the text in this section in its entirety and insert the following:
Every enclosed occupied work space shall be supplied with sufficient heat during the period from September 1st to May 1st to maintain a
temperature of not less than 65 degrees F. (18 degrees C.) during all working hours. The temperature shall be measured at a point 3 feet (914 mm)
above the floor and 3 feet (914 mm) from the exterior walls.
Exception:
1. Processing, storage and operation areas that require cooling or special temperature conditions.
2. Areas in which persons are primarily engaged in vigorous physical activities.
(Ord. 2015-11, 5-21-2015)
Chapter 7
ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE
9-7-1: ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE ADOPTED:
The village building code is hereby amended so that said building code incorporates by reference the international energy conservation code, 2012
edition, and each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of the same are, except as hereinafter amended or modified, hereby
specifically adopted by reference as if fully set out herein. (Ord. 2015-11, 5-21-2015)
9-7-2: ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE AMENDMENTS:
9-7-2-1: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT:
AMENDMENT TO SECTION 101
SCOPE AND GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
Subsection 101.1 Title:
Under "name of jurisdiction" insert the words "village of Streamwood."
(Ord. 2015-11, 5-21-2015)
9-7-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
AMENDMENT TO SECTION 201
GENERAL
Subsection 201.3 Terms Defined In Other Codes:
Delete the words: "international plumbing code" and insert "state of Illinois plumbing code."
(Ord. 2015-11, 5-21-2015)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 313/498
Chapter 8
FUEL GAS CODE
9-8-1: FUEL GAS CODE ADOPTED:
The village building code is hereby amended so that said building code incorporates by reference the international fuel gas code, 2012 edition, and each
and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of the same are, except as hereinafter amended or modified, hereby specifically adopted by
reference as if fully set out herein. (Ord. 2015-11, 5-21-2015)
9-8-2: FUEL GAS CODE AMENDMENTS:
9-8-2-1: ADMINISTRATION:
AMENDMENT TO SECTION 101
GENERAL
Subsection 101.1 Title:
Insert under "name of jurisdiction" the words "village of Streamwood."
AMENDMENT TO SECTION 106
PERMITS
Subsection 106.6.2 Fee Schedule:
Delete the text in this subsection in its entirety.
Subsection 106.6.3 Fee Refunds:
Delete the text in this subsection in its entirety.
AMENDMENT TO SECTION 108
VIOLATIONS
Subsection 108.4 Violation Penalties:
Delete the text in this subsection in its entirety.
Subsection 108.5 Stop Work Orders:
Insert where it says [Amount] the following words: "not less than fifty dollars ($50) or more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750) per day".
AMENDMENT TO SECTION 109
MEANS OF APPEAL
Section 109 Means Of Appeal:
Delete this section in its entirety.
(Ord. 2015-11, 5-21-2015)
9-8-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
AMENDMENT TO SECTION 201
GENERAL
Subsection 201.3 Terms Defined In Other Codes:
Delete the words "international plumbing code" and insert the following words: "state of Illinois plumbing code".
(Ord. 2015-11, 5-21-2015)
9-8-2-3: GENERAL REGULATIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 314/498
AMENDMENT TO SECTION 301
GENERAL
Subsection 301.6 Plumbing Connections:
Delete the words "international plumbing code" and insert the following words: "state of Illinois plumbing code".
(Ord. 2015-11, 5-21-2015)
9-8-2-4: GAS PIPING INSTALLATIONS:
AMENDMENT TO SECTION 408
DRIPS AND SLOPED PIPING
Subsection 408.3 Location Of Drips:
Add sentence: Drips shall be located at all furnaces and water heaters fueled by natural gas.
AMENDMENT TO SECTION 411
APPLIANCE CONNECTIONS
Add new subsection 411.1.1 Connecting Appliances:
8. Water heaters and furnaces shall be connected to the natural gas supply with black steel schedule 40 pipe and black malleable fittings.
(Ord. 2015-11, 5-21-2015)
9-8-2-5: SPECIFIC APPLIANCES:
AMENDMENT TO SECTION 624
WATER HEATERS
Subsection 624.1.1 Installation Requirements:
Delete the words "international plumbing code" and insert the following words: "state of Illinois plumbing code".
Subsection 624.2 Water Heaters Utilized By Space Heating:
Delete the words "international plumbing code" and insert the following words: "state of Illinois plumbing code".
(Ord. 2015-11, 5-21-2015)
Chapter 9
CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION
9-9-1: INTENT:
The board of trustees of the village, having determined that a substantial number of rental units throughout the village are being converted to
condominiums, and that the applicable laws of the state of Illinois are not in themselves adequate to meet certain problems in the village, finds that it is
necessary and appropriate to regulate the various procedures attending the conversions of rental property, so as to guarantee that prospective purchasers
are in possession of all information necessary to make a decision to purchase by requiring that sellers of condominium units provide reasonable
notification and prepare and distribute an engineering report on the property being converted, describing the condition of the building's common elements
and all other information deemed relevant to the buyers of this type of property, as herein enumerated. (Ord. 2015-11, 5-21-2015)
9-9-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
AGENT: Any person, firm, partnership, association, joint venture, corporation or any other entity or combination of entities, who represents or acts for or on
behalf of a developer in selling or offering to sell any condominium unit.
BLANKET ENCUMBRANCE: A trust deed, mortgage, judgment or other lien or encumbrance, including an option or contract to sell, or a trust agreement
affecting a condominium, including any lien or other encumbrance arising as a result of the imposition of any tax assessment by a public authority.
BOARD OF MANAGERS: The board of managers referred to in the Illinois condominium property act.
CLOSING OF THE SALE: The operation of transferring legal or equitable ownership of a condominium to the prospective purchaser from the developer
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 315/498
through a deed of conveyance.
COMMON ELEMENTS:
General Common Elements: Except as otherwise provided in the plat of condominium subdivision, means all portions of the property except the
condominium units.
Limited Common Elements: Those common elements to be reserved for the use of a certain number of condominium units, such as special
corridors, stairways and elevators, balconies, terraces and patios, sanitary services common to the units of a particular floor, and the like.
CONDOMINIUM: The ownership of single units in a multi-unit residential project with common elements. (Alternative definition: Property subject to the
condominium regime established pursuant to the Illinois condominium property act.)
A. The land on which the building stands is fee simple;
B. The foundations, main walls, roofs, halls, columns, girders, beams, supports, corridors, fire escapes, lobbies, stairways, and entrance and exit or
communication ways;
C. The basements, flat roofs, yards, and gardens, except as otherwise provided or stipulated;
D. The premises for lodging of janitors or persons in charge of the building, except as otherwise provided or stipulated;
E. The compartments or installations of central services such as power, light, gas, cold or hot water, heating, central air conditioning or central
refrigeration, swimming pools, reservoirs, water tanks and pumps, and the like;
F. The elevators, garbage and trash incinerators and, in general, all devices or installations existing for common use; and
G. All other elements of the building rationally of common use or necessary to its existence, upkeep and safety.
CONDOMINIUM PROJECT: A plan by a developer to sell residential condominium units in a building, whether through conversion to condominium status
or construction of new buildings with condominium ownership.
CONDOMINIUM UNIT: An area identified as such in the declaration and on the condominium plat and shall include all improvements contained within the
area except those excluded in the declaration.
CONVERSION: The offering for sale by a developer or developer's agent of condominium units that were previously rental units.
CO-OWNER: A person or persons that own a condominium unit in the condominium project.
DEVELOPER: Any person, firm, partnership, association, joint venture or corporation or any other entity or combination of entities or successors thereto
who at any time after the effective date of this chapter undertakes to develop a condominium project either by conversion to condominium status or
construction of new buildings.
OFFERING: Any inducement, solicitation, advertisement, publication or announcement to the general public to encourage a person to acquire a
condominium unit in a condominium project.
PERSON: Any individual natural person, trustee, court appointed representative, syndicate, association, partnership, firm, club, company, corporation,
business, trust, institution, agency, government corporation, municipal corporation, city, county, municipality, district, or other political subdivision,
department, bureau, agency or instrumentality of federal, state or local government, contractor, supplier, vendor, installer, operator, user or owner, or any
officers, agents, employees, factors, or any land of representatives of any thereof, in any capacity, acting either on one's own behalf, or for any other
person, under either personal appointment or pursuant to law, or other entity recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties. The masculine,
feminine, singular or plural is included in any circumstances.
PLAT OF CONDOMINIUM SUBDIVISION: The plat of the surveyor of the city establishing the condominium units, accessory units and common elements.
PRELIMINARY PROPERTY REPORT AND PROPERTY REPORT: All that information required by the property reports in accordance with section 9-9-5 of
this chapter.
PROSPECTIVE PURCHASER: A person who visits the condominium project site for the purposes of inspection for possible purchase or who requests the
property report.
SITE: Any land area on which a part of the condominium is located.
UNIT OWNER: The person or persons whose estates or interests, individually or collectively aggregate fee simple absolute ownership of a unit. (Ord.
2015-11, 5-21-2015)
9-9-3: APPLICATION; COMPLIANCE; CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY:
A. Application: All rental dwellings must apply to the community development department for review and approval prior to any conversion to a
condominium development. All applications shall include, but not be limited to:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 316/498
1. Completed application form.
2. Names, addresses, phone numbers of developer(s), architect, and contractor.
3. Development plan with details of implementation (i.e., phases of renovation, sales, and occupancy).
4. Review for any and all applicable building permits.
B. Compliance: All buildings must comply with the current building code including all fire safety requirements.
C. Certificate Of Occupancy:
1. All rental units that have been converted to condominiums must be inspected and receive a "certificate of occupancy" prior to the occupancy of the
unit, whether offered for sale or sold in an "as is" condition or remodeled, refurbished or upgraded in any manner. It shall be the responsibility of the
developer/contractor to schedule the occupancy inspection a minimum of forty eight (48) hours prior to occupancy of the unit(s).
2. Inspection and occupancy fees shall be as established in this code. (Ord. 2015-11, 5-21-2015)
9-9-4: PROPERTY MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS:
All condominium conversion development projects shall comply with and must meet the requirements of the 2012 international property maintenance code
and any applicable provisions of the current building code; and all condominium conversion development projects shall be equipped throughout with an
automatic fire suppression system. (Ord. 2015-11, 5-21-2015)
9-9-5: PROPERTY REPORT:
It shall be unlawful for any developer to offer rental units for sale as condominium units in any development consisting of more than four (4) units until such
time as all prospective purchasers are provided with a preliminary property report and, forty five (45) days prior to the closing of the first unit, a final
property report, in accordance with this section.
A. A preliminary property report, to be provided to each prospective purchaser at the same time that letters of intent are issued, shall contain the following:
1. Name of building, address and number of units.
2. Name of the developer, address and phone number.
3. Prices of condominium units and preliminary declaration.
4. Estimated monthly assessment upon each unit and taxes on each unit, based upon the previous year's tax bill. If the units have not been assessed
separately, estimated taxes on each unit may be stated.
5. Proposed financing of each unit (subject to approval by lending institution at time of closing), including percent of price required for down payment,
number of years required to repay the loan, interest rate, service charge payable at closing, if any, and total monthly payment, if financed by the
developer.
6. Description of personal property which may be included in the sale, stating whether new or existing, including, without limitation: refrigerator, range,
garbage disposal, dishwasher, clothes washer, clothes dryer, unit air conditioner or unit heaters, decorating and floor coverings.
7. Maintenance and amenity costs covered by monthly assessment.
8. Maintenance and amenity costs which are not covered by the monthly assessment for which optional charges are or may be levied.
9. The time and circumstances upon which the initial board of managers shall be established.
10. A brief description of rights and obligations retained by the sellers and the duration of such rights and obligations.
11. Rights and obligations of unit purchasers after closing and prior to election of the initial board of managers.
12. Description of the condominium's physical properties, including:
a. For buildings which are being converted, an engineering survey of the building's operating and other systems, completed within one year of the
first offer of sale.
b. Description of the age and operating condition of the heating, air conditioning, water and water heating, sewer service, elevators, and all other
common elements, including a description of provisions, or lack thereof, made by the developer for the condominium unit owner's pets.
13. Description of existing contracts for management and other services, including:
a. Length and terms of contract.
b. Location and availability for review.
c. List of all interests of developer, directly or indirectly in all such service contracts.
14. Explanation of the buyer's cancellation rights and the seller's procedures.
15. Statement of all warranties included with unit.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 317/498
16. The following statement in a type size and style equal to at least 20-point bold type:
THIS INFORMATION IS PROVIDED TO PROSPECTIVE CONDOMINIUM UNIT OWNERS IN ADDITION TO THE LEGAL DOCUMENTS
REQUIRED UNDER Village AND ILLINOIS LAW. THIS IS NOT INTENDED TO BE A FULL STATEMENT AS TO (Name of Development) .
FULL DETAILS ARE SET FORTH IN THE PROPERTY REPORT AND CONDOMINIUM DECLARATION. IT IS STRONGLY RECOMMENDED
THAT THESE GUIDELINES AND ALL LEGAL DOCUMENTS ARE REVIEWED BY PROSPECTIVE BUYERS AND THEIR ATTORNEYS AND
OTHER ADVISORS PRIOR TO ENTERING INTO A REAL ESTATE SALES AGREEMENT.
B. The property report shall be certified by the developer or his or her agent and shall contain the following:
1. A statement indicating name and address of the developer and owner, if different, including all partners of a partnership or all officers and directors of
a corporation as well as the following:
a. The name and address of the developer and legal and beneficial owner of the parcel, if different, including all general partners of a partnership and
officers and directors of a corporation.
b. All persons with a direct material financial interest in the property, including interim and permanent mortgage lenders secured by a blanket
encumbrance.
c. The principal attorneys, accountants, architect, engineer and contractor for the property.
2. A description of the property and improvements, including the following:
a. Map or plat showing size and dimensions of the condominium project, together with all improvements, including recreational facilities, proposed
construction and present and planned location of streets and roads. The share of ownership of each unit in the common elements shall be
indicated.
b. Description of the condominium units offered and the nature and extent of individual ownership in such condominium units, including the
percentage of former renters who have purchased or contracted to purchase a condominium unit when the property is a conversion, if known. If
such units are owned in trust by nominees, the beneficiaries or principals shall be named.
c. Description, nature and ownership of all property and facilities on the site which are not part of the condominium.
d. Description of all existing and proposed recreational facilities and other such facilities within the condominium project, including the projected
dates of their completion.
e. Location, nature and ownership of streets and roads on and contiguous to the site.
f. Drawings, architectural plans or other suitable documents setting forth the necessary information for location, maintenance and repair of all
condominium facilities and equipment to the extent these documents exist. Such items shall be incorporated in the property report by reference,
located at the sales office site or construction office site and turned over to the board of managers upon transfer of control by the developer.
g. Projected initiation and completion dates for proposed construction, renovation or conversion.
h. Use permitted for individual condominium units by the declaration, bylaws of the condominium association or organization and applicable zoning
provisions.
i. Statement as to whether or not the condominium units may be rented by the owner.
j. Statement of title, listing all restrictions of record and the condition of title.
3. Method and timing of transfer of control over the condominium project to the board of managers and the nature and extent of an interest retained by
the developer.
4. A statement of all financial aspects of the condominium project, including, but not limited to:
a. Name of construction mortgagor or the interim mortgagor.
b. Institution offering long term mortgage financing, if available, and terms and conditions of such mortgage.
5. Statement disclosing the existence of penalty if the construction, renovation, or conversion or completion date is not met and the additional costs to
be imposed if such date is not met.
6. Nature and extent of any protection of a purchaser if the developer defaults on blanket encumbrance, unless the developer shall have furnished to
the purchaser a noncancelable bond executed by a surety company authorized to do business in the state of Illinois, which has consented to be sued
in this state, indemnifying a prospective purchaser against the loss of the deposit or deposits against payment for the unit (earnest money) except by
reason of the purchaser's default. If the developer has made no such arrangement, the following statement must be inserted, in a type, size and style
equal to at least 10-point bold type:
THE DEVELOPER HAS MADE NO ARRANGEMENTS TO PROTECT THE PURCHASER OF A CONDOMINIUM UNIT FROM ITS POSSIBLE
DEFAULT ON A BLANKET ENCUMBRANCE. ACCORDINGLY, THERE IS A RISK OF LOSING YOUR FINANCIAL INTEREST IN THE EVENT
OF THE DEVELOPER'S FAILURE OR BANKRUPTCY.
7. Statement of any pending litigation which would affect the condominium or the developer's ability to convey clear title.
8. Statement of the current taxes and estimated possible changes in the tax situation of the condominium project which buyers may encounter during
the first two (2) years.
9. Copies of the sales documents and literature, including, but not limited to:
a. Basic purchase contract form being used by developer.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 318/498
b. Forms of conveyance.
c. Deed of trust, mortgage and promissory note.
d. Statement of sales prices, terms and options.
e. Statement of terms and conditions of sale, including estimated closing and settlement costs, taxes and expected special assessments levied either
by the condominium or a governmental entity.
f. Statement of monthly payments, itemized as to principal, interest, taxes, utilities, and all other payments for a period of one year from the expected
date of closing of the sale.
10. Summary of past operating history of the project, if any.
11. Copies of all required documents numbered and indexed in such a manner as the developer may select, so as to permit ready reference thereto:
a. The declaration and plat.
b. The articles of incorporation or charter of the condominium association.
c. The bylaws and regulations of the condominium association.
d. Any leases of real or personal property, applicable to the condominium of more than one year's duration.
e. Any management contract, employment contract, insurance policy, or other contract affecting the use, maintenance or access to all or part of the
condominium of more than one year's duration.
f. Coverage and amounts of condominium insurance policies.
12. A statement of management and expected operation costs of condominium, including:
a. Name of management agent, if any, and the services the agent will perform.
b. Length of term of any management contract and charges and circumstances, if any, under which the charges may be increased.
c. The conditions, if any, under which the contract may be canceled or terminated.
d. Statement disclosing any relationship between the developer and the management firm and their respective corporate officers and controlling
interests.
13. Copy of estimated operating budget for the condominium project, projected for a period of one year from the expected date that control of the
condominium common elements would pass to the board of managers, including monthly payments to be prorated to each condominium unit for
maintenance and/or management of condominium common elements and charges for use of recreational and other facilities. In particular, the
operating budget shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
a. Operating costs:
Building insurance.
Elevator maintenance.
Ground and building maintenance.
Heating fuels.
Janitorial services.
Maintenance and operation of recreational and other facilities.
Security.
Sidewalks and street maintenance.
Trash and garbage disposal.
Utilities.
Other operating costs.
b. Management costs:
Bookkeeping services.
Legal and accounting services.
Management fees.
c. Reserve costs:
Reserve for improvements.
Reserve for replacement and upkeep of common elements and facilities, including basis upon which reserves are calculated.
Reserve for unexpected repair work.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 319/498
If no reserve is provided for any one or more of the costs listed in this subsection, the following statement must be inserted in the property report in
a type size and style equal to at least 10-point bold type:
THE DEVELOPER HAS NOT PROVIDED A RESERVE FOR CERTAIN POSSIBLE FUTURE COSTS ON THE CONDOMINIUM IN THE
BUDGET. ACCORDINGLY, IT MAY BE NECESSARY TO PROVIDE FOR A SPECIAL ASSESSMENT TO ALL CONDOMINIUM UNIT OWNERS
TO PAY FOR SUCH COSTS SHOULD THEY OCCUR.
14. Alternative provisions if an insufficient number of units are sold to cover the proposed operations and maintenance budget.
15. In the case of a conversion from rental or other legal status to condominiums, a report from a qualified licensed structural engineer or registered
architect, not associated with the developer/builder, stating his or her opinion concerning the condition and the rated life and expected useful life of
the roof, foundation, external and supporting walls, mechanical, electrical, plumbing and structural elements and all other common facilities, together
with an estimate of repair and replacement costs, at current market prices, which shall indicate what the cost per category of unit would be if the unit
owners were assessed for the estimated cost. This report shall include the approximate dates of installation of the facilities listed above and the
dates of major repairs to such facilities. There shall also be attached a list of violations of the village of Streamwood building code, as received from
the building department of the village or, if no notice of such violations has been received, the report shall so state.
16. If there are any restrictions upon the free sale, transfer, conveyance, encumbrance or leasing of a unit, then a statement in bold face type or capital
letters in substantially the following form shall be included: "THE SALE, LEASE OR TRANSFER OF YOUR UNIT IS RESTRICTED OR
CONTROLLED". Immediately following this statement, there shall appear a reference to the documents, articles, paragraphs, or pages in the
disclosure materials where the restriction, limitation or control on the sale, lease or transfer of units is set forth or described in detail.
17. Each property report shall contain on the first page the following warning in capital letters, in a type size and style equal to at least 10-point bold
type:
VILLAGE LAW SPECIFICALLY PROHIBITS ANY REPRESENTATION TO THE EFFECT THAT THE VILLAGE HAS PASSED UPON THE
MERITS OF OR GIVEN APPROVAL TO MAKE OR CAUSE TO BE MADE TO ANY PROSPECTIVE PURCHASER ANY REPRESENTATIONS
WHICH DIFFER FROM THE STATEMENTS IN THIS PROPERTY REPORT. ORAL REPRESENTATIONS CANNOT BE RELIED UPON AS
CORRECTLY STATING THE REPRESENTATIONS OF THE DEVELOPER AND ARE NOT BINDING ON THE DEVELOPER. REFER TO THE
PROPERTY REPORT FOR CORRECT REPRESENTATIONS.
18. A senior executive officer of the developer shall sign the property report and affirm that it and any supplements, modifications and amendments are
true, full, complete and correct. (Ord. 2015-11, 5-21-2015)
9-9-6: TRANSFER OF CONTROL:
Control over the condominium project shall be transferred from the developer to the board of managers, pursuant to the Illinois condominium property act,
at such time as seventy five percent (75%) of the condominium units are sold, or no later than three (3) years from the closing date of the first unit. (Ord.
2015-11, 5-21-2015)
9-9-7: REPRESENTATION:
Owners of units shall be represented in their respective condominium associations equally. (Ord. 2015-11, 5-21-2015)
9-9-8: PARKING FACILITIES:
No developer shall record a declaration or plat unless parking facilities, if any, located on or within the new condominium property are either: a) included
among the property's common elements, or b) divided as individual parking spaces among, and designated as being a part of the condominium units.
(Ord. 2015-11, 5-21-2015)
9-9-9: MANAGEMENT CONTRACTS:
It shall be unlawful for developers to enter into a lease of common elements, including exclusive service contracts relating to the condominium, which
expire later than one year from the date on which the board of managers assumes control of the condominium. (Ord. 2015-11, 5-21-2015)
9-9-10: NOTICE REQUIREMENTS:
A. Not less than thirty (30) days prior to offering for sale of any condominium unit or recording the declaration, pursuant to the Illinois condominium
property act, whichever occurs first, the developer shall provide:
1. Written notice to each tenant of the building, specifying the date on which conversion will commence;
2. A copy of the preliminary property report, as described by section 9-9-5 of this chapter.
B. The developer shall be required to automatically extend the lease of any tenant which is due to expire during the notification period to the end of the full
one hundred twenty (120) day period.
C. With regard to the right of first refusal:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 320/498
1. Each tenant will have the option to purchase his or her premises for a period of one hundred twenty (120) days from the notice of conversion
required, on the same terms or better than the premises will be offered to the general public.
2. In the event that a discount is offered by the developer, the tenant shall be allowed to purchase his or her premises at a discount for a period of forty
five (45) days following notification of conversion and on the same terms at which the premises will be offered to the general public for the remaining
seventy five (75) days of the notification period.
D. Notwithstanding lease provisions to the contrary, the tenant's premises will not be shown to prospective purchasers without the tenant's permission until
the expiration of the tenant's option to purchase or seventy five (75) days prior to the end of the term of the tenant's lease, whichever is later. (Ord.
2015-11, 5-21-2015)
9-9-11: ENFORCEMENT:
It shall be the responsibility of a developer or his or her agent to provide all information required by this chapter to each prospective purchaser of a
condominium unit directly. The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the director of community development of the village. (Ord. 2015-11, 5-21-
2015)
9-9-12: PENALTIES:
Any person found guilty or liable of violating, refusing to comply with, or resisting or opposing the enforcement of any of the provisions of this chapter,
except when otherwise specifically provided, upon conviction shall be punished by a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for the first offense, and not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for
the second and each subsequent offenses in any one hundred eighty (180) day period; provided, however, that all actions seeking the imposition of fines
only shall be filed as quasi-criminal actions subject to the provisions of the Illinois civil practice act1. Repeated offenses in excess of three (3) within any
one hundred eighty (180) day period may also be punishable as a misdemeanor by incarceration in the county jail for a term not to exceed six (6) months
under the procedure set forth in section 1-2-1.1 of the Illinois municipal code2 under the provisions of the Illinois code of criminal procedure3 in a separate
proceeding. Each false or misleading statement of fact or omission of fact or each sale of a condominium unit made in violation of the provisions of this
chapter shall be considered a separate offense. A separate and distinct offense shall be regarded as committed each day on which such person shall
continue or permit any such violation. Nothing herein shall be construed to preclude the revocation of any license for violation of any other provision of this
code. (Ord. 2015-11, 5-21-2015)
9-9-13: SEVERABILITY:
If any provision, clause, sentence, paragraph, section, or part of this chapter, or application to any person, or circumstance, shall, for any reason, be
adjudged to be unconstitutional or invalid, that judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder of this chapter and the application of that
provision to other persons, firms, corporations, public agencies or circumstances, but shall be confined in its operation to the provision, clause, sentence,
paragraph, section, or part directly involved in the controversy in which the judgment has been rendered and to the person, firm, corporation, public
agency, or circumstances involved. (Ord. 2015-11, 5-21-2015)
Title 10
LAND SUBDIVISIONS
Chapter 1
GENERAL SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
10-1-1: TITLE:
This title shall be known and may be cited and referred to as the SUBDIVISION CONTROL ORDINANCE OF THE VILLAGE OF STREAMWOOD,
ILLINOIS, and is adopted pursuant to the authorization of 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-12-5. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010)
10-1-2: PURPOSE:
The purposes of these regulations are to ensure the orderly extension of village streets and the following:
A. To ensure sound, harmonious subdivision development and community growth, and to safeguard the interests of the homeowner, the subdivider, the
investor and the village.
B. To provide permanent assets to the locality and to the village.
C. To prevent scattered development beyond existing public utilities and prevent excessive development costs.
D. To ensure the development of land for optimum use with necessary protection against deterioration and obsolescence.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 321/498
E. To limit and control the pollution of the environment that can be caused by inadequate or incomplete urban development.
F. To lessen congestion in the streets and highways.
G. To provide common grounds of understanding and a sound working relationship between the village and the subdivider.
H. To provide for adequate light and air.
I. To facilitate adequate provision for transportation, water, sewerage, schools and other public necessities.
J. To ensure proper legal description and proper monumenting of subdivided land.
These regulations are established with reasonable consideration of the character of the village with a view toward conserving the value of buildings upon
the land and providing the best possible environment for human habitation. It is intended that these regulations shall supplement and facilitate the
enforcement of the provisions and development standards contained in the building codes, official map regulations, zoning ordinance and the official
village plan. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010)
10-1-3: JURISDICTION:
The subdivision control regulations of the village shall apply to all subdivisions of land, as defined herein, located within the village and entirely or in part
within the unincorporated area within one and one-half (11/2) miles of the corporate limits of the village, in accordance with 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/7-4-1. The subdivision plans and plats, proposed improvements to be installed, and all procedures relating thereto, shall in all respects be in full
compliance with the regulations herein. The regulations for design and construction standards for the construction of public improvements shall apply, but
are not limited to, planned developments, subdivisions or single zoned lots within the area of jurisdiction. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010)
10-1-4: RULES AND DEFINITIONS:
In the interpretation of this title, the rules and definitions contained in this section shall be observed and applied, except when the context clearly indicates
otherwise. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010)
10-1-4-1: RULES:
The language set forth in the text of this title shall be interpreted in accordance with the following rules of construction:
A. Words used in the present tense shall include the future; and words used in the singular number shall include the plural number, and the plural the
singular.
B. The word "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary.
C. The word "may" is permissive.
D. The word "lot" shall include the words "plat" and "piece" and "parcel".
E. The phrase "used for" shall include the phrases "arranged for", "designed for", "intended for", "maintained for", and "occupied for". (Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-
2010)
10-1-4-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and terms, wherever they occur in this title, shall be construed as herein defined:
ALLEY: A public right of way which affords a secondary means of access to abutting properties. An alley shall not be considered a street.
ARTERIAL: See definition of Street, Major.
BLOCK: A tract of land bounded by streets, or by a combination of streets and public parks, golf course, cemeteries, railroad rights of way, or shorelines of
waterways. A block may be located, in part, beyond the boundaries of the village of Streamwood.
BORINGS, SOIL: Examination and analysis of the subsoil conditions of a specific parcel of land by drilling.
BUILDING: Any structure built for the enclosure, shelter, support, or protection of person, animals or property of any kind and which is permanently affixed
to the ground. The term "building" shall not include fences.
BUILDING PERMIT: A permit issued by the village for the erection or alteration of a construction, structure or building.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 322/498
CERTIFICATION: The specific inspections and test where required, have been performed and such tests comply with the applicable requirements of this
title.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN: The composite of the functional and geographic elements of the official comprehensive plan of the village and environs or any
segment thereof, in the form of plans, maps, charts, text of reports, implementing ordinances, and the official map.
CORINGS; PAVEMENT: Examinations and analysis of the completed surface and/or subsurface of a finished pavement by removing a core by drilling.
CROSSWALK: Any portion of a roadway distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the surface.
CUBIC YARDS: The amount of material in excavation and/or fill measured by the method of "average and areas".
CUL-DE-SAC: A minor street having one open end and being permanently terminated by a vehicular turnaround.
CURB: The permanent edge of a paved surface designed to separate the vehicular travelway from the landscaped parkway.
DAM: A structure built of earth, masonry, concrete or other material, the function of which is to prevent the flow of water from a reservoir.
DATUM PLANE: A reference point from which elevations are measured. The datum plane is mean sea level as established by the United States geodetic
survey (USGS).
DETENTION BASIN: A covered or uncovered reservoir designed to hold an excessive accumulation of stormwater so as to reduce peak flow in a
stormwater drainage system.
DEVELOPER: Any person, group of persons, organizations, etc., whose concern and desire is to improve land in accordance with the development
regulations of the village. See definition of Subdivider.
DITCH, OPEN: An uncovered channel constructed as part of a stormwater drainage system designed to contain, collect and direct a flow of stormwater.
DRAINAGE SWALE: A turf drainage ditch of shallow depth with side slopes not exceeding one to twelve (1:12).
DRIVEWAY: An entrance which provides vehicular access to either public or private property.
EASEMENT: A recorded agreement whereby a property owner grants the use of air, land or mineral right for a specific purpose.
ELEVATIONS: The vertical distance measured from a point on the ground to the datum plane.
EMBANKMENT: A side of a reservoir formed by the cutting or grading of earth.
ENGINEER, DESIGN: A professional engineer, registered in the state of Illinois, retained by a subdivider to prepare designs and specifications for required
land improvements within a subdivision.
ENGINEER, VILLAGE: A professional engineer, registered in the state of Illinois, who has been duly appointed as village engineer.
ENVIRONMENTALLY SENSITIVE AREA (ESA): Environmentally sensitive areas (ESA) are those areas which have significant natural features such as
large trees or wetlands. These areas require special care be taken during any development. Wetland mitigation shall be in accordance with chapter 8 of
this title.
EXCAVATION: Any act by which organic matter, earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other similar material is cut into, dug, quarried, uncovered, removed,
displaced, relocated or bulldozed and shall include the conditions resulting therefrom.
EXISTING GRADE: The vertical location of the existing ground surface prior to excavation or filling.
FARMLAND: Land actively used for commercial agricultural purposes.
FILL: Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other material is deposited, placed, replaced, pushed, dumped, pulled, transported or moved by
man to a new location and shall include the conditions resulting therefrom.
FIRE LANES: Lanes designated for fire protection as required by the president and board of trustees.
FRONTAGE: The length of the front property line of the lot, lots or tract of land abutting a public street, highway or road.
FRONTAGE ROAD: See definition of Street, Marginal Access.
GRADE: The slope of the land, road, street or other public way expressed in percent, or average level of the finished surface of the ground adjacent to the
exterior wall of a structure.
GRADING: Excavation or fill or any combination thereof and shall include the conditions resulting from any excavation or fill.
GROSS LAND AREA: The entire area of a development including lots, streets and alleys, measured to the centerline of any bounding streets.
HIGHWAY SEPARATION: A crossing of two (2) highways at different levels, one carried over the other by a structure.
IDOT: Illinois department of transportation.
LAND DIVISIONS: Any division of a parcel of land into two (2) or more parcels for the purpose of sale or development that is not a "subdivision" as herein
defined.
LAND IMPROVEMENT: Any sanitary sewer system, storm sewer system, water supply and distribution systems, roadway, parkway, sidewalk,
pedestrianway, no access strip, off street parking area, soil conservation, or other improvement which the village may require under this title.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 323/498
LAND SURVEYOR: A registered surveyor of the state of Illinois.
LOT: A single tract or parcel of land within a block under unified ownership or control and as further defined by title 11 of this code.
LOT, CORNER: A lot situated at the intersection of two (2) streets, the interior angle of such intersection not exceeding one hundred thirty five degrees
(135°).
LOT, THROUGH: A lot having frontage on two (2) parallel or approximately parallel streets, and which is not a corner lot.
MWRD: Metropolitan water reclamation district.
MEDIAN STRIP: A dividing section, barrier or unpaved strip which separates two (2) roadways.
NO ACCESS STRIP: A land area at least twelve feet (12') wide along the rear lot line of a through lot and abutting a thoroughfare within which no
vehicular driveway shall be permitted.
OFFICIAL MAP: The map showing the streets, highways and parks theretofore laid out, adopted and established by law and any amendments or additions
thereto resulting from the board of trustees action or the approval of subdivision plats.
PARCEL: All contiguous land in one ownership.
PARKWAY: That portion of the street right of way between the sidewalk and curb.
PEDESTRIANWAY: A right of way across or within a block designated for pedestrian use.
PERMITTEE: Any person to whom a site development permit is issued.
PERSON: Any person, firm or corporation, public or private, the state of Illinois and its agencies or political subdivisions, and the United States Of
America, its agencies and instrumentalities, and any agent, servant, officer or employee of any of the foregoing.
PLAN, PRELIMINARY: A detailed map, drawing, or chart on which the subdivider's design for the subdivision of land is presented and which he submits in
form for review and approval but not for recording.
PLAN SKETCH: A general map or drawing on which the subdivider's design for the subdivision of land is presented for discussion purposes prior to the
preparation of the preliminary plan.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT: A unique development of a tract of land, under unified ownership or control, in accordance with the provisions of this
title.
PLAT, FINAL: A map, drawing or chart on which the subdivider's plan for the subdivision of land is presented and which he submits for final approval and
intends to record in final form.
PUBLIC UTILITY: Any person, firm or corporation, municipal department, board or commission, duly authorized to furnish, and furnishing under
government regulations, to the public: gas, steam, electricity, sewage disposal, communication, telegram, transportation or water.
REFORESTATION: Restocking of existing forests, woodlands or any number of trees which have been depleted.
REMOVED: Cutting vegetation to the ground, or complete extraction of stumps, etc., or killing by spraying.
RESIDUE AREA: A residue area is that portion of a planned development not platted as residential lots or designed for dedication as streets or alleys.
RETENTION BASIN: A permanent body of water.
ROADWAY: The paved area within a street right of way intended for vehicular traffic, including all curb and gutter facilities.
SETBACK: The minimum horizontal distance between a lot line and the nearest side of a structure to such lot lines.
SIDEWALK: That portion of the street right of way designated for pedestrian use.
SITE: A lot or parcel of land, or a contiguous combination thereof, where grading work is performed as a single unified operation.
SITE DEVELOPMENT: Altering terrain and/or vegetation.
SOIL AND WATER CONSERVATION DISTRICT: The North Cook County soil and water conservation district.
SOIL TESTING: Determination and analysis of the subsoil conditions of a specific land area by use of soil borings.
STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS FOR ROAD AND BRIDGE CONSTRUCTION: Current edition of the "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge
Construction" (SSRB) as adopted by the Illinois department of transportation.
STREET: A public or private right of way or easement which affords a primary means of access to abutting properties. An alley shall not be considered a
street.
STREET, BOULEVARD: A street developed to two (2) lane, one-way pavements, separated by a median.
STREET, HALF: A street of less than the total required width along one or more property lines of a subdivision.
STREET, LOOP: A minor street of short length with two (2) openings to traffic beginning from the same street, and projecting parallel to each other and
connecting at their termination by a loop.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 324/498
STREET, MAJOR: A street of considerable continuity which serves or is intended to serve a major traffic artery connecting various sections of
Streamwood.
STREET, MARGINAL ACCESS: A minor street which is parallel and adjacent to highways and major streets and which provides access to abutting
properties and protection to local traffic from fast, through moving traffic on the highways and major streets.
STREET, MINOR: A street primarily used as access to abutting properties.
STREET, PRIVATE: An undedicated street which is privately owned and maintained, or an easement of access benefiting a lot or parcel.
STREET, PUBLIC: Any major or secondary street or minor street which is shown on the subdivision plat and is or is to be dedicated to public use.
STREET, SECONDARY OR COLLECTOR: A street which carries traffic from minor streets to the major street system, including the principal entrance
streets of residential development and streets for circulation within such development.
STREET, TURNAROUND: A short boulevard street permanently terminated by a vehicular turnaround.
SUBDIVIDER: The person or persons responsible for preparing and recording the plats of this subdivision and for carrying out all appropriate requirements
relating thereto as outlined in this title.
SUBDIVISION: A described tract of land which is to be, or has been, divided into two (2) or more lots or parcels, any of which is less than five (5) acres in
area, for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer of ownership or building development, including all public streets, alleys, ways for public
service facilities, parks, playgrounds, school grounds or other public grounds, and all the tracts, parcels, lots or blocks, and numbering of all such lots,
blocks or parcels by progressive numbers, giving their precise dimensions. The term subdivision includes resubdivision, consolidation, and where it is
appropriate to the context, relates to the process of subdividing or to the land subdivided; provided, however, that the following shall not be considered a
subdivision and shall be exempt from the requirements of this title.
A. The division or subdivision of land into parcels or tracts of five (5) acres or more in size which does not involve any new streets or easements of
access, or otherwise deemed by the president and board of trustees.
B. The sale or exchange of parcels of land between owners of adjoining and contiguous land.
C. The conveyance of parcels of land or interest therein for use as right of way for railroads or other public utility facilities which does not involve any
new streets or easements of access.
D. The conveyance of land owned by a railroad or other public utility which does not involve any new streets or easements of access.
E. The conveyance of land for highway or other public purposes or grants or conveyances relating to the dedication of land for public use or
instruments relating to the vacation of land impressed with a public use.
F. Covenants made to correct descriptions in prior conveyances.
G. The division of existing lots of record into no more than two (2) parts and not involving any new streets or easements of access, provided that the
two (2) parts meet the requirements of the applicable zoning ordinance (title 11 of this code) and all other ordinances of the village.
H. The division of lots or blocks of less than one acre in any recorded subdivision which does not involve any new streets or easements of access,
provided that all requirements of this title and the zoning ordinance (title 11 of this code) are complied with.
I. The sale of a single lot of less than five (5) acres from a larger tract when a survey is made by a registered surveyor; provided however, that this
exemption shall not apply to the sale of any subsequent lots from the same larger tract of land, as determined by the dimensions and configuration of
the largest tract on October 1, 1973, and provided that all requirements of this title and the zoning ordinance (title 11 of this code) are complied with.
VACANT: Land on which there are structures or only structures which are secondary to the use or maintenance of the land itself.
VILLAGE: The village of Streamwood, Illinois.
WATER LEVEL, CONSTANT: The minimum depth of water designed to be contained at all times within a retention basin.
WATER LEVEL, OCCASIONAL: The maximum depth of water designed to be contained within a retention or detention basin during periods of peak
stormwater flow.
ZONING ORDINANCE: The village zoning ordinance, as amended (title 11 of this code). (Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010)
10-1-5: INTERPRETATION AND SEPARABILITY:
10-1-5-1: INTERPRETATION:
A. Minimum Standards Established: In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this title shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the
promotion of the public health, safety and general welfare.
B. Higher Standards Govern: Where the conditions imposed by any provisions of this title upon the subdivision of land are either more restrictive or less
restrictive than comparable conditions imposed by any other provisions of this title, or of any other applicable law, ordinance, resolution, rule or
regulation of any kind, the regulations which are more restrictive and impose higher standards or requirements shall govern.
C. Easements Or Covenants Not Abrogated: This title is not intended to abrogate any easement, covenant or any other private agreement, provided that
where the regulations of this title are more restrictive or impose higher standards or regulations than such easement, covenant, or other private
agreement, the requirements of this title shall govern.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 325/498
D. Existing Subdivisions: No subdivision of land which was not lawfully existing at the time of the effective date hereof, shall be made lawful solely by
reason of the adoption of these regulations, and to the extent that said subdivision of land is in conflict in any manner with the requirements of this title,
said subdivision of land remains unlawful hereunder.
E. Public Improvements: The public improvements required under this title, including, but not limited to, streets, sidewalks, storm and sanitary sewers,
water mains, streetlights and landscaping, shall be paid for, installed and maintained by the developer. The maintenance of these items will be
assumed by the village upon final acceptance by the village board, in accordance with subsection 10-3-7A of this title. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010)
10-1-5-2: SEPARABILITY:
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the village board that the several provisions of this title be separable in accordance with the following:
A. Separability Of Parts: If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge any provision of this title to be invalid, such judgement shall not affect any
other provision of this title not specifically included in said judgment.
B. Separability Of Application: If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge invalid the application of any provision of this title to a particular
subdivision of land, such judgment shall not affect the application of said provision to any other subdivision of land, not specifically included in said
judgment. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010)
Chapter 2
SUBDIVISION APPROVAL, GENERAL PROVISIONS
10-2-1: PLANNING AND ZONING BOARD GUIDELINES:
A. Particular Attention Of Planning And Zoning Board: The planning and zoning board, in the examination of subdivision plans for approval, and in the
application of this title, shall take into consideration the requirements of the community and the best use of the land being subdivided. Particular
attention shall be given to width and location of streets, suitable sanitary utilities, stormwater drainage, lot sizes and arrangements, as well as local
requirements such as parks and playgrounds, schools and recreation sites, and other public uses.
B. Conformity With Comprehensive Plan: The planning and zoning board shall especially require that all subdivisions conform to the provisions and
conditions of the comprehensive plan. Plat approval may be withheld if a subdivision does not conform to the provisions of the comprehensive plan.
C. Area Plan Required: Where a tract of land proposed for subdivision is part of a larger, logical subdivision unit in relation to the village as a whole, the
planning and zoning board may, before recommending approval, cause to be prepared a plan for the entire area or neighborhood, such plan to be used
by the planning and zoning board as an aid in judging the proposed plat.
D. Stormwater Provisions Required: The planning and zoning board shall not recommend for approval by the village board any plat of subdivision which
does not make adequate provisions for storm or flood water runoff channels or basins. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010; amd. Ord. 2015-9, 5-7-2015)
E. Preservation Of Natural Features: In all subdivisions due regard shall be given to the preservation of natural features such as large trees, watercourses,
historical sites or structures, and similar features. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010)
10-2-2: UNSUITABLE LAND:
No land shall be subdivided for any use which is determined by the planning and zoning board, after investigation by the village engineer, to be unsuitable
for such use by reason of flooding or bad drainage, adverse earth or rock formation or topography, or any other feature likely to be harmful to the health,
safety or welfare of the future residents in the proposed subdivision or of the community. However, if the subdivider agrees to make improvements which
will, in the opinion of the village engineer, make the area safe for occupancy and provide adequate lot and street drainage and stormwater detention
facilities, the subdivision may then be approved. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010; amd. Ord. 2015-9, 5-7-2015)
10-2-3: DEDICATION OF LAND FOR PUBLIC USE:
A. Procedure:
1. The village shall notify all affected public bodies as required by law in writing of any formal application for annexation or development of lands within
or adjacent to the village of Streamwood. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010)
2. Upon submission of a preliminary plat of subdivision to the village, a duplicate copy of said plat shall be filed with the park district. The park district
shall comment and make written recommendations to the planning and zoning board on said preliminary plat within sixty (60) days of receipt of said
preliminary plat. In the event that the park district has not made written recommendations within sixty (60) days, it shall be assumed that the park
district will accept cash in lieu of land on said development. No preliminary plat shall be approved until subsequent to the sixty (60) day review period
unless otherwise waived in writing by both the park district and applicant. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010; amd. Ord. 2015-9, 5-7-2015)
3. During said sixty (60) day review period and initial approval of the preliminary plat, the village shall notify the park district in writing of any suggested
modifications, changes or amendments to said preliminary plat. In the event of substantial modifications, changes or amendments, the park district
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 326/498
shall have an additional thirty (30) days for written comment. Substantial modifications, changes or amendments with reference to this section shall
be defined as changes in access, size, character or location of designated park land or a change of density in the development.
B. Acceptance Or Refusal Of Designated Land:
1. Acceptance Of Designated Land: When a final plat of a subdivision has been approved by the village board and all other required approvals are
obtained and the plat is recorded, that approval shall constitute acceptance for the purpose designated on the plat of all lands shown on the plat as
dedicated to the public, excepting street dedications which shall be accepted only after inspection and recommendation by the village engineer. (Ord.
2010-27, 12-2-2010)
2. Refusal Of Designated Land: Whenever a preliminary plan includes a proposed dedication of land to public use and the planning and zoning board
finds that such land is not required or not suitable for public use, the planning and zoning board may either refuse to approve such dedication or
require the rearrangement of lots in the proposed subdivision to include such land. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010; amd. Ord. 2015-9, 5-7-2015)
3. Time For Completion Of Improvements: All lands required to be dedicated hereunder, shall be fully improved in accordance with the requirements of
subsection 10-2-5H of this chapter, upon closing of the sale of fifty one percent (51%) of the total lots or units in said development. (Ord. 2010-27,
12-2-2010)
10-2-4: RESERVATION OF PUBLIC SPACES AND SITES:
A. Plan To Show Public Land: Whenever a tract to be subdivided includes a proposed street, highway or parkway, or proposed site for a park, playground,
school or other public use as indicated on the official map of the village, such space shall be suitably incorporated by the developer into his subdivision
plat after proper determination of its necessity by the planning and zoning board and the appropriate village office or other public agency involved in the
acquisition and use of each such site. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010; amd. Ord. 2015-9, 5-7-2015)
B. Adequate Open Space Required:
1. Floodplain Areas: The village board may, when it deems it necessary for the health, safety or welfare of the present and future population of the area
and necessary to the conservation of water, drainage, and sanitary facilities, prohibit subdivision of any portion of the property which lies within the
floodplain of any stream or drainage course. These floodplain areas shall be preserved from any and all destruction or damage resulting from
clearing, grading or dumping of earth, waste material or stumps.
2. Park And Playground Sites: Unless appropriate provisions for dedication or donation of park or playground sites have been made by the village
board in a previous action, any required parks or playgrounds shall be acquired by the appropriate village, county, or state agency. (Ord. 2010-27,
12-2-2010)
C. Acquisition Of Land For Public Use: The planning and zoning board shall consider all preliminary plans and adopted or proposed studies related
thereto, to determine the need for acquisition for public use of any of the land included in the preliminary plan. Land may be acquired for parks,
playgrounds, or other public recreation areas, or other public purposes as provided by law.
1. Referral To Public Body: The planning and zoning board shall refer the plat to the public body concerned with acquisition for its consideration and
report. The planning and zoning board may propose alternate areas for such acquisition and shall allow the public body or agency thirty (30) days
from the date of referral for reply. The agency's recommendation, if affirmative, shall include a map showing the boundaries and area of the parcel to
be acquired and an estimate of the time required to complete the acquisition.
2. Notice To Property Owner: Upon receipt of an affirmative report from an acquiring agency, the planning and zoning board shall notify the property
owner and shall designate on the preliminary plan and final plat that area proposed to be acquired by the public body. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010;
amd. Ord. 2015-9, 5-7-2015)
3. Duration Of Land Reservation: The acquisition of land reserved by a public agency on the preliminary plan or final plat shall be initiated within twelve
(12) months of notification, in writing, from the owner that he intends to develop the land. Such letter of intent shall be accompanied by a sketch plan
of the proposed development and a tentative schedule of construction. Failure on the part of the public agency to initiate acquisition within the
prescribed twelve (12) months shall result in the removal of the "reserved" designation from the property involved and the freeing of the property for
private development. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010)
10-2-5: DEDICATION FOR SCHOOL SITES, PARKS AND OTHER PUBLIC AREAS:
As a condition of approval of a final plat of subdivision, or of a final plat of a planned unit development, each subdivider or developer shall be required to
dedicate land for school sites and parks and recreational purposes, to serve the immediate and future needs to the residents of the development; or cash
contributions in lieu of actual dedication; or a combination of both at the option of the village in accordance with the following criteria and formula:
A. Criteria For Requiring School Site Dedication:
1. Requirement And Population Ratio: The ultimate number of students to be generated by a subdivision or planned unit development shall be
determined by obtaining the ratio of: a) estimated children to be served in each such school classification over the b) maximum recommended
number of students to be served in each such school classification as stated herein, and their applying such ratio to the c) said minimum
recommended number of acres for a school site of each school classification as stated herein. The product thereof shall be the acres of land deemed
needed to have sufficient land for school sites to serve the estimated increased children in each such school classification.
2. School Classifications And Size Of School Site: School classifications and size of school sites within the village shall be determined in accordance
with the following criteria:
School
Classification
Maximum Number
Of Students
Minimum Number
Of Acres Of Land
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 327/498
By Grades For Each Such
School Classification
For Each School Site
Of Such Classification
Elementary schools, grades kindergarten
to 6th (K-6)
600 students 15 acres
Junior high schools,
grades 7th and 8th (7-8)
900 students 35 acres
High schools, grades
9th to 12th (9-12)
1,500 students 80 acres
3. Location: The official plan and the standards adopted by the affected school district shall be used as a guideline in locating sites.
B. Criteria For Requiring Park And Recreation Land Dedication:
1. Requirement And Population Ratio: The ultimate density of a proposed development shall bear directly upon the amount of land required for
dedication. The total requirement shall be ten (10) acres of land per one thousand (1,000) of ultimate population in accordance with the following
classifications:
Types Of
Recreation Area
Minimum
Size Range
Minimum Acres
Per 1,000 People
Play lot 8,000 square feet n/a
School - park* (neighborhood playground) 5 acres n/a
Neighborhood park 3.5 acres 1.0
Districtwide park or play field 4 acres - up to
30 acres
1.25
Community wide recreation park 12 acres - up to
30 acres
2.0
*Park site adjacent total, but not including school 10 acres of land
per 1,000 people
No land defined as "wetland" in subsection B2 of this section shall be credited in the land dedicated to the park district for park purposes.
2. Wetland: "Wetlands" are areas designated by the current U.S. army corps of engineers delineation manual and any regional supplements or manual
revisions and are areas inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and under normal
circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps,
marshes, bogs, and similar areas, and those transitional lands between terrestrial and aquatic systems where the water table is at or near the
surface or the lands are covered by shallow water. Wetland mitigation plans are required and shall be done in accordance with this code. (Ord. 2010-
27, 12-2-2010)
3. Credit For Private Open Space And Recreation Areas: When subdividers or developers provide their own open space for recreation areas and
facilities, it has the effect of reducing the demand for local public recreational services. Depending on the sites of the development, a portion of the
park and recreation in subdivision or planned unit developments may, at the option of the planning and zoning board and upon agreement of the park
district, be provided in the form of "private" open space in lieu of dedicated "public" open space. The extent of same shall be determined by the
planning and zoning board, based on the needs of the projected residents and in conformance to the total park and recreation land plan adopted by
the park district for general use and approved by the village board. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010; amd. Ord. 2015-9, 5-7-2015)
In general, a substitution of private open space for dedicated parks will imply a substantially higher degree of improvement and the installation of
recreational facilities, including equipment by developer as part of his obligation. Detailed plans of such areas, including specifications of facilities to
be installed, must be submitted to the park district and before any credit is given for private recreation areas, the subdivider or developer must
guarantee that these private recreation areas will be permanently maintained for such use by the execution of the appropriate legal documents.
Private "swimming clubs" are included in the provision. When an adjustment for private recreation areas is warranted, it will be necessary to
complete the total park land dedication that would have been required from the subdivision or planned unit development and then subtract the credit
to be given. However, in no case shall private recreational facilities constitute more than seventy five percent (75%) of the total requirement. The
park district shall either approve, or disapprove, said plans within thirty (30) days after submittal to it by the subdivider, or developer. Approval by the
park district is a condition precedent to allowance of credit for private open space.
C. Criteria For Requiring Contribution In Lieu Of Park And School Sites: Where the development is small and the resulting site is too small to be practical,
or when available land is inappropriate for park and recreational purposes or a school site, the village shall require the subdivider/developer to pay
cash contribution in lieu of land dedication required. This cash contribution in lieu of park and recreation land dedication shall be collected by the village
for the park district solely for the acquisition of park area recreation land as hereinbefore was classified, which will be available to serve the immediate
or future needs of the residents of that subdivision or development or for the improvement of other existing local park and recreational land which
already serves such needs. The cash contribution in lieu of school sites shall be collected by the village for the school district to be used solely for the
acquisition by the school district of a school site to serve the immediate and/or future needs of children from the proposed subdivision or PUD, or for
the improvement (including, without limitation, the construction of new buildings and building additions and improvements) of any existing school site
which will predominantly serve such needs. If any portion of a cash contribution in lieu of park and recreation land dedication, or cash contribution in
lieu of school site is not expended for the purposes set forth herein within ten (10) years from the date of receipt, it shall be refunded, by the taxing
body (i.e., a school district or park district), to the owners of record of all lots, except lots dedicated pursuant to the provisions of this section, in the
subdivision for which such contribution was made. The refund shall be paid to the person who is the owner of record on the day which is the tenth
anniversary of the receipt of such contribution, together with accrued interest thereon, divided by the total number of lots in the subdivision (excluding
only those lots which were dedicated pursuant to this section) for which such contribution was made.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 328/498
1. Fair Market Value: The cash contributions in lieu of land shall be based on the "fair market value" of the improved land as determined by an MAI
appraisal of the total acreage included in the proposed development, exclusive of wetlands as defined herein. The present "fair market value" of such
land shall be determined by the following four (4) factors:
a. The average cost of one acre of unimproved, unannexed land;
b. The cost per acre for specified improvements, including, but not limited to, streets, water and sanitary sewer service, stormwater installation,
streetlights, curbs and gutters;
c. The cost of mass grading of the subdivision; and
d. The average cost for extension of the sanitary sewer and water service.
In the event the park district or school district contest the valuation established in said MAI appraisal, said park district or school district shall have
the option of obtaining their own MAI appraisal. The final determination of said "fair market value" per acre of such improved land shall be made by
the corporate authorities of the village based upon the values established in the MAI appraisal or appraisals. For purposes of this section, the term
"fair market value" shall be deemed to mean no less than eighty three thousand dollars ($83,000.00) per acre, as such figure may be changed
upward or downward from time to time by amendment to this chapter.
2. Criteria For Requiring A Dedication And Fee: There will be situations in subdivisions or planned unit developments when a combination of land
dedication and a contribution in lieu of land are both necessary. These occasions will arise when:
a. Only a portion of the land to be developed is proposed as the location for a park or school site. That portion of the land within the subdivision
falling within the park or school location shall be dedicated as a site as aforesaid, and a cash contribution in lieu thereof shall be required for any
additional land that would have been required to be dedicated.
b. A major part of the local park or recreation site or school site has already been acquired and only a small portion of land is needed from the
development to complete the site. The remaining portions shall be required by dedication, and a cash contribution in lieu thereof shall be required.
D. Density Formula: The table of population density set forth in subsection J of this section is generally indicative of current projected trends in family size
for new construction and shall be used in calculating the amount of required dedication of acres of land or the cash contributions in lieu thereof unless a
written objection is filed hereto by the subdivider or developer. In the event a subdivider files a written objection to the table of estimated ultimate
population listed herein, he shall submit his own demographic study showing the estimated additional population to be generated from the subdivision
or planned unit development and in that event final determination of the density formula to be used in such calculations shall be made by the village
board based upon such demographic information submitted by the subdivider or developer and from other sources which may be submitted to the
village board by the school and/or park district. It is recognized that population density, age distribution and local conditions change over the years, and
the specific formula for the dedication of land, or the payment of fees in lieu thereof, as stated herein, is subject to periodic review and amendment, if
necessary.
E. Combining With Adjoining Developments: Where the subdivision or planned unit development is less than forty (40) acres, public open space or school
sites which are to be dedicated should, where possible, be combined with dedications from adjoining developments in order to produce usable
recreation areas or schools sites without hardship on a particular developer.
F. Topography And Grading: The entire site shall be graded to provide adequate stormwater runoff to ensure usable land, a minimum surface grade of two
percent (2%) shall be maintained; if this cannot be provided, underground drainage shall be installed.
A minimum of four inches (4") of topsoil shall be provided and fine graded, seeded and fertilized to provide turfed area preparatory for recreational
facilities by the park district or school district.
G. Access Into Site:
1. Direct access from public rights of ways shall be provided as listed in the following table:
Park Area Size
(Total)
Number Of
Access Point
Width Of
Each Access
0 to 5 acres 2 60'0"
5 to 15 acres 3 60'0"
15 to 25 acres 3 Total length 250'0"
(Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010)
2. Over twenty five (25) acres may require additional footage which may be recommended by the planning and zoning board and approved by the
village board.
3. Where a new development adjoins an existing park site, the developer shall provide access to the park. Size of access shall be as recommended by
the planning and zoning board and approved by the village board. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010; amd. Ord. 2015-9, 5-7-2015)
4. There shall be a minimum of three (3) acres of high ground for parks around ponds up to five (5) acres in size. Park sizes for ponds over five (5)
acres shall be negotiated.
5. A plat of survey showing adjacent streets, lots and right of way with utilities shall be filed with the park district.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 329/498
H. Improved Sites: All sites shall be dedicated in a condition ready for full service of electrical, water, sewer and streets (including closed drainage and
curb and gutter) as applicable to the location of the site, or acceptable provisions made therefor. The term "improved site" means that the dedicated
site shall be deeded to the park district or school district, upon completion of the following items:
1. Fine grading and seeding of site.
2. Drainage from adjacent private property shall not create unusual and difficult maintenance problems, therefore positive drainage shall be provided
around the perimeter of the property.
I. Annexation Of Lands: The dedications of land and/or cash contributions as required by this section shall also be required as a condition to the
annexation of any land to the village and provisions therefor shall be incorporated in any annexation or preannexation agreements governing such
land. All final plats of annexation shall include a paragraph providing that said lands are hereby annexed to the Streamwood park district.
J. Population Density Tables: The current edition of the "Per Density Unit" as published by the Illinois school consulting service shall be adopted as the
village standard.
K. Administration: The village shall administer this section for the governmental bodies having entered into agreement with the village under the
intergovernmental agreement governing the transfer of revenue derived from the village of Streamwood land donation ordinance.
L. Conflicting Provisions: Where there is conflict between this section and other subdivision control regulations, the subdivision control regulations shall
govern.
M. Development Impact Fees: As a condition of the approval of a final plat of subdivision or a final plat of a planned unit development, or an annexation,
the subdivider or developer shall pay to the village a development impact fee to help defray the cost of municipal services that relate to the needs of the
development and its residents. This fee is calculated based on the village capital budget, and the tax lag. The development impact fee schedule is
updated by the village periodically by ordinance. The current development impact fee is two thousand one hundred one dollars ($2,101.00) per
residential dwelling unit. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010)
10-2-6: LIBRARY DISTRICT CONTRIBUTIONS:
Whereas there are no present land requirements for the library districts, the applicable library district shall receive from the developer a onetime payment
of an amount equal to an annual payment of real estate taxes to which the library district is entitled. Said payment is to be calculated and collected based
upon the last available tax rate on the date each building permit is issued. Said contribution is to be used solely for the purpose of servicing the additional
population generated by the development making the contribution. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010)
10-2-7: VACATION OF SUBDIVISION PLAT:
A. Any plat or any part of a plat may be vacated by the owner of the premises, at any time before the sale of any lot therein, by a written instrument, to
which a copy of such plat shall be attached, declaring the same to be vacated.
B. Such an instrument shall be approved by the village board in like manner as planning of subdivisions. The village board may reject any such instrument
which abridges or destroys any public rights in any of its streets. Such an instrument shall be executed, acknowledged or approved, and recopied, or
filed, in the like manner as plats of subdivisions; and being duly recorded, or filed, shall operate to destroy the force and effect of the recording of the
plat so vacated, and to divest all public rights in the streets and public grounds, and all dedications laid out or described in such plat.
C. When lots have been sold, the plat may be vacated in the manner herein provided by all the owners of lots in such plat joining in the execution of such
writing. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010)
10-2-8: LAND DIVISIONS OTHER THAN SUBDIVISIONS:
A. Interpretation And Scope: Any division of lot, parcel or tract of land into two (2) or more parcels or building sites, of five (5) acres or more in size, and
not requiring the development and/or installation of any new street or easement of access, shall be subject to the provisions of this section.
B. Preliminary Consultation Required: Prior to the submission of the certified plat of survey required herein, the divider shall meet with the director of
community development for the purpose of minimizing the risk of objections to, or rejection of, the prepared plat of survey, and for the purpose of
ascertaining the problems and requirements affecting his property. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010)
C. Procedure Of Approval: The owner or divider shall file with the director of community development twenty (20) prints of a certified plat of survey
showing the proposed division of such lots, blocks, parcels or tracts of land approximately fifteen (15) working days prior to the next regularly
scheduled planning and zoning board meeting. Not more than fifteen (15) days after the meeting at which the plat of survey is referred to the planning
and zoning board, the chairman of the planning and zoning board shall notify the owner or divider whether a new street or easement of access is
required. In the event that a new street or easement of access is required the notice shall stipulate that an application for final plat approval containing
such maps, certifications and supporting documents as required by the planning and zoning board shall be filed with the director of community
development for processing as herein set forth in this title.
The planning and zoning board shall, within forty (40) days, approve, approve conditionally or reject the proposal. The village board shall be notified in
writing of any conditions of approval or the reasons for rejection. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010; amd. Ord. 2015-9, 5-7-2015)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 330/498
D. Requirements For Approval:
1. Compliance With Regulations: To the extent reasonably practicable, the division of land shall comply with the provisions of this title governing
general requirements, design standards, and required improvements.
2. Survey: The survey shall be performed and the map prepared by a registered Illinois land surveyor.
3. Monuments: All corners shall be monumented as follows:
a. All lot corners shall be monumented in the field by iron pipes, at least twenty four inches (24") long and one inch (1") in diameter, or by round or
square iron bars at least twenty four inches (24") long.
b. The line of lots that extend to rivers or streams shall be monumented in the field by iron pipes at least thirty inches (30") long and one inch (1") in
diameter or by round or square iron bars at least thirty inches (30") long. These monuments shall be placed at the point of intersection of the river
or stream lot line with a meander line established not less than twenty feet (20') back from the bank of the river or stream.
E. Certificates And Affidavits:
1. Affidavits Required: The survey map shall include the affidavit of the surveyor who surveyed and mapped the parcel; typed, lettered or reproduced
legibly with nonfading black ink, giving a clear and concise description of the land surveyed by bearings and distances, commencing with some
corner marked and established in the U.S. public land survey or some corner providing reference to a corner named and established in the U.S.
public land survey. Such affidavit shall include the statement of the surveyor to the effect that he has fully complied with the requirements of this
section. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010)
2. Certificates Required: The certificate of approval of the planning and zoning board shall be typed, lettered or produced legibly with nonfading black
ink on the face of the survey map. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010; amd. Ord. 2015-9, 5-7-2015)
F. Filing Of Survey Map: The survey map shall be filed by the village clerk and recorded with the recorder of deeds of Cook County. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-
2010)
Chapter 3
PROCEDURE FOR SUBDIVISION APPROVAL
10-3-1: PRELIMINARY MEETING:
A. Preliminary Meeting: The subdivider shall meet with the director of community development and other village staff to determine the size and scope of
the proposed subdivision and to advise the subdivider of the current development polices of the village. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010)
B. Preliminary Notice: The village will publish a public notice that the planning and zoning board will meet on a date and time certain to hear evidence
regarding the proposed project. This notice shall be in accordance with the Illinois state statutes and shall be made no more than thirty (30) days nor
less than fifteen (15) days prior to the public hearing before the planning and zoning board. The date of the public hearing shall be determined by the
director of community development. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010; amd. Ord. 2015-9, 5-7-2015)
10-3-2: PRELIMINARY PLAN APPROVAL:
A. Action By Subdivider: The subdivider shall cause to be prepared a preliminary plan, which plan shall include all of the property owned or controlled by
the applicant, which properties are adjacent to or considered to be contiguous to the proposed subdivision, together with improvement plans and all
other supplementary material as specified in section 10-3-3 of this chapter, which shall be submitted to the director of community development with
written application for tentative approval of preliminary plan. The preliminary plan and all accompanying documentation and the required filing fee shall
be filed with the director of community development. The number of copies shall be determined by the director of community development at the time
of submission. The date of application acceptance is not determined until the subdivider has filed the last item of required supporting data as detailed in
section 10-3-3 of this chapter. The village reserves the right not to accept any supporting data that is not in conformance with the requirements of this
title. All information required for preliminary plan approval shall be submitted to the director of community development at least twenty (20) working
days prior to the date of the planning and zoning board meeting. The village staff will then determine if all required information has been submitted and,
if so, begin staff review and publish the public notice for planning and zoning board's meeting, date, time and place, where the subdivider will be
afforded an opportunity to be heard in public. If variances from this title are requested, a variance application and review form should be submitted
along with the preliminary plan information.
B. Action By Planning And Zoning Board: The planning and zoning board shall receive the required written evaluation from the village staff, the affected
public bodies, and any other village officers.
The planning and zoning board shall review the preliminary plan submitted for compliance with this title and other applicable ordinances, rules,
regulations, codes or other appropriate standards adopted by the village, and the planning and zoning board shall, within ninety (90) days from the date
of acceptance of the application for preliminary plan, generate one of the following actions:
1. Advise Applicant: If the planning and zoning board finds that changes, additions or corrections are required on the preliminary plan, the planning and
zoning board shall advise the applicant in writing. The applicant may then resubmit his preliminary plan changes following subsection A of this
section with no additional filing fee.
2. Make Recommendations: The planning and zoning board shall recommend approval or disapproval of the proposed preliminary plan with suggested
modifications (if necessary) and not in all respects where the plan fails to conform with village ordinances. These written recommendations, including
staff comments, will be forwarded to the village board of trustees.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 331/498
3. Minor Changes: If minor changes are recommended by the planning and zoning board and the applicant agrees to those changes, they can be
noted in writing on the plan. The planning and zoning board can recommend approval of the preliminary plan contingent upon the changes being
made. The applicant shall then make the required changes on the plan and resubmit it to the director of community development for review and sign
off.
4. Extension Of Time: The applicant and the planning and zoning board may mutually agree to extend the ninety (90) day period.
C. Action By Village Board: The recommendations from the planning and zoning board will be forwarded to the village board by the village manager. The
village board shall approve or reject said plan within sixty (60) days after its next regular board meeting following the action of the planning and zoning
board. However, the village board may approve or reject, or modify the recommendation of the planning and zoning board by a majority vote of those
holding office. If the village board denies approval of the preliminary plan, the applicant may withdraw the application, make modifications and submit a
new application pursuant to requirements of this section. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010; amd. Ord. 2015-9, 5-7-2015)
1. Qualifications Of Approval: The following qualifications shall govern approval of the preliminary plan: (Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010)
a. Approval of the preliminary plan by the village planning and zoning board and the village board of trustees is tentative only, involving merely the
general acceptability of the layout as submitted. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010; amd. Ord. 2015-9, 5-7-2015)
b. The village board of trustees may require such changes or revisions as are deemed necessary in the interest of the needs of the community.
c. Approval of the preliminary plan shall be effective for a maximum period of one year unless upon application of the subdivider, the village manager
may grant an extension not to exceed one year from the effective date. The village board, at its discretion, may grant additional extensions. If the
subdivider does not make an application and submit the final plat and plans and specifications to the director of community development within the
one year period or within any extension granted, the preliminary plan approval becomes null and void. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010)
10-3-3: PRELIMINARY PLAN REQUIREMENTS:
The purpose of the preliminary plan is to allow the planning and zoning board, the board of trustees, and other public bodies to determine whether the
proposed layout of the land in question is satisfactory from the standpoint of the public interest. The preliminary plan shall be prepared by a qualified
professional, trained and experienced in the layout of subdivisions. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010; amd. Ord. 2015-9, 5-7-2015)
The following graphic and descriptive items are normally required to be shown on the preliminary plan and the accompanying application for approval. The
lack of information under any item specified herein, or improper information supplied by the applicant, shall be cause for rejection of the application for
tentative approval of preliminary plan. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010)
A. Application For Approval: Written application by the owner, or his agent, for approval, on forms furnished by the planning and zoning board shall
accompany each preliminary plan and contain the following information: (Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010; amd. Ord. 2015-9, 5-7-2015)
1. Name For File Identification:
a. Name of subdivision if property is within an existing subdivision.
b. Proposed name if not within a previously platted subdivision. The proposed name shall not duplicate the name of any plat previously recorded in
Cook County.
c. Name of property if no subdivision name has been chosen. (This is commonly the name by which the property is locally known.)
2. Location And Description Of Property: Location of property by government lot, section, township, range, and county.
3. Basic Facts And Proposals Pertaining To Property:
a. Size of tract in acres or of existing lots, if any, in square feet.
b. Existing zoning classification of property and any rezoning proposed to be requested.
c. Number of lots proposed in subdivision.
d. Area of lots proposed; minimum, average and maximum.
e. Proposed linkage with water and sewer facilities.
f. Any other proposals, such as parcels of land intended to be dedicated, conveyed, or reserved for public use, and the conditions proposed for such
disposal and use.
4. Information As To Ownership, Preparation Of Plat And Submission:
a. Name and address, including telephone number, of legal owner or agent of property and citation of last instrument conveying title to each parcel of
property involved in the proposed subdivision, giving grantor, grantee, date, and land records reference.
b. Citation of any existing legal rights of way or easements affecting the property.
c. Existing covenants on the property, if any.
d. Name and address, including telephone number, of the professional responsible for the subdivision design shall be shown on the preliminary plat
as submitted; registered professional engineer of Illinois, responsible for the design of public improvements, and registered Illinois land surveyor,
responsible for surveys.
B. School Demographic Study And Determination Of Acreage Allotment:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 332/498
1. Demographic Study Requirements: A school demographic study shall be prepared by the subdivider and shall be submitted for approval in
conjunction with the preliminary plan. It shall include, but need not be limited to, the following:
a. The number and types of dwelling units to be constructed upon approval of the plan, the density of such dwelling units on the land, and a
breakdown of each type of dwelling unit by the number of bedrooms.
b. Estimates of the number of children to be generated from the different types of dwelling units based on general standards approved by and on file
with the village.
c. Estimates of the number of children to be generated in each school classification of each school district situated wholly or partially within the area
depicted in any such plat.
2. Estimate Of Additional Acreage: From the estimates made in this school demographic study, the subdivider shall estimate the added acreage
necessitated for each school classification of each school district or school sites resulting from the estimated additional schoolchildren to be
generated from the particular subdivision. Such estimate shall be in accordance with the following:
a. Each school district's official policy as to the various school classifications of the district, the maximum recommended number of students for each
school classification, and the minimum recommended number of acres for school sites under each such school classification shall be as filed with
and as approved by the village board.
b. Estimates by the subdivider of this added acreage requirement shall be herein referred to as the "acreage allotment" as to each such school
classification.
c. The acreage allotment for each school district and school classification shall be determined by obtaining the ratio of the estimated children to be
serviced in each school.
3. Determination Of Acreage Allotment: Final determination of such acreage allotment shall be made by the board of trustees based upon the
demographic information submitted by the subdivider and by information submitted to the village board by the affected school districts.
C. Accompanying Documentation Required: The preliminary plan of subdivision shall be accompanied by:
1. Annexation Statement: A statement that the proposed subdivision (where contiguous) is or is not to be annexed to the village.
2. Preliminary Plan For Sewer And Water: Either a preliminary engineering plan for sewer, water and storm sewers or a written statement setting forth
general plans for such improvements and indicating the method to be employed to overcome particular problems that may be encountered with the
development of the proposed subdivision. Said plan shall include groundwater data.
3. Soils Analysis: A soils analysis for each proposed subdivision shall be completed by an engineer registered in the state of Illinois and shall be of
sufficient scope to point out potential ground absorption, runoff, flooding deficiencies, the presence of unstable soils or of soils of such low bearing
capacity as to constitute problems for conventional construction, or the presence of subsurface rock that would affect the installation of underground
improvements on the provisions of aboveground improvements, if the subdivision contains questionable soil and, in the opinion of the village
engineer, additional soil investigations, borings or other soil tests are necessary to determine the nature and extent of such questionable material, the
owner or developer shall retain or cause to be retained the services of a competent testing laboratory to perform the needed investigations. The
analysis shall include a soil map and a soil survey from the appropriate soil conservation district. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010)
a. Copies of the completed reports prepared by the testing laboratory shall be filed with the village engineer and planning and zoning board. (Ord.
2010-27, 12-2-2010; amd. Ord. 2015-9, 5-7-2015)
b. Neither the village engineer nor the village shall have liability for costs connected with the tests, borings, or interpretations of results of such work.
4. Protective Covenants: Draft of protective covenants, whereby the subdivider proposes to regulate land use in the subdivisions and otherwise protect
the proposed development.
5. Development: Development schedule.
D. Drawings And Data Required: The preliminary plan and required accompanying maps shall be drawn on tracing medium in a manner that clear and
legible prints can be made therefrom, and shall be at a scale of two hundred feet to the inch (1" = 200'). It shall show all existing conditions required
below and shall show all proposals including the following:
1. Identification And Description: Identification and description shall be as follows:
a. Name Of Subdivision: Not a duplication of a name of any plat heretofore recorded in the village or in Cook County, Illinois.
b. Location Of Subdivision: Location by section, town, and range, or by other approved legal description, including present tract designation
according to official county records.
c. Survey Of Subdivision: Boundary line survey on an accompanying map which is prepared and certified by a registered land surveyor.
d. Designer Of Subdivision: Name and address of the site planner and/or engineer.
e. Owner Of Subdivision: Name and address of the owner and/or subdivider.
f. Not For Recording: Statement that "this plan is not for record".
g. Improvements Statement: Statement that the location, grade, size and alignment of all underground improvements will be considered at final
engineering and are shown in the preliminary plan for information only. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010)
2. Existing Conditions: Data required as a basis for the preliminary plan shall include existing conditions as follows, except when otherwise specified by
the planning and zoning board: (Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010; amd. Ord. 2015-9, 5-7-2015)
a. Boundary Lines: In accordance with subsection D1c of this section.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 333/498
b. Total Acreage: Within the boundary lines.
c. Existing Zoning Districts: Both in proposed subdivision and adjacent tracts.
d. Existing Improvements: Location, widths and name of all existing or previously platted streets or other rights of way showing types of improvement
(if any), railroad and utility rights of way, parks and other public open spaces, permanent buildings and structures and their street address
numbers, easements and section and corporate lines within the tract and to a distance of five hundred feet (500') beyond the tract.
e. Utilities On And Adjacent To Tract: Location and size of existing sewer lines, water mains, culverts, or other underground facilities within the tract
and to a distance of one hundred feet (100') beyond the tract; also indicating such data as locations and surface and invert grade elevations of
catch basins, manholes and fire hydrants. If water drains and sewers are not on or adjacent to the tract, indicate the direction and distance to, and
the size of nearest usable facilities.
f. Location Map: Drawn at a scale of not less than one inch equals one thousand feet (1" = 1,000'), showing boundary lines of adjoining unsubdivided
or subdivided land within an area bounded by nearest arterial streets or other natural boundaries, but not less than one-half (1/2) mile beyond the
subdivision boundaries in subdivisions located beyond the village limits, identifying type of use and ownership of surrounding land and showing
alignments of existing streets.
g. Topographic Data: Data including existing contours at vertical intervals of not more than two feet (2'), except in unusual topographical conditions,
such vertical intervals may be required to be altered as determined by the village engineer, topographic data shall refer to United States geodetic
survey or adjusted to village datum plane.
h. Other Conditions On Tract: Wetlands, watercourses, marshes, sinkholes, rock outcrop, wooded areas, houses, barns, shacks, ponding areas,
natural drainageways, flood hazard areas, other significant features and a tree location survey. The tree location survey shall be at the same scale
as the plans for the development, but not less than one inch equals fifty feet (1" = 50'). The survey shall show all trees six inches (6") in diameter
and larger. All trees over twelve inches (12") in diameter must be identified by size and species.
i. Reference To Monuments: Locations of or reference to locations of existing monuments or survey markers used in preparation of survey and grade
elevation of each monument and marker.
j. Proposed Public Improvements: Highway or other major improvements planned by public authorities for future construction at or near the tract.
k. Easements: Location, width and purpose.
l. Other Conditions On Adjacent Land: Approximate direction and gradient of ground slope, including any embankments or retaining walls, character
and location of buildings, railroads, power lines, towers and other nearby nonresidential land uses or adverse influences; and owner of adjacent
unplatted land (for adjacent platted land refer to subdivision plat by name, recording date, and number, and show approximate percent build up
typical lot size and dwelling type).
3. Subdivision Design Features: Subdivision design features shall be as follows:
a. Accord With Comprehensive Plan: The preliminary plan shall be in substantial accord with the comprehensive plan as amended from time to time.
b. Proposed Zoning Changes: The village zoning districts proposed for the subdivision shall be shown.
c. Layout Of Streets, Sidewalks, Bikeways: Showing right of way widths and street names (not duplicating the name of any street heretofore used in
the village or its environs unless such street is an extension of or in line with an already named street in which event that name shall be used) and
showing proposed through streets extended to the boundaries of the subdivision and approximate grades and gradients and type of construction.
The street numbering system as adopted by the village shall be adhered to; showing the location on sidewalks, bikeways, etc.
d. Other Rights Of Way: Location and width of pedestrianways and utility easements; how they are to be maintained and by whom.
e. Location, Type And Size Of Utilities: If not shown on other exhibits.
f. Lotting: Layout, total number of lots and dimensions on the lot containing the maximum width and depth, lot numbers and block numbers.
g. Sites To Be Reserved Or Dedicated: Sites, if any, to be reserved or dedicated for schools, parks, playgrounds, open space or other public uses.
Such sites shall be designated by letter or number with the acreage noted.
h. Setback Lines: Minimum front and side street building lines, indicating dimensions.
i. Sewers And Drainage: Proposed location of sewer lines and stormwater drains and proposed method of sewage and waste disposal including
sufficient information to show the intent of surface drainage and detention and/or retention facilities conforming to minimum standards of the village
and the metropolitan water reclamation district of Greater Chicago.
Such layout shall show the storm and sanitary sewers, stubs, valves, line hydrants and water mains including size, capacity, and location. Included
with this shall be specifications for the storm and sanitary sewers and water mains, and a written statement by the subdivider or his engineer
describing the adequacy of these proposed facilities as well as the effect they will have on existing or future facilities. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010)
j. Grading: The subdivider shall submit proposed detailed grading plans of blocks and lots. No land will be approved for subdivision which is subject
to periodic flooding or which contains inadequate drainage facilities or other topographic conditions which may increase danger to health, life or
property or aggravate erosion or flood hazard unless the subdivider agrees to make improvements which will, in the opinion of the village engineer
and planning and zoning board make such land safe for development and occupancy, including construction of adequate stormwater detention,
erosion and sediment control facilities. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010; amd. Ord. 2015-9, 5-7-2015)
k. Land Use Plan: Sites, if any, for multi-family dwellings, shopping centers, churches, industry or other nonpublic uses exclusive of single-family
dwellings for all project phases.
l. Landscape Plan: The landscape plan is intended to provide an accurate illustration of all plant material and other related landscape improvements
proposed for the site. The plan should be dimensional and drawn at an accurate scale. At a minimum the plan should list the names of all plant
materials and their size and location. When possible, other landscape improvements such as earthen mounds, fences and stonework should also
be depicted on the plan.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 334/498
(1) All industrial, commercial, planned unit developments, single-family and multi-family developments require a comprehensive site landscaping
plan. The plan must include the use of evergreen and deciduous shrubs, ornamental trees, perennial flowers, canopy trees and evergreen trees.
The plan must show the plants to be installed in all designated common areas, building foundation plantings and, where required under section
11-4-10 of this code, interior parking lots planting islands. The landscape plan is in addition to the parkway trees and any reforestation plan
required by this code.
(2) The canopy trees to be installed in the common areas must include the following species: bur oak, red oak, swamp white oak, sugar maple. All
canopy trees shall be a minimum of two and one-half inches (21/2") in diameter, twenty five percent (25%) of all canopy trees shall be three
inches (3") to four inches (4") and ten percent (10%) shall be four inches (4") or larger. All deciduous shrubs shall be a minimum of thirty six
inches (36") tall at planting. Evergreen trees shall be a minimum of six feet (6') tall, twenty five percent (25%) to be seven feet (7') tall, twenty
percent (20%) to be eight feet (8') tall, ten percent (10%) to be ten feet (10') tall and ten percent (10%) to be twelve feet (12') tall. All plant
material shall be in either a container or balled and burlaped. Bare root material is not permitted.
(3) A dense landscape screen must be constructed along all major streets or highways (including Schaumburg Road, Barrington Road, Irving Park
Road, Bartlett Road, Lake Street and Route 59) that abut the project. Such screening will be required in all proposed residential subdivisions
and may be required in commercial and industrial subdivisions when noted by the director of public works. The landscape screen must include a
double line of evergreen trees. These trees shall be placed at a maximum spacing equal to the installed height of the plant, but not greater than
twelve feet (12'). The minimum size plant shall be ten feet (10'). At least twenty five percent (25%) of the plant material must be greater than ten
feet (10'). The landscape screen shall include shrub beds, perennial flowers and ornamental trees. The minimum planting size of all shrubs shall
be thirty six inches (36"). The minimum size of ornamental trees shall be eight feet (8'). On the structure side of the evergreens large canopy
trees shall be installed. These trees must be on a staggered forty foot (40') spacing. All canopy trees shall be a minimum of three inches (3") in
diameter. At least twenty five percent (25%) of the canopy trees shall be four inches (4") or larger. The species of canopy trees shall include
sugar maple, bur oak, and swamp white oak. All plants shall be installed in modified soil beds. The director of public works shall approve the
modified soil mix. All plant material shall be covered by the guarantee specified in subsection 10-3-7A of this chapter. A landscape architect shall
design the landscape screen.
The landscape screen shall include a berm. The top of the berm elevation must be at least five feet (5') above the top of the foundation elevation
of the nearest building. The berm side slopes shall not exceed a four to one (4:1) slope. The berm shall not be a straight line. The berm may
include retaining walls to achieve the required height above grade. The landscape screen described above shall be fit to the berm. If a fence is
proposed as part of the screen it shall be either cedar with six inch by six inch (6" x 6") treated posts or a concrete fence. The village shall
approve the design of the fence.
(4) Buffers between residential and commercial or industrial areas must include a mixture of evergreen and canopy trees, shrubs and ornamental
trees. In buffers that include fencing, fifty percent (50%) live landscaping material must be used.
(5) Foundation planting must include evergreen and flowering shrubs, ornamental trees and perennial flowers.
(6) All shrub beds and perennial beds shall have a minimum of twelve inches (12") of modified soil consisting of mushroom compost, sand and
topsoil.
(7) All plant material installed as part of the landscape plan or reforestation plans is to be covered by a guarantee amount in conformance with
section 10-3-6 of this chapter after final acceptance of the public improvements by the village board.
(8) The landscape plan must show the plants at the size expected after five (5) years of growth.
m. Off Street Parking And Loading Plan: The off street parking and loading plan is intended to provide an accurate illustration of all off street parking
and loading spaces. The plan should be prepared in accordance with the requirements of the village's zoning ordinance and other development
and building codes. It should be dimensional and drawn at an accurate scale. At a minimum the plan should accurately list the following:
(1) Location of all parking and loading spaces.
(2) Location and width of aisles.
(3) Means of ingress and egress.
(4) Proposed lighting (if any).
(5) Proposed surface treatment.
(6) Relationship to proposed structures and property lines.
(7) The angle of parking and size of parking spaces.
(8) Total quantities of parking and loading spaces.
(9) Ratio of parking and size of parking and loading spaces to the square footage of the proposed structures and/or other applicable standards as
defined in the ordinances of the village.
(10) Traffic control devices and signs (if any).
(11) Security measures (if any).
n. Gross Acreage: Gross acreage (includes street right of way).
o. Net Acreage: Net acreage (excludes street right of way).
p. Wetlands: Preliminary wetlands mitigation plan. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010)
10-3-4: FINAL PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS FOR REQUIRED LAND IMPROVEMENT:
After the approval of the final plat, the village clerk records the plat with the recorder of deeds of Cook County, and the subdivider may proceed to develop
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 335/498
and sell lots in his subdivision.
A. Engineering Plans Required: After the approval of the preliminary plan and as a condition of final plat approval, and prior to submission to the village
board for approval, the subdivider shall submit to the director of community development three (3) complete sets of engineering plans and
specifications plus one digital copy of each in a format approved by the village engineer for the land improvements required by this title along with a
single estimate of the cost of the proposed improvements. The date of application acceptance is not determined until the applicant has filed the last
item of required supporting data as detailed in this section. The village reserves the right not to accept any supporting data that is not in conformance
with the requirements of this section. Said engineering plans and specifications shall include the following:
1. Title sheet.
2. Standard village detail.
3. General construction standards, details and notes.
4. Special detail.
5. Grading plan.
6. Overall utility layout plan with a minimum scale of one inch equals one hundred feet (1" = 100').
7. Street lighting plan.
8. Pavement plan and profile.
9. Underground improvements plan and profile.
10. Sewer and water conflict analysis1.
11. Storm sewer and stormwater storage calculations2.
12. Final wetland mitigation plan.
13. Final landscaping plan.
14. The developer shall provide a digital copy of the subdivision's final plat on a CD-ROM in a format compliant with the village's GIS computer system.
Note: All engineering drawings shall be submitted on twenty four inch by thirty six inch (24" x 36") sheets and in a digital format as specified by the
village engineer. Except as otherwise specified, all plans shall have a minimum horizontal scale of one inch equals fifty feet (1" = 50') and a minimum
vertical scale of one inch equals five feet (1" = 5'). All engineering drawings and calculations shall be signed and sealed by a registered professional
engineer.
B. Engineering Plans Approval: The director of community development shall distribute the complete sets of final plans and specifications for land
improvements to the village staff for review and approval. The staff review will be completed in less than sixty (60) days from the date of receipt of a
complete application, and the applicant will be informed in writing of any required changes. The applicant will then make the required changes and
resubmit nine (9) sets of the drawings reflecting the recited changes. The revised plans will then be reviewed by the staff for compliance with this code
and requirements of the preliminary plans previously approved by the village board.
1. Review Of Final Plans, Certification: After staff review and all required changes have been made, the village engineer must certify that the plans and
specifications are accurate and in accordance with this title, rules, regulations, codes or other appropriate standards adopted by the village. The
director of community development will also certify that the review has been completed and that all required changes have been made.
2. Review Fees: The village will charge the subdivider for review of plans for required surface and underground improvements based upon fees as
established by the village. This fee shall be paid by the subdivider prior to the approval of his engineering plans. Fee shall include charges for review
by any member of village staff. Any costs for consultants employed by the village for review of the plans shall be billed to developer on a time plus
material basis. Final review fees are one percent (1%) of the estimated cost of the public improvements. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010)
10-3-5: REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS:
A. Installation Required: After approval of the final plan by the village board, and after approval of the plans and specifications for required improvements
by the village engineer, and board of trustees, the subdivider shall install street and utility improvements, and other improvements indicated on the plan,
in accordance with specifications hereinafter provided.
B. Deeding Of Improvements: All underground public improvements up to the property line shall be deeded over to the village and become the property of
the village after approval by the director of public works and when accepted by resolution of the village board. All labor and material for installing
underground public improvements shall be furnished by the subdivider. All testing required for acceptance shall be done by the subdivider under the
supervision of the director of public works. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010)
10-3-6: AGREEMENTS AND GUARANTEE OF IMPROVEMENTS:
The requirements of this section shall be complied with prior to final plat approval.
A. Action By Subdivider: Prior to the filing of an application for final plat approval, the subdivider shall submit the following to the village clerk:
1. Subdivision Improvement Agreement: A completed executed subdivision improvement agreement. Said subdivision improvement agreement shall
be in the form as the president and board of trustees may from time to time prescribe, a copy of which is on file with the village clerk. The village
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 336/498
president and clerk are hereby authorized to execute all properly completed executed subdivision improvement agreements submitted to the village
once such agreements are approved by motion of the president and board of trustees of the village.
2. Letter Of Credit: Subdivider may present to the village an irrevocable, unconditional letter of credit naming the village as beneficiary thereto as
security for the guarantee of improvements. Said letter of credit shall be issued by a sound and reputable banking or financial institution authorized to
do business in the state of Illinois. Said letter of credit shall be in effect for the length of time required to complete the required subdivision
improvements and shall be automatically renewable unless the expiration or reduction is specifically approved by the village finance director. The
letter of credit shall be in the amount that is prescribed in the subdivision improvement agreement or as determined by the village engineer. The letter
of credit shall be established prior to the beginning of any construction on the site. The letter of credit shall be in a form acceptable to the village
finance director. The letter of credit shall include a provision of automatic renewal unless otherwise authorized by the village board.
3. Requirements: Letters of credit shall cover and shall be in an amount which represents one hundred twenty five percent (125%) of the total of the
following items:
a. Earth excavation 100% of improvement cost
b. Sanitary sewer, water main storm sewers and services 100% of improvement cost
c. Pavement 100% of improvement cost
d. Curb and gutter 100% of improvement cost
e. Sidewalk 100% of improvement cost
f. Streetlights 100% of improvement cost
g. Parkway landscaping 100% of improvement cost
h. Parkway trees and special landscaping 100% of improvement cost
i. Street signs 100% of improvement cost
j. Topsoil return on and off lots 100% of improvement cost
k. Sodding on and off lots 100% of improvement cost
l. Retaining walls 100% of improvement cost
m. Nuisance abatement 5% of total letter of credit
n. Wetland mitigation 100% of improvement cost
o. All off site improvements 100% of improvement cost
p. PUD landscaping 100% of improvement cost
4. Surety Bond: A surety bond from an institution and in a form acceptable to the village finance director may be submitted as security for the guarantee
of improvements. The surety bond shall include a provision of automatic renewal unless authorized to expire in a resolution passed by the village
board. The institution issuing the bond must agree to honor any and all drafts within ten (10) days of any demand by the village. The developer shall
indemnify the village for all costs associated with demands on the surety bond. If a surety bond is submitted as security for the guarantee of
improvements, no work on the site shall be allowed until after the village board has given final approval of the project. The bond amount is to be
calculated in accordance with the letter of credit calculations itemized in subsection A3 of this section.
5. Cash Deposit: A cash deposit may be substituted for a letter of credit or surety bond as security for the guarantee of improvements.
B. Inspection Fee: Engineering inspection fee of two and one-half percent (2.5%) of the total amount of the letter of credit.
C. Action By Village Clerk: The village clerk shall not certify the approval of the president and board of trustees on the final plat until the requirements of
this section have been met.
D. Subdivisions Outside Corporate Limits: A subdivision improvement agreement, as put forth in this section, shall not be required for subdivisions located
in the unincorporated areas within one and one-half (11/2) miles beyond the village limits when there is evidence that an agreement has been entered
into between the owner or subdivider and Cook County, except that when the village's design standards for public improvements are more restrictive
than Cook County design standards, the village may require the owner or subdivider to comply with the provisions of this section.
E. Letter Of Credit; Cash Deposit; Surety Bonds After Acceptance: A letter of credit, cash deposit or surety bond shall be required of any person who
constructs a building(s) located within a subdivision. This letter of credit, cash deposit or surety bond shall be in an amount and in a form recommended
by the director of public works and approved by the president and board of trustees. This letter of credit, cash deposit or surety bond shall be to cover
the cost of repair to any existing improvements damaged by said construction and to secure the installation of any required improvements.
F. Reduction In Security For Guarantee Of Improvements: A letter of credit or cash deposit may be reduced upon certification by the director of public
works and the village manager that the cost to complete the improvements is not greater than the reduced amount. In no case shall the letter of credit
or cash deposit be reduced below thirty percent (30%) of the original amount. After two (2) years, the letter of credit must be recalculated and one
hundred fifteen percent (115%) of the cost to complete must be posted. This amount cannot be less than thirty percent (30%) of the original amount.
The design engineer shall certify, prior to any reduction, that all improvements covered by the reduction have been completed in accordance with this
code. If a surety bond is used as a guarantee of completion, no reductions in the bond amount shall be allowed until the commencement of the two (2)
year guarantee period. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 337/498
10-3-7: ACCEPTANCE OF REQUIRED LAND IMPROVEMENTS:
A. Acceptance Of Improvements By Resolution: The village board shall accept by resolution all public improvements upon: 1) completion of all buildings
within the subdivision phase or unit; 2) completion of all improvements; 3) the passage of at least one winter between the construction of the pavement
binder course and the construction of the surface course; 4) completion of a comprehensive inspection by the director of public works of all
improvements and landscaping; 5) completion of all necessary repairs by the developer; 6) certification by the director of public works that all the
improvements are completed in accordance with this code and any applicable planned unit development ordinances; 7) tender of a bill of sale for all the
improvements to be accepted; 8) completion of all park sites within the phase or unit and written acceptance by the Streamwood park district; 9)
completion of all wetland mitigation areas, reforestation areas, and/or woodland mitigation areas; 10) the unit or phase is not being used as
construction access for additional or future construction; 11) the elimination of all construction traffic from all parts of the area to be accepted; and 12) a
deed and clear title policy for any property to be conveyed to the village prepared in a form acceptable to the village attorney. The comprehensive
inspection shall include all improvements required by this code or planned unit development ordinance, including, but not limited to, streets, streetlights,
storm sewer system, sanitary sewer system, water system, curb, sidewalk, driveway aprons, retaining walls, grading, required turf, detention and/or
retention areas, all trees and shrubs and other plant material installed in woodland mitigation areas, wetland mitigation areas, reforestation areas, on
public property, and all trees, shrubs and other plant material installed as part of a planned unit development or subdivision landscape plan for public,
common area and foundation plant material. The inspection shall not take place between November 1 and March 15. As a result of the inspection the
director of public works shall furnish a list of the necessary repairs to the developer. If all the repairs are not completed by December 31 of the same
year, a new inspection and list shall be made the following year. Unless approved by the director of public works, the surface course of all streets shall
not be constructed until completion of all other necessary repair work. The developer shall supply two (2) sets of as built prints, and one set of as built
mylars and the digital CAD files in a format as approved by the village engineer. As builts are required prior to final inspection. As built drawings shall
show the location with measurements of all B-boxes, water valves, fire hydrants, sewer services and manholes, all elevations of the manhole rims, pipe
inverts and corresponding pipe slopes. All building top of foundation and basement floor elevations must be shown. All public improvements shall be
guaranteed against defects in material and workmanship for two (2) years following acceptance by the village board. All trees and shrubs and other
plant material installed in woodland mitigation areas, wetland mitigation areas, reforestation areas, on public property, and all trees, shrubs and other
plant material installed as part of a planned unit development or subdivision landscape plan for public, common area and foundation plant material shall
be guaranteed for two (2) years after acceptance by the village board. All replaced landscape material shall comply with subsection 10-6-9E of this title.
B. Final Plat Approval Not Acceptance Of Improvements: If any final plat of subdivision contains public streets or thoroughfares which are therein
dedicated as such, whether located within the corporate limits of the village, or all or in part outside thereof or contains existing streets located outside
of said corporate limits, the approval of the final plat by the board of trustees or the subsequent annexation of the property to the village shall not
constitute an acceptance thereon or therein, irrespective of any act or acts by an officer, agent or employee of the village with respect to such streets or
improvements.
C. Guarantee Period: Upon acceptance by the village board, the owner or his assigns (developer) shall post a letter of credit, surety bond or cash deposit
equal to ten percent (10%) of the original amount to guarantee any repairs due to defects in material or workmanship during the guarantee period. The
guarantee period shall be two (2) years for all public improvements. All trees and shrubs planted in parkways, islands, medians, or woodland mitigation
areas shall be guaranteed for two (2) years. At least sixty (60) days prior to the end of the guarantee period, the director of public works shall inspect
the accepted area and furnish a list of necessary repairs to the owner. Concerning trees, each year during the guarantee period, the director of public
works shall inspect the accepted area and furnish a list of necessary tree replacements to the owner. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010)
10-3-8: FINAL PLAT APPROVAL:
A. Final Plat Review By Staff:
1. The final plat may be submitted concurrently with the plans and specifications for land improvements. The applicant will submit an original and
seventeen (17) copies of the final subdivision plat to the village clerk along with a completed application for final approval of the final subdivision plat.
In addition, the applicant will file with the village clerk a copy of the most recent real estate tax bill(s) for the property. The original and eight (8) copies
of the final subdivision plat, as well as the copy of the aforementioned real estate tax bill(s), will be filed with the village clerk. The village clerk will
send one copy of the final plat to the public works department. The final plat shall be submitted in conformance with the standards detailed in
subsection E of this section. If the final plat and engineering documents are in conformance with the preliminary plan and the requirements of this
title, or any other rules, regulations, codes or appropriate standards, the director of public works will certify same in writing. This document will then
be forwarded to the village clerk. The village clerk will notify the director of community development and the chairman of the planning and zoning
board in writing that the final plat has been certified by the director of public works. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010; amd. Ord. 2015-9, 5-7-2015)
2. The final plat shall conform substantially to the preliminary plan as approved and, if desired by the subdivider, it may constitute only that portion of
the approved preliminary plan which he proposes to record and develop at the time, provided; however, that such portion conforms to all
requirements of these regulations. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010)
B. Final Plat Review By Planning And Zoning Board: The director of community development will schedule the final plat and plans and specifications for
consideration and notify the applicant in writing of the date and time of the planning and zoning board meeting to review the final plat and plans and
specifications. The planning and zoning board shall review the final plat and engineering documents and recommend approval, disapproval or
modification. These documents are then forwarded to the village manager for placement on the next committee meeting agenda. Before the village
board may consider a final plat for approval:
1. All modifications of the final plat required by the planning and zoning board must be noted on the final plat. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010; amd. Ord.
2015-9, 5-7-2015)
2. All planning, engineering and legal fees must be paid.
C. State, County And Sanitary District Permits: After the plans and specifications for required land improvements have been reviewed by the staff, the
applicant can submit any MWRD, North Cook County soil and water conservation district, county, state IDOT division of waterways, IDOT division of
highways and/or Illinois EPA (water and/or sewer) permit applications to the director of public works for review. If these permits conform to this title and
plans and specifications for land improvements, these permit applications will be signed and forwarded to the respective agency. However, final
approval will be contingent upon board approval of the plans and specifications for improvements. The applicant shall supply the village with an
approved copy of any permits from other agencies. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 338/498
D. Final Plat Disposition:
1. Village Board Action: The village board must take action within sixty (60) days after the date of application at which the final plat and plans and
specifications have been submitted to the village. The village board can accept the final plat as presented or can make modifications, if the applicant
is agreeable, or can reject the final plat. If the final plat is approved, the village clerk shall attach a certified copy of the resolution of approval to a
copy of the plat. If the proposed plat is disapproved, the resolution shall state the reasons for disapproval, specifying the items in which the plat fails
to conform to the ordinances, rules, regulations, codes or other appropriate standards adopted by the village. A copy of the resolution, regardless of
the disposition, shall be filed with the village clerk. Upon approval by the village board of trustees, the village president, planning and zoning board
chairman and village clerk shall sign the final plat. The village clerk shall record the plat with the Cook County recorder of deeds within one month.
(Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010; amd. Ord. 2015-9, 5-7-2015)
2. Building Permit Applications: Prior to the acceptance of any application for a building permit, the applicant must submit or comply with the following
items which, in each case, must conform to all ordinances, rules, regulations, codes or other appropriate standards adopted by the village:
a. Upon proof of final plat approval, a building permit may be applied for through the community development department. Applicants for permits
must submit four (4) sets of building plans to the community development department.
b. The applicant will submit four (4) stamped, current plats of survey showing the exact location of proposed construction, including all existing and
proposed grades.
c. Certification by the finance department that all financial obligations have been satisfied. This shall include any and all fines, fees, liens, and taxes.
d. All street rights of way are improved with base course and curbs.
e. A complete water system is installed.
f. All working fire hydrants required by ordinance are installed, inspected and approved in conformance with state and local standards.
g. The applicant may receive a permit to install a building foundation, including the footing and slab only, prior to the installation of any of the required
public improvements on the condition that: 1) all necessary letters of credit are posted, 2) the final plat is approved and recorded, and 3) the
building plans are approved. No work of any kind shall be permitted above the slab, and no combustible material of any kind may be delivered to
the site prior to the installation of all the improvements called for in this subsection D2.
E. Drawing And Date For Final Approval: The final plat shall be accurately drawn in ink on tracing cloth or mylar drafting film, in a manner that clear and
legible transparent or contact prints or photostatic copies can be made. The final plat shall be at a scale of one hundred feet (100') to the inch on
sheets not to exceed twenty four inches by thirty six inches (24" x 36"). Where necessary, the plat may be drawn on several sheets accompanied by an
index sheet showing the entire subdivision. For large subdivisions, the final plat may be submitted for approval progressively in contiguous sections
satisfactory to the village engineer. The final plat shall show the following:
1. General Information: Required general information to be included on plat, or submitted at the time of the request for final plat approval, shall be as
follows:
a. Boundary Lines: In accordance with subsection 10-3-3D1c of this chapter and section 10-4-3 of this title.
b. Layout Of Streets: Showing right of way widths and street names (not duplicating the name of any street heretofore used in the village or its
environs unless such street is an extension of, or in line with, an already named street in which event that name shall be used) and showing
proposed through streets extended to the boundaries of the subdivision.
c. Other Rights Of Way: Location and width of alleys, pedestrianways, and utility easements.
d. Sites To Be Reserved Or Dedicated: Sites to be reserved or dedicated for schools, parks, playgrounds or other public uses, or for the exclusive
use of property owners within the subdivision. Such areas shall be designated by letter or number and by legal description. For any land to be
dedicated to the village of Streamwood, a deed in a form acceptable to the village attorney must also be submitted.
e. Accurate Dimensions: Accurate angular and linear dimensions for all lines, angles, radii and arcs used to describe all boundaries including
perimeter survey of tract, streets, easements, areas to be reserved or dedicated for public use, and other important features. Error of closure of
boundary line surveys shall not exceed one in ten thousand (10,000) (1 foot for each 10,000 feet) of perimeter survey. Angular error shall not
exceed plus or minus twenty (±20) seconds. Lot lines to show dimensions in feet and hundredths, and where angle occurs in any lot line between
lot corners, the measurement of the angle shall be shown in degrees, minutes and seconds. The final plat shall show accurately the location of all
permanent lot markers as actually installed.
f. Control Points: True angles and distances of the nearest established street lines and official monuments (not less than 3), which shall be accurately
described in the plat by location, size and elevation to which all dimensions, angles, bearings and similar data on the plat shall be referred.
g. Identification System: An identification system for all blocks and lots using consecutive numbers for lots within a block and, where applicable, a
street address number in accord with current village policies.
h. Correlation With Existing Boundaries: Municipal, township or section lines accurately correlated to the lines of the subdivision by distances and
angles.
i. Location Of Monuments: Accurate location of all monuments which shall be placed at all block corners, angle points, and at intermediate points as
shall be required by the village engineer, and installed in such a manner that they may be located by a licensed surveyor. All USGS, state, county,
village or other official bench marks, monuments, or triangulation stations in or adjacent to the property shall be preserved in precise position.
j. Covenants: Protective covenants, or filed as an accompanying document in form for recording. If filed as a separate document, the covenants shall
be recorded, and the recorded document filed with the village, prior to application for occupancy of the first unit in the development.
k. Architectural Control: For subdivisions containing twenty (20) acres or more in area, the board of trustees may require a declaration creating and
establishing scope of activities for an architectural control committee.
l. Setback Lines: Proposed building setback lines on all lots and other sites.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 339/498
m. Subdivision Name: Name of subdivision.
n. Location: By section, township and range.
o. Title, Scale, Etc.: Title, scale, north arrow, date.
p. Certification: Certification by a registered land surveyor certifying to the accuracy of the survey and plat.
q. Other Data: Such other certificates, affidavits, endorsements or dedications as may be required by the president and board of trustees in the
enforcement of these regulations.
r. Party To Receive Tax Bill: Name and address of party to receive tax bill.
s. Permanent Index Numbers: All permanent index numbers covered by the subject property.
t. Floodplain Map Number: Floodplain map number where appropriate.
2. Certification Required: The application for approval of the final plat shall not be deemed completed until the following certificates, other than the
village clerk certificate, have been duly executed:
a. Owner's Certificate*:
STATE OF ILLINOIS) SS
COUNTY OF COOK)
This is to certify that the undersigned is the owner of the land described in the annexed plat, and has caused the same to be surveyed and
subdivided, as indicated thereon, for the uses and purposes therein set forth, and does hereby acknowledge and adopt the same under the style
and title thereon indicated.
The undersigned hereby dedicates for public use the lands shown on this plat for thoroughfares, streets, alleys and public services; and hereby
also reserves for the Illinois Bell Telephone Company and the Public Service Company, Division of Commonwealth Edison Company, the
easement provisions which are stated on their standard form which is attached hereto. The undersigned hereby certifies that to the best of his
knowledge and belief:
(1) The drainage of surface waters will not be changed by the construction of the subdivision or any part thereof, or, that if such surface water
drainage will be changed, adequate provision has been made for collection and diversion of such surface waters into public areas, or drains which
the owner has a right to use, and that such surface waters will not be deposited on the property of adjoining land owners in such concentrations as
may cause damage to the adjoining property because of the construction of the subdivision.
(2) Topographical and profile studies of the land herein subdivided have been filed previously with the Village, which documents are on file in the
office of the Village Clerk as permanent public documents.
(3) The Village has approved drawings and specifications for the installation of all public improvements required to be made upon the subject
parcel.
(4) The owner has also posted security with the Village to guarantee the installation of such improvements.
(5) Any subsequent owner of this land shall be obligated to install or complete the installation of such public improvements as are required by the
statutes of the State of Illinois and the ordinances of the Village of Streamwood.
Title:
Address:
Dated this day of , 20 .
*Corporate owner's certificate should be accompanied by a corporate form of acknowledgement.
b. Notary Certificate:
STATE OF ILLINOIS) SS
COUNTY OF COOK)
I, , a Notary Public in and for said County, in the State aforesaid, do hereby certify that personally known to me to be the same
persons whose names are subscribed to the foregoing instrument as such owners, appeared before me this day in person and acknowledged that
they signed the annexed plat as their own free and voluntary act for the uses and purposes therein set forth.
Given under my hand and Notarial Seal this day of , 20 .
Notary Public
c. Surveyor's Certificate:
STATE OF ILLINOIS) SS
COUNTY OF COOK)
This is to certify that I, , Registered Illinois Land Surveyor No. have surveyed and subdivided the following described property:
As shown by the annexed plat which is a correct representation of said survey and subdivision. All distances are shown in feet and decimals
thereof. I further certify that all regulations enacted by the Board of Trustees relative to plats and subdivisions have been complied with on the
preparation of this plat.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 340/498
Given under my hand and seal at , Illinois, this day of , 20 .
Surveyor
d. Village Engineer:
STATE OF ILLINOIS) SS
COUNTY OF COOK)
I, , Village Engineer of the Village of Streamwood, Illinois, hereby certify that the land improvements described in the annexed plat and
the plats and specifications therefor meet the minimum requirements of said Village and have been approved by all public authorities having
jurisdiction thereof.
Dated at Streamwood, Cook County, Illinois, this day of , 20 .
Village Engineer
e. County Clerk Certificate:
STATE OF ILLINOIS) SS
COUNTY OF COOK)
I, , County Clerk of Cook County, Illinois, do hereby certify that there are no delinquent general taxes, no unpaid forfeited taxes, and no
redeemable tax sales against any of the land included in the annexed plat.
Given under my hand and seal at Chicago, Cook County, Illinois this day of , 20 .
County Clerk
f. Certificate As To Special Assessments:
STATE OF ILLINOIS) SS
COUNTY OF COOK)
I, , Village Treasurer of the Village of Streamwood, do hereby certify that there are no delinquent or unpaid current or forfeited special
assessments or any deferred installments thereof that have been apportioned against the tract of land included in the plat.
Dated at Streamwood, Cook County, Illinois, this day of , 20 .
Village Treasurer
g. Village Clerk's Certificate:
STATE OF ILLINOIS) SS
COUNTY OF COOK)
I, , Village Clerk of the Village of Streamwood, Illinois hereby certify that the annexed plat was presented to and by resolution duly approved by the
Board of Trustees of said Village at its meeting held on , 20 , and that the required bond or other guarantee has been posted for the completion of
the improvements required by the regulations of said Village.
In witness whereof I have hereto set my hand and seal of the Village of Streamwood, Illinois this day of , 20 .
Village Clerk
3. Subdivisions Outside Corporate Limits: Except as otherwise required by statute, certification on final plats of subdivision located in the
unincorporated areas within one and one-half (11/2) miles beyond the village limits shall be those required by the Cook County subdivision
regulations, except when village subdivision regulations are more restrictive, the applicable certifications contained herein shall also be required.
(Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010)
Chapter 4
SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS
10-4-1: PLANNING STANDARDS:
The subdivision of land, including the arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and location of all streets, crosswalks, easements, sites for parks,
playgrounds and schools or other land to be dedicated for public use, shall conform to the comprehensive plan and official map of the village; and approval
of design standards shall be considered on the basis of their relation to existing and platted streets, reasonable circulation of traffic within the subdivision
and adjacent land, topographic conditions, runoff of stormwater, public convenience and safety, and appropriate relation to the proposed uses of the area
to be served. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010)
10-4-2: STREET STANDARDS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 341/498
A. Street Arrangement: Where such is not shown on the comprehensive plan and/or official map, the arrangement of streets within a subdivision shall
either:
1. Continuity: Provide for the continuation or projection of existing principal streets in adjacent areas; or (Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010)
2. Conformity With Plan: Conform to a plan for the area or neighborhood approved or adopted by the planning and zoning board to meet a particular
situation where topographical or other conditions make continuance or conformance to existing streets impracticable. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010;
amd. Ord. 2015-9, 5-7-2015)
B. Street Design: All required street right of way widths, and pavement widths, curves, gradients and site distances shall be as shown in the accompanying
table of minimum standards for street design and in accordance with the following:
1. Street Jogs: Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than one hundred fifty feet (150') shall be avoided.
2. Intersections: It must be evidenced that all street intersections and confluences encourage safe and efficient traffic flow and, in general, be at or near
right angles and in no case shall a street intersect any other street at less than sixty degrees (60°). An intersection of more than two (2) streets shall
not be permitted.
3. Cul-De-Sac Streets: A cul-de-sac street in residential districts shall be not more than six hundred feet (600') in length, measured along its centerline
from the point of origin to the end of its right of way. Each cul-de-sac street shall have a terminus of nearly circular shape with a minimum right of way
diameter of one hundred twenty five feet (125') and a pavement outside diameter of not less than ninety feet (90').
4. Median Strips: Median strips other than raised center curb separating lanes of traffic within a single right of way shall not be allowed. However,
where an existing parkway exists on a new street which is an extension of the existing street, a median strip may be constructed not more than five
hundred feet (500') in length to provide the transition to no median strip. All such median strips as described above shall have barrier curbs with
gutter.
5. Access From Major Streets: Provisions shall be made for vehicular and pedestrian access to residential property abutting a major street either:
a. By providing marginal access road, or
b. By backing lots to the thoroughfare and providing access by a collector, minor or cul-de-sac street one lot depth removed and with a no access
strip at least twelve feet (12') wide along the rear lot line.
These standards are established for the purpose of providing protection for the residential properties and to provide for traffic safety and the
efficient use of the major street for its intended function of accommodating through traffic. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010)
6. Frontage Roads: Where a subdivision borders on or contains a railroad or highway, the planning and zoning board may require a street
approximately parallel to and on each side of such railroad or highway, at a distance suitable for the appropriate use of the intervening land, as for
park purposes in residential districts, or for commercial or industrial purposes in appropriate districts. Such distances shall also be determined with
due regard for the requirements of approach grades and future grade separations. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010; amd. Ord. 2015-9, 5-7-2015)
7. Reserve Strips: Reserve strips controlling access to public utilities, streets or alleys shall be prohibited.
8. Street Levels: Street levels shall provide proper relation between the street and the elevation of the houses to assure positive drainage from the
building to the street.
9. Acceleration-Deceleration Lanes: When required by the village engineer, streets which intersect with major or secondary streets shall be provided
with paved acceleration and deceleration lanes and passing lanes on both sides of the street. Such lanes shall be provided in accordance with the
standards approved by the village for this type of improvement.
MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR STREET DESIGN
Street
Right Of Way
Width
Pavement
Width1
Radius Of
Horizontal
Curves
Length Of
Vertical
Curves
Tangent
Between
Horizontal
Reverse
Curves
Maximum
Gradient
Minimum
Gradient
Clear Sight
Distance
Major 72' (varies) 52' or
2@27'
w/median4
500' (a)200' 200' 5% 0.5% 500'
Collector
Minor 66' 32'3 400' (a)200' 200' 5% 0.5% 400'
Major 72' 39'3 400' (a)200' 200' 5% 0.5% 400'
Minor
Multi-family 66' 32'2 150' (b)100' --- 6% 0.5% 200'
Single-family 60' 27' 150' (b)100' --- 6% 0.5% 200'
Cul-de-sac
Multi-family 66' 32'2 150' (b)100' --- 6% 0.5% 200'
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 342/498
Single-family 60' 27' 150' (b)100' --- 6% 0.5% 200'
Marginal access
Multi-family 66' 32'2 400' (b)200' 100' 6% 0.5% 200'
Single-family 60' 27' 400' (b)200' 100' 6% 0.5% 200'
Business and
industrial
80' 43' 500' (a)200' 200' 2% 0.5% 500'
Notes:
(a) 50 feet for each 1 percent algebraic difference of grade, but in no case less than 200 feet.
(b) 40 feet for each 1 percent algebraic difference of grade, but in no case less than 100 feet.
1. Pavement widths are measured back to back of curb and include additional width for on street parking.
2. 27 foot widths may be used only in areas with either 2 car drives and garages or 2 car drives with 1 sided parking. In all other areas, a width
of 32 feet is required.
3. Or as approved by the village engineer.
4. All medians shall be designed in accordance with IDOT design standards to include barrier curb.
(Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010)
C. Private Access Streets:
1. Planned Developments:
a. Design Approval: The complete design for access streets, including specifications and designation of trafficways, driving lanes, paving widths,
thickness, materials, etc., shall be submitted to the planning and zoning board for review and approval prior to the issuance of building permits or
the sale or lease of buildings or land in planned developments as defined in section 10-1-4-2 of this title. Private streets shall be built to the same
standards as public streets. The minimum number of off street parking spaces shall be in accordance with the requirements of the zoning
ordinance of the village (title 11 of this code). Where more than one owner or lessee are to use the same private marginal access road or parking
lot, a trust indenture shall be recorded before approval of the multi-family, commercial or industrial subdivision as defined herein.
b. Ingress And Egress: A minimum distance may be recommended by the planning and zoning board and required by the village board where
deemed necessary between points of ingress and egress where all property to be subdivided is under one ownership on the effective date hereof.
Where property has frontage on a state or federal highway, the spacing and design of the points of ingress and egress to the major highway shall
be subject to approval of the Illinois department of transportation. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010; amd. Ord. 2015-9, 5-7-2015)
2. Conventional Development:
a. Residential:
(1) A paved concrete driveway from the property line to the street shall be provided and this driveway shall not be less than eighteen feet (18') at
the property line and shall not exceed twenty five feet (25') in total width inclusive of a two foot (2') taper on each side of the apron (see exhibit A
of this section).
Exception: Where a lot has a three (3) car garage, the driveway at the property line must be a minimum of twenty two feet (22') and the driveway
apron may have a maximum total width of thirty feet (30') inclusive of the required two foot (2') taper on each side at the curb (see exhibit B of
this section).
(2) The driveway between the property line and the dwelling unit shall be equal in width to the driveway from the property line to the street unless a
three (3) car garage is constructed, then the width of the flare may be tapered between the home dwelling unit and property line with the
approval of the public works director (see exhibits C and D of this section).
All driveways shall be constructed in conformance with village standards.
b. All Other Zoning Districts:
(1) A paved driveway from the property line to the street shall be provided with a maximum width measured at the right of way line of thirty feet
(30') with a fifteen foot (15') radii. Said driveway shall be constructed of reinforced concrete a minimum of eight inches (8") thick.
3. Driveway Slopes: All driveway slopes shall be two percent (2%) minimum and ten percent (10%) maximum.
4. Minimum Width Of Driveway In Residential Areas: The minimum width for a driveway in all residential areas shall be sixteen feet (16') at the right of
way line, with a two foot (2') flare on each side at the curb.
5. Driveways Within Right Of Way: All driveways within the right of way shall be constructed of reinforced concrete a minimum of six inches (6") thick
for residential areas, and eight inches (8") thick in commercial and industrial areas. All concrete shall conform to the requirements of IDOT class SI
6.1 bag mix. The apron in multi-family areas with common garbage pick up shall be six inches (6") thick.
D. Public Sidewalks: Sidewalks shall be installed on both sides of all streets located wholly within a subdivision and on the interior side of any existing
street or street right of way bordering a subdivision in accordance with the following:
1. Sidewalks Separated From Streets: Sidewalks shall be separated from public streets by the full width of parkways. Parkways shall be a minimum of
eleven and one-half feet (111/2') from the edge of the walk to the back of the curb.
2. Carriage Walks Prohibited: Sidewalks adjacent to, or in conjunction with, street curbs are not permitted.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 343/498
E. Street Sign Standards: The village shall install all street name signs, regulatory signs, warning signs, required or recommended by the MUTCD,
including speed limit, stop signs, and parking signs. The cost to install all signs shall be the responsibility of the developer. The cost to replace any sign
damaged or destroyed up to the time of final acceptance shall be the responsibility of the developer. Construction warning related signs shall be the
responsibility of the developer to install and maintain.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 344/498
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 345/498
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 346/498
(Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010)
10-4-3: EASEMENTS:
A. Easement Design And Location: Utility distribution or transmission installations serving the subdivision, and when required, stormwater drainageways
shall be located in easements as designated on the subdivision plat of record. Such easements shall be located along the rear lot lines or side lot lines
at locations and extensions of utility installation between blocks, or continuity of drainageway. Easement width shall be a minimum of five feet (5') or as
required by the village engineer, local utility providers including, but not limited to, electric, gas, telephone, cable TV and/or internet services. Additional
easements at other locations may be recommended for specific condition by the village engineer and required by the board of trustees.
B. Continuity Of Easements: Easements shall be designed to provide continuity from block to block.
C. Drainage Easements: Where a subdivision is traversed by a natural drainageway, channel or stream, there shall be provided a drainage easement,
conforming substantially with the areas bordering such watercourse that are subject to flooding, and in accordance with the Streamwood master
drainage plan. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010)
10-4-4: BLOCKS:
A. Configuration Of Blocks: The shape of blocks shall be determined by topographical features, the basic street system and traffic pattern, lot depths, and
areas designated for public and other nonresidential land uses. In addition to these, the lengths, widths and shapes of blocks shall be determined with
due regard to:
1. Site Adequacy: Provision of adequate building sites suitable to the special needs of the type of use contemplated.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 347/498
2. Zoning: Zoning requirements as to lot sizes and dimensions within the corporate limits of the village.
3. Convenience: Needs for convenient access, circulation, control and safety of street traffic. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010)
B. Length Of Blocks:
1. Residential: In residential subdivisions, the maximum length of blocks containing lots less than one hundred fifty feet (150') in width shall be one
thousand eight hundred (1,800) linear feet, and the maximum length of blocks containing lots one hundred fifty feet (150') and over in width shall be
two thousand (2,000) linear feet. No blocks shall be less than one thousand (1,000) linear feet in length unless recommended by the planning and
zoning board and approved by the board of trustees.
2. Nonresidential: In manufacturing and business subdivisions, maximum length of blocks shall be as recommended by the planning and zoning board
and approved by the board of trustees. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010; amd. Ord. 2015-9, 5-7-2015)
C. Nonresidential Blocks: Blocks or portions thereof intended for commercial or industrial use shall be designated as such, and the plan shall show
adequate off street areas to provide for parking, loading docks, and other such facilities. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010)
10-4-5: LOTS:
A. Configuration Of Lots: The lot size, width, depth, shape and orientation shall be appropriate for the location of the subdivision and for the type of
development and use contemplated and, in general, lots should be as nearly rectangular in shape as practicable. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010)
1. Conformance With Zoning Regulations: Width and areas of lots shall conform with lot width and area requirements set forth in the zoning ordinance
of the village (title 11 of this code) or that of Cook County in the unincorporated areas beyond the village limits. Corner lots shall be increased in
width by twenty percent (20%) over the width of typical interior lots, except that corner lots need not exceed ninety feet (90') in width if the ninety feet
(90') in width is greater than the width of the typical lot; except the board of trustees may require, when recommended by the planning and zoning
board, a greater lot width to provide for the proper development of intersection design and traffic safety.
2. Nonresidential Lots: Width, area and depth of lots in a commercial or industrial subdivision shall be as recommended by the planning and zoning
board and approved by the board of trustees. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010; amd. Ord. 2015-9, 5-7-2015)
3. Side Lot Lines: Side lot lines of lots shall be at right angles or radial to the street line, or substantially so.
B. Access To Lots: Each lot within the subdivision must have access to a public or private street unless otherwise provided by local ordinance.
C. Separation From Major Streets: Through lots shall be avoided except where essential to provide separation of residential development from major
streets or highways or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation. A planting screen easement, a minimum of twenty feet (20')
in depth and across which there shall be no right of vehicular access, shall be provided along the rear lot lines of lots abutting such highways and major
thoroughfares. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010)
D. Through Lots: Through lots are not permitted, except where lots back upon a major street, upon a body of water in separate or undivided ownership, or
in manufacturing and business subdivisions when specifically recommended by the planning and zoning board and approved by the board of trustees.
E. Lots Abutting A Watercourse: Lots abutting upon a watercourse, drainageway, channel or stream shall have an additional depth or width as
recommended by the planning and zoning board and approved by the board of trustees in order to provide acceptable building sites.
F. Preservation Of Natural Features: In the subdividing of any land, due regard shall be given to the preservation of natural features, such as trees,
watercourses, historical landmarks, and similar community assets which, if preserved, would add to the attractiveness and value of the subdivision,
neighborhood or the community as a whole. The planning and zoning board shall include in its report its conclusions as to compliance herewith. (Ord.
2010-27, 12-2-2010; amd. Ord. 2015-9, 5-7-2015)
10-4-6: BUILDING SETBACK LINES:
Building setback lines in all new subdivisions shall conform to the provisions of the Streamwood zoning ordinance (title 11 of this code). (Ord. 2010-27, 12-
2-2010)
10-4-7: PARKS, SCHOOL SITES AND PUBLIC AREAS:
Whenever required by this title or any other ordinance of the village, parks, school sites and/or other public areas shall be shown on all plans and plats and
shall be of such configuration as to be acceptable to the planning and zoning board, village board, and concerned public agency. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-
2010; amd. Ord. 2015-9, 5-7-2015)
10-4-8: DESIGN STANDARD DIAGRAMS:
Design Standards
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 348/498
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 349/498
Intersection Design
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 350/498
(Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010)
Chapter 5
REQUIRED UNDERGROUND IMPROVEMENTS
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 351/498
10-5-1: SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM:
A. Sewer Service Required: Public or community sanitary sewer systems, including sewer stub terminals at the outside of curb line or edge of pavement
for each lot, shall be installed to serve all lots in a subdivision or lot divisions. Subdivisions or lot divisions containing no lots less than one acre or more
in area and located in the unincorporated areas within one and one-half (11/2) miles of the corporate limits of the village or subdivisions or lot divisions
containing no lots less than one acre in areas which are annexed to the village after the effective date hereof, may be served with individual sewage
disposal systems; provided, in either case, there is conformance with standards approved by the Cook County health department and other applicable
governmental authorities, except that individual sewerage disposal systems shall be permitted in such subdivisions annexed to the village after the
effective date hereof only after the board of trustees shall find that connection with a public or community system is not practicable, or there is an
agreement between the subdivider and the village and to guarantee by the subdivider that all lots in the subdivision will be served with a public or
community sewerage system within a specified period of time.
B. Approval For Construction: All sanitary sewer systems shall be constructed in accordance with standards approved by the environmental protection
agency of the state of Illinois, the metropolitan water reclamation district of Chicago, and the village, or such other utility corporation, public or private,
whose service may be required. All sewer design plans, and specifications shall be submitted to the above agencies for approval and file.
C. Larger Capacity Sometimes Required: Where sanitary sewer mains of larger capacity than necessary are required, as directed by the board of trustees
to serve the subdivision as delineated in the preliminary plan, the subdivider shall be required to pay for the proportionate benefit of the installation to
his subdivision, as established by the board of trustees.
D. Sewer Pipe Specifications: Public sanitary sewers shall have a minimum internal diameter of eight inches (8"). Sanitary sewers with internal diameters
between eight inches (8") and fifteen inches (15") shall be constructed of PVC SDR 26 in accordance with ASTM D3033, D3034 and D3212. Sanitary
sewers with internal diameters over fifteen inches (15") shall be constructed of reinforced concrete pipe or ductile iron pipe. All sanitary sewers more
than seventeen feet (17') deep shall be class 52 ductile iron pipe with restrained joints and an interior sanitary lining as designed specifically for the
protection of sanitary sewer as approved by the village engineer in polyethylene encasement. The sewer service from a ductile iron main shall be
ductile iron.
E. Sewer Joint Specifications: Joints for sanitary sewer pipe shall be in conformance with the specifications for the appropriate type of pipe used, or
approved by the village engineer.
F. Miscellaneous Specifications:
1. Wye Connections: All connections to sewer mains shall be with a wye. A wye shall be installed in the sewer main at each lot. Vertical risers are
prohibited. No riser shall be at an angle greater than forty five degrees (45°) to horizontal.
2. Self-Cleansing: Sanitary sewers shall be self-cleansing with a minimum flow of two and one-half feet (21/2') per second. Minimum slopes for sanitary
sewers shall be:
8 inches 0.40 percent
10 inches 0.28 percent
12 inches 0.22 percent
15 inches 0.15 percent
3. Depth Of Sewer: The depth from the finished grade to the top of a sanitary sewer shall not be less than five feet (5').
4. Overexcavated Trenches: All sewer trenches shall be overexcavated by four inches (4") and backfilled with CA-11 or CA-13 bedding material. Pipe
shall have four inch (4") bedding or one-fourth (1/4) of the pipe diameter bedding and granular backfill to the centerline of the pipe. Material shall be
CA-11 or CA-13. The pipe shall be backfilled from the centerline to six inches (6") above the top of the pipe with CA-11 or CA-13 or compacted select
material passing a one inch (1") sieve. From six inches (6") above the pipe to the subgrade the pipe shall be backfilled in accordance with IDOT
section 550.07.
5. Granular Trench Backfill: Granular trench backfill is required anytime any portion of the trench falls within two feet (2') or is under the curb,
driveways, sidewalk or pavement. All trenches, regardless of location, must be compacted to ninety five percent (95%) of modified proctor and all
granular trench backfill must be compacted according to SSRB 550.07. All compacted trenches must have compaction tests taken on every lift. All
granular trench backfill shall be CA-6 grade 8 or grade 9. No recycled trench backfill is allowed.
6. Location Of Sewer: All underground improvements shall be installed outside the pavement wherever possible.
7. Sanitary Sewers Under Creeks: When a sanitary sewer shall cross a creek, it shall be a minimum of two feet (2') below the creek bed. Pipe shall be
class 54 ductile iron and shall be installed with a steel casing pipe.
8. Installation: All noncurvilinear sanitary sewers shall be installed using a laser.
G. Standards For Construction: All sanitary sewers shall be constructed in accordance with the "Standard Specifications For Water And Sewer
Construction" in Illinois and the requirements of the MWRDGC.
H. House Connections: All house sewer connections to the main sewer shall be inspected and approved by the village engineer. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-
2010)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 352/498
10-5-2: STORMWATER DRAINAGE SYSTEM:
A. Stormwater Drainage System Required: An adequate system of stormwater drainage shall be constructed and installed, consisting of natural
watercourses, storm sewers and other necessary facilities which will drain the subdivision and protect roadway pavements. Open ditches shall be
prohibited.
B. Design Requirements:
1. Storm Drainage Computations: The design engineer shall submit to the village one copy of the storm drainage computations. The storm sewer
system shall be designed based on a ten (10) year storm with an intensity based on the time of concentration. The coefficient of runoff shall be an
approved composite established for each project. Rainfall shall be as determined in subsection 10-6-12C of this title.
2. Downstream Capacity Of Existing System: The design engineer shall indicate in his drainage computations any cases where the downstream
capacity of the sewer system is inadequate and the proposed sewers will not handle the runoff, or where the topography of the ground is such that
flooding can be expected more often than the period for which the system is designed.
3. Construction Of Detention Ponds: See section 10-6-12 of this title.
C. Sewer Pipe And Joint Specifications: Storm sewers shall be constructed of reinforced concrete pipe conforming to the American Society For Testing
And Materials designation, C-76, wall thickness B.
Other materials of storm sewer construction may be used in special cases upon the approval of the director of public works. Existing drain tiles shall be
connected to storm sewers or shall be restored to operating condition. Joints shall meet the requirements of the Illinois "Standard Specifications For
Road And Bridge Construction". Storm sewers shall be a minimum of twelve inches (12") in diameter.
Under design flow, the minimum velocity shall not be less than three feet (3') per second.
D. Miscellaneous Specifications:
1. Minimum Cover: Minimum cover on storm sewers shall be a minimum of one and one-half feet (11/2') measured from top of pipe to the pavement
subgrade or finished grade in grassed areas.
2. Inlets: Storm draining inlets shall be placed in rear yards and street gutters at intersections and elsewhere as required by the terrain, but shall not be
spaced more than five hundred feet (500') apart or from the high point. At all low points and on all slopes exceeding two percent (2%), double inlets
shall be installed. All inlets shall have directional lids.
Continuous six inch (6") drain tile shall be installed in all rear yards and connected to rear yard inlets. Drain tiles must be installed in all cases
including horseshoe type lot drainage. Drain tiles shall be installed in pea gravel or washed river gravel. The entire trench must be lined with an
approved geotextile fabric. No direct connections to concrete storm sewer pipe are allowed.
All sump pump discharge lines shall be connected with an air gap to the rear yard drain tile.
3. Outfalls: Any outfall storm sewer that drains into an existing open ditch or natural watercourse shall have a reinforced concrete headwall or a
reinforced concrete flared end section with trash rack in accordance with IDOT standards. All such outfalls shall be provided with energy dissipation
devices with fabric, in accordance with the "Standards For Soil Erosion Control" (the Green Book). All outfalls shall be supported by the placement of
concrete or creosoted timber piles approximately ten feet (10') long.
4. Granular Trench Backfill: Granular trench backfill is required anytime any portion of the trench falls within two feet (2') or is under the curb,
driveways, sidewalk or pavement. All trenches, regardless of location, must be compacted to ninety five percent (95%) of modified proctor and all
granular trench backfill must be jetted. All compacted trenches must have compaction tests taken on every lift. All granular trench backfill shall be
CA-11 or CA-13. Storm sewer pipe shall have four inches (4") of granular bedding and granular backfill to the centerline of the pipe. From the
centerline to the subgrade the pipe shall be backfilled in accordance with IDOT standard specifications.
E. Separation Required: Stormwater shall not be directed into the sanitary sewer system and no connections between the storm and sanitary sewer
systems will be permitted at any time before, during or after construction.
F. Larger Capacity Sometimes Required: Where storm sewer mains of larger capacity than necessary are required, as directed by the board of trustees to
serve the subdivision as delineated in the preliminary plat, the subdivider shall be required to pay for the proportionate benefit of the installation to his
subdivision, as established by the board of trustees.
G. Surface Water Runoff:
1. Review Of Engineering Plans: Plans and specifications for all channels shall be included in the documentation required in section 10-3-4 of this title.
2. Effect On Downstream Land: Due cognizance shall be taken to the effect of development of any land tract downstream and surrounding land
affected by rainfall and surface water runoff.
H. Standards For Construction: Installation of stormwater drainage facilities shall meet the requirements of the state of Illinois "Standard Specifications For
Road And Bridge Construction". In cases where this title conflicts with the requirements of these specifications, the provisions of this title shall govern.
I. Report And Video Required: Immediately prior to final acceptance, the developer, in the presence of the village representative, shall color televise and
record the storm sewer system and provide the village with a written report and a copy of the recording in a digital format acceptable to the village
engineer. All defects shall be repaired prior to final acceptance. The sump pump connections and yard drain tiles are considered part of the storm
sewer system and must be televised.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 353/498
J. Testing And Approval: All testing shall be made or caused to be made by the contractor or owner at no cost to the village and in the presence of the
village representative. Testing shall be of the low pressure air testing method for sanitary sewers as approved by the metropolitan water reclamation
district of Greater Chicago and the village. Immediately prior to final acceptance, the developer in the presence of the village representative, shall color
televise and record the sanitary sewer system in a digital format acceptable to the village engineer. All defects shall be repaired prior to final
acceptance. Sanitary sewer house services shall be televised.
K. Waterway Opening: All streets which cross Poplar Creek, or any open tributary, or creek shall have a waterway opening sized in accordance with the
requirement of and approved by IDOT DWR, the crossing shall be reinforced concrete box culvert with a minimum opening of one hundred twenty
(120) square feet. All box culverts whether cast in place or precast shall: have epoxy coated reinforcing bars; have cast in place head walls and wing
walls; have a cast in place antiseep collar. This structure shall be designed by an Illinois registered structural engineer. The crossing shall be protected
by a steel plate guardrail. A streetlight shall be installed at the crossing. The slope from the street ROW line to the top of the head wall shall be flatter
than four to one (4:1). (Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010)
10-5-3: MANHOLES AND DRAINAGE APPURTENANCES:
Manholes and drainage appurtenances, as outlined below, shall be constructed in accordance with the requirements of the village standard detail sheets.
A. Manholes:
1. Manhole Size And Construction: Manholes for sewers thirty six inches (36") and smaller shall have an inside diameter of forty eight inches (48") and
a six inch (6") thick precast concrete base, in one piece, bedded in at least four inches (4") of CA-11 or CA-13. The sidewalls shall be of precast
concrete ring construction which shall have a five inch (5") minimum thickness. Manhole bases for sewers with an internal diameter forty two inches
(42") and larger shall be constructed of reinforced concrete.
2. Manhole Spacing: Manhole spacing shall be three hundred fifty feet (350') maximum. Manholes shall be required whenever the sewer changes
direction.
3. Drop Type Manholes Required: Wherever two (2) sanitary sewer lines connect and there is a difference of vertical elevation of more than two feet
(2'), there shall be constructed a precast, drop type manhole. All drop assemblies shall be ductile iron and the first pipe out of the drop shall be
ductile iron. All backfill around drop manholes shall be trench backfill up to the bottom of the inlet pipe.
4. Rubber Boots: Pipe connections to sanitary sewer manholes shall include rubber boot. Connections to existing sanitary sewer manholes must be
cored and have a boot installed.
5. Gasket Sealed Covers: Sanitary sewer manholes shall have Neenah self-seal gasketed covers or approved equal.
6. Seal Required: The adjusting rings and manhole sections of sanitary sewer manholes must be sealed with an approved mastic material and chimney
seals.
B. Catch Basins:
1. Catch Basin Size And Construction: Catch basins shall be IDOT type A or type C.
2. Curb Inlets: Curb inlets shall have an internal diameter of two feet (2') and a minimum depth of two feet (2'). Sidewalls shall be precast concrete
having a thickness of four inches (4"), bedded in a minimum of two inches (2") of CA-11 or CA-13. Inlets shall be IDOT type A.
3. Catch Basin Location: Catch basins shall be placed in street gutters at intersections and elsewhere as required by tile terrain. Manholes, inlets and
catch basins shall be located so that the length of over the surface drainage, either along a street or through the rear lot areas, will not exceed five
hundred feet (500').
4. Bedding Catch Basins: All catch basins or inlets shall be bedded in a minimum of four inches (4") crushed stone.
C. Frames And Grates: Frames and grates for manholes, catch basins, inlets and valve vaults shall be in accordance with the IDOT standard type I or type
II depending upon the type of curb used.
D. Standards For Construction: Installation of all manholes, catch basins or other drainage appurtenances shall meet the requirements of the state of
Illinois "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction". In cases where this title conflicts with these standards, the provisions of this title
shall govern. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010)
10-5-4: WATER SUPPLY AND DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM:
The water supply and distribution system shall be constructed in accordance with the village standard detail sheets.
A. Water Supply And Distribution System Required: Public or community water supply and distribution systems, including water stub terminals to each lot
shall be installed to serve each lot in a subdivision or lot divisions. Subdivisions containing no lots less than one acre or more in area and located in the
unincorporated areas within one and one-half (11/2) miles of the corporate limits of the village; or subdivisions containing no lots less than one acre in
area and which are annexed to the village after the effective date hereof, may be served with water supply from individual wells conforming with
standards approved by Cook County health department and other applicable governmental authorities, except individual wells shall be permitted in
such subdivisions located within the village only after being specifically approved by the board of trustees when it is determined that connection with a
public or community water supply system is not practicable; or there is an agreement between the subdivider and the village and a guarantee by the
subdivider that all lots in the subdivision will be served with a public or community water supply system within a specified period of time. Evidence shall
be presented by the subdivider that an adequate water supply is available or will be in advance of occupancy for development of individual lots and that
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 354/498
the local utilities can satisfactorily serve the area by the utility easements shown. No physical connection shall be permitted between the village water
system and/or supply and any other system and/or supply not of equal or better bacteriological and chemical quality as determined by inspections and
analysis by the village. Said connection must be approved by the village board.
B. Approval For Construction: All water distribution systems constructed to or within a subdivision shall be constructed in accordance with standards
approved by the state of Illinois environmental protection agency, and the village public works department. All distribution system plans and
specifications shall be submitted to the above agencies for approval and file.
C. Larger Capacity Sometimes Required: The subdivider shall install the water main in the size required by the village to provide for future growth. No
recapture agreements for water main construction will be allowed.
D. Water Main And Joint Specifications: Water mains shall be a minimum of eight inches (8") internal diameter. However, water main loops in cul-de-sacs
may be six inches (6") internal diameter provided there is not more than one fire hydrant on the line. Water mains shall be constructed of either ductile
iron mechanical joint or double sealing single gasket joint pipe, class 52, conforming to American Standards Association specifications A21.6, or A21.8,
with A21.10 mechanical joint fittings or push on type joints. All fire hydrants, valves and bends or other fittings must be secured with the use of a
restrained joint, "mega lug" or approved equal. In some cases the village engineer may require stainless threaded rods and concrete thrust blocks.
E. Valve Specifications: Valves shall be nonrising stem gate valves with operating nut, designed to take full pressure on either face, furnished in full
compliance with American Water Works Association standards C-500. All valves shall open by turning to the left. Valves shall operate at a working
pressure of one hundred fifty (150) pounds per square inch and a test pressure of three hundred (300) pounds per square inch. Valves eight inches (8")
and smaller shall be housed in valve vaults with an internal diameter of forty eight inches (48"); valves over eight inches (8") shall be housed in vaults
with an internal diameter of sixty inches (60"). Valve vault, sidewall and base construction shall conform to that required for catch basins. Precast
concrete vaults shall be constructed around all line valves. Valve vaults are not needed for hydrant valves.
F. Hydrant Requirements And Specifications:
1. Hydrant Requirements: Fire hydrants shall be installed at all street intersections and, at the termination points of all cul-de-sacs, and at the end of all
mains before the water line is put into service. Intermediate hydrants shall be installed so that the spacing between hydrants shall not exceed four
hundred feet (400') in single-family residential areas, or three hundred feet (300') in multiple-family, commercial or industrial areas. The village board
may require spacing of intermediate hydrants at closer intervals in special situations where recommended by the fire chief of the village. No more
than one fire hydrant shall be allowed on a six inch (6") water main.
When a water main shall cross the creek, a valve and vault shall be placed on the line on each side of the creek not more than two hundred feet
(200') from the center of the creek. The pipe shall be ductile iron class 54 and have a minimum of three feet (3') bury under the creek bed. All water
mains under a creek crossing shall be in a steel casing.
2. Hydrant Specifications:
a. Hydrant Standards: Hydrants shall be of the compression or gate type conforming to American Water Works Association standard C-502 and shall
be of a make that has been adopted by the village as standard. Hydrants shall be designed for a three hundred (300) pound test pressure and a
one hundred fifty (150) pound working pressure. Threads on nozzles and caps, and operating nuts, shall be national standard threads. Hydrants
shall open by turning to the left and shall be so marked. Hydrants shall be the "breakaway" base model. Fire hydrants shall be manufactured by
the East Jordon Iron Works, the Traverse City Iron Works or the Muller Company.
b. Nozzle Requirements: Hydrants shall be furnished with two (2) 21/2-inch hose nozzles and one 41/2-inch steamer nozzle.
c. Thrust Block Required: In accordance with the village standard detail sheets.
d. Painting: Hydrants shall be painted to conform to village standards.
e. Elevation: The center of the hydrant steamer nozzle shall be not less than eighteen inches (18") nor more than twenty eight inches (28") above
finished grade. There shall not be any plantings and/or other obstructions within this area, or the area between the steamer nozzle and the curb
line.
G. Miscellaneous Specifications:
1. Depth Of Main: Water main shall be installed at a depth of not less than five feet (5') nor more than nine feet (9') below finished grade.
2. Special Valves Required: Antisiphoning and/or check valves shall be installed between commercial, industrial and residential land uses for the
purposes of conservation and relief of demands on existing residential supply.
3. Water Reclamation: Consideration shall be given to water reclamation and reuse in commercial and industrial tracts for the purpose of conservation
and relief of demands on existing residential supply.
4. Connections: Connections to the existing water system shall be made by pressure tap where required by the village board.
5. Corrosion Protection: Prior to the installation of any water main, a corrosion protection investigation shall be conducted by the Ductile Iron Pipe
Research Association. The application for the investigation shall be made by the developer. The developer shall install all corrosion protection
devices called for by the investigation. If no report is provided the water main shall be protected by polyethylene encasement.
6. Bedding And Backfill: Water main pipe shall have four inches (4") of granular bedding and granular backfill to the centerline of the pipe. Bedding
material shall be CA-11 or CA-13. From the centerline of the pipe to the subgrade, backfilling shall be in accordance with the "Standard
Specifications For Water And Sewer Construction" in Illinois. Granular trench backfill is required anytime any portion of the trench falls within two feet
(2') of, or is under the curb, driveway, sidewalk or pavement. All trenches, regardless of location, must be compacted to ninety five percent (95%) of
modified proctor and all granular trench backfill must be jetted. All compacted trenches must have compaction tests taken on every lift. All granular
trench backfill shall be CA-11 or CA-13.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 355/498
H. Disinfection: Disinfecting of all newly constructed water supply, treatment and distribution facilities shall be performed in accordance with the
requirements of the American Water Works Association standard C-601 with the following modifications:
Revise section 12 of the standard to read "...at least 25 ppm after 24 hours standing..." in lieu of 10 ppm. This may be expected with an application of
40-50 ppm in lieu of 25 ppm as stated.
Revise section 14 to read "...and should produce no less than 25 ppm..." in lieu of 10 ppm.
I. Standards For Construction: Installation of all water mains, valves and hydrants shall be in accordance with the "Standard Specifications For Water And
Sewer Construction" in Illinois. In cases where this title conflicts with these requirements the provisions of this title shall govern.
J. Leakage Testing: All water mains and building services four inches (4") in diameter and larger shall be tested for leakage at a minimum of one hundred
fifty (150) psi for a minimum of one hour. The allowable leakage shall be as shown in the "Standard Specifications For Water And Sewer Construction"
in Illinois, latest edition.
K. Fire Sprinkler Services: Automatic sprinkler service lines from the water main to any building shall meet the following specifications:
1. The system shall have an independent water supply (not for domestic use).
2. A valve vault shall be installed at the source of the tap.
3. Underground supply mains shall be ductile iron pipe class 52 or type K copper, when approved by the village engineer.
4. The service shall be constructed in accordance with the "Standard Specifications For Water And Sewer Construction" in the state of Illinois.
5. Testing shall be the same as for water mains.
6. Disinfections and sampling shall be the same as for water mains.
7. All testing, disinfection and sampling shall be done in the presence of an inspector and/or certified water plant operator of the public works
department. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010)
10-5-5: BUILDING SERVICES FOR UNDERGROUND UTILITIES:
A. Building Services Required: Individual building services for sewer and water shall be constructed to connect each lot, dwelling unit or building site with
the utility service mains for each utility required in the provisions of this title as follows:
1. Length Of Building Service: Building services shall extend from the main to the property line.
2. Boxes: All service boxes and buffalo boxes shall be located in the parkway or easements. B-boxes shall be cast iron extension type with one and
one-half inch (11/2") Minneapolis pattern base, or two and one-half inch (21/2") Tyler cast iron #95E curb box.
3. Marking: At the end of all building services, a two by four (2 x 4) plank, six feet (6') in length, shall be driven into the ground to a depth of four feet (4')
to be used as a temporary marker.
4. Construction: Building services shall be one continuous piece of copper from the water main to the B-box, and one continuous piece of copper from
the B-box to the meter whenever possible. Any building services that are not capable of being laid in one piece shall have a mechanical coupling of a
type that shall be approved by the community development department. All services which require a coupling shall be tested for leakage. Testing
shall be at a minimum of one hundred (100) psi. All service testing shall be approved by the community development department.
5. Water Service Testing: All building services four inches (4") and larger shall meet the same requirements as set forth under water main leakage
testing and disinfection.
6. Water Service Testing: All building services smaller than four inches (4") may be required to be tested for leakage and disinfection at the discretion of
the official custodian of the community water supply.
B. Specifications For Building Water Services: Building water service for each single-family residence shall be minimum one inch (1") type K copper or
approved equal and shall be terminated at a shutoff valve and box of a type approved by the village engineer and located within the parkway. In no
case shall the buffalo box be located in the sidewalk or driveway or buried underground.
C. Specifications For Building Sanitary Services: The connection from the sewer to the sanitary building drain shall be six inch (6") PVC or ductile iron, set
at a minimum grade of one-fourth inch (1/4") per foot installed in accordance with the ASTM and the "Standard Specifications For Water And Sewer
Construction" in Illinois. Such service shall connect to the sewer with a wye. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010)
10-5-6: DRAINAGE PIPE INSTALLATIONS:
The village board may require a subdivider to install drainage pipe around any buildings constructed. Such pipe shall be perforated pipe encased in filter
fabric. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010)
10-5-7: DRY UTILITY DISTRIBUTION LINES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 356/498
A. All Dry Utilities To Be Underground: All dry utility distribution lines for telephone, cable TV, street lighting, electric and gas service in the subdivision shall
be placed underground entirely throughout a subdivided area. Installation of such facilities shall be made in compliance with the applicable orders,
rules and regulations of the Illinois commerce commission now or hereafter effective and the subdivider shall be responsible for compliance with rules
and regulations, now or hereafter effective and filed with said commission pursuant to the Illinois public utilities act, or any public utility whose service
will be required for the subdivision with respect to the provisions of such facilities.
B. Location And Specifications Of Dry Utilities: Underground telephone, electric and gas service shall be placed within easements or dedicated public
ways in a manner which will not conflict with other underground services. Further, all transformer boxes shall be located so as not to be unsightly or
hazardous to the public. The utility lines shall be parallel to and not less than twelve inches (12") from the property lines. corner markers as required in
this title shall not be disturbed by the installation of utility lines. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010)
10-5-8: INSPECTION OF UNDERGROUND IMPROVEMENTS:
A. Inspection Required: All water, sewer, stormwater, streetlights, or other underground improvements as required by this title, shall be inspected during
the course of construction and upon completion by the village engineer.
B. Notification Required: During the course of construction of the improvements, the subdivider shall notify the village forty eight (48) hours before any
required inspection.
C. Approval Before Backfilling: No backfilling of utility trenches shall be made until all required inspections are completed. Any backfilling done in conflict
with this title shall be removed at the subdivider's expense.
D. Inspection Fees: All developments shall pay to the village the sum of two and one-half percent (21/2%) of the estimated cost of the improvement for the
purpose of providing engineering inspections. This fee is to be based on the total required guarantee amount as calculated by subsection 10-3-6A of
this title.
E. As Built Plan Required: No final inspection shall commence until the developer furnishes the village with an as built plan of the underground
improvement. Said as built plan shall show the exact location of all storm sewer, sanitary sewer, and water mains together with all manholes and
valves, and their rim and invert elevations.
All building services shall be shown with their location being shown by distances in feet from numbered manhole locations.
Said as built plans shall also contain all storm and sanitary sewer rim and invert elevations, the grades of the stormwater overland flood route and shall
be signed and sealed by a registered Illinois professional engineer.
After inspection of the improvements, but before final inspection and final approval, the developer shall supply the village with four (4) copies, plus one
reproducible copy on mylar, of the as built plan of the underground improvements, and a digital copy in a format approved by the village engineer.
All as built plans shall be approved by the village engineer. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010)
Chapter 6
REQUIRED SURFACE IMPROVEMENTS
10-6-1: EROSION, SEDIMENTATION AND DUST CONTROL; SITE DEVELOPMENT PERMIT:
10-6-1-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the following sections is to provide minimum standards to safeguard persons and to protect property and the environment by regulating the
design, construction and maintenance of any development or other activity which results in the movement of earth or land situated in the village. (Ord.
2010-27, 12-2-2010)
10-6-1-2: GENERAL CRITERIA AND STANDARDS:
The following general principles shall apply to any movement of earth and any sedimentation and control plan:
A. The smallest practical area of land as determined by the village engineer shall be exposed at any given time during development.
B. Such minimum area exposure shall be kept to as short a duration of time as is practical as determined by the village engineer.
C. Sediment basins, debris basins, desilting basins or silt traps shall be installed and maintained to remove sediment from runoff waters from land
undergoing development.
D. Provision shall be made to effectively accommodate the increased runoff caused by changed soil and surface conditions during and after development.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 357/498
E. Permanent, final plant covering or structures shall be installed as soon as possible.
F. The plan shall relate to the topography and soils of the site so that the lowest potential for erosion is created.
G. Natural plant covering shall be retained and protected so far as is consistent with developing the site.
H. No site development permit shall be issued unless application is made for a development on the site.
I. All unsuitable, contaminated, or nonbuildable soils within building sites shall be removed and replaced under the supervision of a registered professional
engineer.
J. No work of any kind is permitted on any U.S. army corps of engineers designated wetland without a permit from the corps and from the village. (Ord.
2010-27, 12-2-2010)
10-6-1-3: ENGINEERING REQUIREMENTS AND PERMITS:
A. Permit Required: Before land is cleared, graded, transported or otherwise disturbed by the movement of earth for construction projects within the
village, a site development permit embodying the proposed earth movement shall be obtained from the village engineer.
B. Application: No site development permit shall be issued until said developer submits a site development plan, together with any other submissions
required by this title, and certifies that any movement of earth shall be in accordance with such plan and submissions.
1. Each application shall contain an estimated time schedule and phasing of the land movement, which shall contain schedules for stripping and/or
clearing, rough grading and construction, final grading and vegetation establishment and maintenance.
The proposed phasing of development of the site, including stripping and clearing, rough grading and construction, and final grading and
landscaping. Phasing should identify the expected date on which clearing will begin, the estimated duration of exposure of cleared areas, and the
sequence of installation of temporary sediment control measures (including perimeter controls), clearing and grading, installation of temporary soil
stabilization measures, installation of storm drainage, paving streets and parking areas, final grading and the establishment of permanent vegetative
cover, and the removal of temporary measures. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to notify the village of any significant changes which
occur in the site development schedule after the initial erosion and sediment control plan has been approved.
These submissions shall be prepared in accordance with the requirements of this title and the standards and requirements contained in the latest
edition and updates of the "Illinois Urban Manual", which was originally prepared by the environmental protection agency, and the "Illinois Procedures
And Standards For Urban Soil Erosion And Sedimentation Control" (the Green Book), which was prepared by the Northeastern Illinois soil erosion
and sedimentation control steering committee and adopted by the North Cook County soil and water conservation district, which standards and
requirements are hereby incorporated into this title by reference.
The village may waive specific requirements for the content of submissions upon finding that the information submitted is sufficient to show that the
work will comply with the objectives and principles of this title.
A development plan of the site showing:
a. Existing topography of the site and adjacent land within approximately one hundred feet (100') of the boundaries, drawn at no greater than two
foot (2') contour intervals and clearly portraying the conformation and drainage pattern of the area.
b. The locations of existing buildings, structures, utilities, streams, lakes, floodplains, wetlands and depressions, drainage facilities, vegetation cover,
paved areas, and other significant natural or manmade features on the site and adjacent land within one hundred feet (100') of the boundary.
c. A general description of the predominant soil types on the site, their locations, and their limitations for the proposed use.
d. Proposed use of the site, including present development and planned utilization; areas of clearing, stripping, grading, excavation, and filling;
proposed contours, finished grades, and street profiles; provisions for storm drainage, including storm sewers, swales, detention basins and any
other measures to control the rate of runoff, with a drainage area map, indications of flow directions, and computations; kinds and locations of
utilities; and areas and acreages proposed to be paved, covered, sodded or seeded, vegetatively stabilized, or let undisturbed.
2. An erosion and sediment control plan showing all measures necessary to meet the objectives of this title throughout all phases of construction and
permanently after completion of development of the site including:
a. Locations and description, including standard details, of all sediment control measures and design specifics of sediment basins and traps,
including outlet details.
b. Location and description of all soil stabilization and erosion control measures, including seeding mixtures and rates, type of sod, method of
seedbed preparation, expected seeding dates, type and rate of lime and fertilizer application, kind and quantity of mulching for both temporary and
permanent vegetative control measures, and type of nonvegetative stabilization measures.
c. Location and description of all runoff control measures, including diversions, waterways, and outlets.
d. Location and description of methods to prevent tracking of sediment off site, including construction entrance details, as appropriate.
e. Description of dust and traffic control measures.
f. Locations of stockpiles and description of stabilization methods.
g. Description of off site fill or borrow volumes, locations, and methods of stabilization.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 358/498
h. Provisions for maintenance of control measures, including type and frequency of maintenance, easements, and estimates of the cost of
maintenance.
i. Identification (name, address, and telephone) of the person(s) or entity which will have legal responsibility for maintenance of erosion control
structures and measures during and after development is completed.
j. The starting date.
k. Duration of exposure of affected areas.
l. Installation of storm drainage by phase and date.
m. Plan for establishing permanent vegetative cover including the seeding mixes and rates, type of seed, seedbed preparation, seeding dates, time
and fertilizer application, temporary seeding and mulching or similar stabilization procedures to be applied immediately after final grading has been
completed.
3. No site development permit shall be issued for the sole purpose of removal of the existing trees, or other vegetation cover.
C. Dust Control: The developer shall have a water wagon or other acceptable device on, or available to, the project site in order to control dust.
D. Guarantee Amount: A guarantee in the amount of one hundred twenty five percent (125%) of the total cost of the earth movement and one hundred
twenty five percent (125%) of the cost of the soil erosion control measures shall be filed with the village before a permit is issued.
E. Inspection: The village engineer or designee shall make inspections as herein required and shall either approve that portion of the work completed or
shall notify the permittee of the failure to comply with the plan. Where it is found by inspection that conditions are not substantially as stated or shown in
said plan, the village engineer may stop further work until approval is obtained for a revised grading plan conforming to the existing conditions. Plans
for the grading work, approved by the village engineer, shall be maintained at the site during progress of the work. In order to obtain inspections in
accordance with the following schedule, the permittee shall notify the village engineer at least two (2) working days before the said inspection is to be
made; first, when rough grading has been completed; and second, when all work, including installation of all drainage and other structures and required
planting, has been completed.
F. Responsibility: Failure of the village engineer to observe or recognize hazardous, or unsightly conditions, or to recommend denial of the site
development permit, or the village board to deny said permit shall not relieve the permittee from responsibility for the condition or damage resulting
therefrom and shall not result in the village, its officers or agents being responsible for any condition or damage resulting therefrom.
G. Appeal: Any applicant denied a permit under this section shall have the right to appeal such denial to the village manager and, if further denied, to the
village board. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010)
10-6-1-4: EXPIRATION OF PERMIT:
Every site development permit shall expire by limitation and become null and void if the work authorized by such permit has not been commenced within
one hundred eighty (180) days, or is not completed within one year from date of issue; except that the village may, if the permit holder presents
satisfactory evidence that unusual difficulties have prevented work being started or completed within the specified time limits, grant a reasonable extension
of time if written application is made before the expiration date of the permit. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010)
10-6-2: GRADING AND TRENCH BACKFILLING:
A. Grading And Grading Plans:
1. The grading plan shall indicate existing and proposed grades of the street, curb and gutter, lot and building finished swale. The minimum lot grades
for split drainage are one and one-half percent (11/2%) across rear yard and two percent (2%) in side yards. For horseshoe drainage, the minimum of
one and one-half percent (11/2%) to the high point then up to a minimum of six inches (6") to the finish grade at the building. Top of foundation shall
be six inches (6") above finish grade. Maximum allowable slope in rear yard is three to one (3:1), slope must be within the last five feet (5') of the rear
yard. If a three to one (3:1) slope cannot be maintained within the last five feet (5'), a retaining wall, designed by a registered structural engineer,
must be built within six inches (6") of the lot line. Retaining walls shall not be constructed of railroad ties. All walls with any part above eighteen
inches (18") in height shall be designed and certified by a registered architect or structural engineer. All walls in excess of eighteen inches (18") in
height must have a pressure treated forty two inch (42") high fence or other approved material installed along the top of the wall. Unless approved by
the village engineer all retaining walls shall be constructed of segmented concrete block. All walls shall have an approved drainage system installed
behind them. All retaining walls shall be inspected and approved by a licensed professional engineer provided for and paid for by the developer.
All grading plans shall have a minimum scale of one inch equals fifty feet (1" = 50'). A one inch equals twenty feet (1" = 20') plan may be required if
additional detail is necessary.
Prior to issuance of a building permit, a detailed grading plan shall be submitted for each lot for which a permit is applied for. This detailed plan shall
show the proposed foundation, driveway, lot corner and swale grades. All building setback lines shall be shown. No work shall be done until this plat
is reviewed and approved by the village engineer. After completion of the foundation, an as built plat showing location and elevation of the foundation
shall be submitted. No building shall be erected until the as built plat is reviewed and approved by the village engineer.
All plats required by this section shall be signed and sealed by an Illinois registered land surveyor or Illinois registered professional engineer.
2. The roadway area shall be compacted to ninety five percent (95%) of modified laboratory density to achieve a firm and unyielding subgrade as
tested with a heavily loaded truck, the subgrade shall be constructed in accordance with the Illinois department of transportation "Standard
Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction" and for slab or grade the house pad area shall be compacted to ninety five percent (95%) of
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 359/498
modified laboratory density. If the subgrade is not firm and unyielding the material shall be removed and replaced with suitable material or the
subgrade stabilized as approved by the village engineer.
B. Granular Trench Backfill: Granular trench backfill is required anytime any portion of the trench falls within two feet (2'), or is under the curb, driveway,
sidewalk or pavement. All trenches, regardless of location, must be compacted to ninety five percent (95%) of modified proctor and all granular trench
backfill must be jetted. All compacted trenches must have compaction tests taken on every lift. All granular trench backfill shall be CA-11 or CA-13.
C. Completion Of Grading And Trench Backfilling: Before any base course of the roadway pavement or any sidewalk is laid, all grading of streets shall be
completed and approved, all of the underground work, such as water, sewer and gas mains, house service connections therewith, and all underground
conduits for electric and telephone lines, shall be completely installed in place and approved; and all backfilling of trenches dug across the roadway or
sidewalkway shall have completely settled to the satisfaction of the village director of public works. Any existing streets shall not be open cut without
written approval by the director of public works.
D. Removal Of Unsuitable Material: All unsuitable material shall be removed from under roads or utility lines. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010)
10-6-3: ROADWAY PAVEMENT:
Residential:
11/2" asphalt hot mix surface, Superpave, N50, mix D, PG 64-28, 4% voids @ 50 gyr, 0% RAP
11/2" asphalt hot mix binder, Superpave, N50, IL-25, PG 64-28, 4% voids @ 50 gyr, 0% RAP
7" bituminous base, Superpave, N50, IL-25, PG 64-28, 2% voids @ 50 gyr, 0% RAP
4" aggregate subbase type B
Commercial and industrial areas, arterial streets, major collector streets:
11/2" asphalt hot mix surface, superpave, N70, mix D, PG 64-28, 4% voids @ 50 gyr, 0% RAP
11/2" asphalt hot mix binder, Superpave, N70, IL-25, PG 64-28, 4% voids @ 50 gyr, 0% RAP
9" bituminous base, Superpave, N70, IL-25, PG 64-28, 2% voids @ 50 gyr, 0% RAP
4" aggregate subbase type B
Minimum crown on all streets shall be two percent (2%).
All mixes shall have a minimum of fifty percent (50%) manufactured sand, minimum lift thickness shall be three (3) times the largest aggregate size; mixes
containing pea gravel are not allowed, IL-9.5 surface and IL-19.0 are not allowed; no recycled material is allowed.
Thicker cross sections may be required if the traffic count or traffic type or soil conditions warrant additional thickness. The subbase shall comply with the
requirements of granular subbase type B, the material shall be CA-6 or CA-10, and must be a crushed stone or crushed gravel. Pit run gravel, gravel, or
crushed slag is not allowed.
Hot mix asphalt surface course shall not be installed until all other requirements of section 10-3-7 of this title are met.
After completion of the hot mix binder course, the contractor shall provide pavement cores at the frequency and location required by the director of public
works.
The village engineer shall review and approve the mix designs prior to installation. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010)
10-6-4: CURB AND GUTTER:
Concrete combination curbs and gutters shall be constructed on all streets in accordance with the requirements set forth on the village standard detail
sheets as follows:
A. Type Required: Curbs and gutters on all streets in all developments shall be type B6.12. In commercial and residential areas the depressed curb
openings shall be installed at the time the curb is placed. In industrial areas where the driveway locations are not known at the time of curb placement
the driveway openings will be established by a method approved by the director of public works. Saw cutting the back of the curb will not be allowed
unless approved by the director of public works.
B. Driveway Openings: Whenever a driveway or entranceway occurs at a barrier type curb and gutter, said curb shall be depressed to allow for adequate
entrances and exits with the tapering of the curb at a thirty degree (30°) angle.
C. Curb Returns: All curb returns at street intersections shall have a radius of not less than twenty feet (20').
D. Concrete: All concrete shall conform to the requirements of IDOT class SI 6.1 bag mix.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 360/498
E. Curb Thickness: In residential areas, the minimum curb thickness at the street shall be ten inches (10"). In industrial and commercial areas and on
arterial streets the minimum curb thickness at the street shall be twelve inches (12"). Two inches (2") of crushed unrecycled stone is required under all
curbs.
F. Expansion Joints: Expansion joints shall be every forty feet (40') with three inch (3") deep contraction joints every ten feet (10'). Contraction joints can be
either saw cut or tooled. Expansion joints shall be placed five feet (5') from all inlets, and at the PC of all curb returns at street intersections. (Ord.
2010-27, 12-2-2010)
10-6-5: PARKWAYS:
Parkways shall be required on both sides of a street to the sidewalk line. They shall be graded by the subdivider with not less than four inches (4") of
topsoil. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010)
10-6-6: PUBLIC SIDEWALKS:
A. Construction Specifications: All sidewalks shall be constructed in accordance with the village standards and approved by the village engineer.
B. Concrete: All concrete shall conform to the requirements of IDOT class SI 6.1 bag mix.
C. Width And Thickness: All sidewalks shall be four feet (4') wide and five inches (5") thick, with two inches (2") of compacted crushed stone under the
walk.
D. Sidewalks In Driveways: Sidewalk in driveways shall be four feet (4') wide and six inches (6") thick with #6 wire mesh and two inches (2") of compacted
crushed stone under the walk. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010)
10-6-7: STREET LIGHTING SYSTEM:
A. Description: Streetlights and appurtenances shall be installed according to the "American Standard Practice For Roadway Lighting", current edition and
the national electrical code, current edition.
The streetlight system consists of the poles, mast arms, luminaries, wire and all other materials and work necessary to complete the street lighting
installation.
Light standards shall be centrecon pole type MEO-/(Brown #513) installed in accordance with the manufacturer's requirements.
B. Design Requirements And Approval: The complete lighting system shall be designed by a registered professional engineer of the state of Illinois and
shall be submitted to the director of public works for approval. In special cases, the director of public works may designate larger lamps, higher poles,
two (2) masted poles, or vary the spacing as he deems necessary to meet special conditions.
C. Material And Workmanship: All materials comprising the lighting systems shall be the product of a firm or firms regularly engaged in the manufacture of
such materials and shall be covered by the manufacturer's or installing contractor's warranty or guaranty. The materials shall be new, of current
manufacture and of standard design free from defects.
Workmanship shall be of the highest grade in accordance with standard practice. All work shall be done in accordance with the national electric code
and local regulations and in case of differing standards, materials and construction shall be in accordance with those standards requiring the highest
grade. Soil shall be hydraulically tamped around the pole.
D. Material And Equipment Specifications:
1. Conduit: All driveways, street and sidewalk crossings shall have a two inch (2") galvanized rigid steel conduit or PVC conduit used as a raceway for
underground cable with two inch (2") insulating fiber bushings.
2. Wire And Cable: All wire installed under this section shall be copper with six hundred (600) volt insulation. Cable shall be of a type approved by the
director of public works for direct burial such as types "USE" and "UF" UL approved for two (2) conductors. All streetlight cables shall be installed in
one and one-fourth inch (11/4") diameter SDR 13.5 HDPE duct. One conductor shall be white to determine neutral. Wire installed in trench shall be
#6 stranded as shown on the plans. Vertical wire in poles shall be #10 stranded R.H. All wire will be subject to an insulation test to ground after
installation. The minimum acceptable resistance to ground will be two hundred fifty thousand (250,000) ohms. Any section of wiring failing to pass
the minimum insulation test will be replaced.
E. Location: A streetlight system shall be installed in all new developments and subdivisions. The locations of streetlights shall be as required by the
director of public works. Lights will be required at all intersections and at the point of curve (PC), point of tangent (PT), and point of intersection (PI) of
all curves. Lights will be required for special locations such as steep grades or creek crossings. A streetlight is required at the end of all cul-de-sac
streets. In no event shall streetlights in residential areas be located more than two hundred feet (200') apart. Lights will be placed in industrial and
commercial areas to provide a continuous level of illumination as recommended by the "American Standard Practice For Roadway Lighting".
F. Cable Location: Trench shall be eighteen inches (18") off the property line. All underground cable shall be continuous.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 361/498
1. Size Of Trench And Backfilling Procedures: This work shall consist of constructing a trench for the accommodation of cable or conduit and backfilling
it at the location shown on the plans, or as directed by the director of public works. The trench shall be excavated at least twenty four inches (24")
below the finished grade. Backfilling material shall be deposited in the trench in layers not to exceed six inches (6") in depth and shall be thoroughly
compacted by suitable tamping before the next layer is deposited in the trench. The trench shall be located two feet (2') back of the curb or as
directed by the director of public works.
G. Splices: Splices shall be made by using 3M scotch cast kits or equal, as approved by the director of public works.
H. Fuses And Fuseholders: Each pole shall be fused with a five (5) amp fuse using a tron in-line waterproof fuseholder (HEB-AA) and protective insulated
rubber boots or equal as approved by the director of public works.
I. Wire Nuts: All wire nuts will be taped.
J. Mast Arm Brackets: Crouse-Hinds (2 inch x 6 inch) rectangular arm OA1062 (10 inch arm).
K. Controls: Individual photoelectric control units shall be provided with each luminaire. Each luminaire shall use a tork photo control model #2007, 105-
277 multi-voltage or equal as approved by the director of public works. Said control shall fit all RCL series standard receptacles and be constructed so
as to prevent false turnoff by passing automobile headlights or lightning flashes.
L. Luminaries: The luminaries for light improvements to be accepted by the village for maintenance shall be manufactured by Crouse-Hinds Company in
the model and style listed below of luminaries equipped with photoelectric control units and one piece reflector housing of anodized aluminum. The
luminaire shall also be equipped with a hinged refractor holder that shall be securely held in place by a suitable latch. The luminaire head shall embody
a two inch (2") slip filter and shall be equipped with adjustable latch lugs to permit the proper orientation of the light pattern on the street; and an EELNEMA
standard, three (3) terminal polarized lock in type, photoelectric control receptacle. In addition, mercury units shall be equipped with built in
ballasts. The luminaries shall provide lighting distribution equivalent to IES type II except at intersections where IES type V or IES type II with four-way
distribution shall be provided.
Electrical luminaries shall be RCL15STN30-120/240 OA1063-4. Required wattage shall be as determined by the director of public works. Lamps shall
be color corrected high pressure sodium.
Street type Primary or major - MEO-10
Pole height aboveground 32 feet 10 inches
Embedded depth 5 feet 7 inches
Overall length 38 feet 2 inches
Luminaire size in watt RCL 40SC230-400
Street type Secondary or collector - MEO-8
Pole height aboveground 26 feet 3 inches
Embedded depth 4 feet 11 inches
Overall length 31 feet 2 inches
Luminaire size in watt RCL 15SP230-150
Street type Minor and cul-de-sac - MEO-8
Pole height aboveground 26 feet 3 inches
Embedded depth 4 feet 11 inches
Overall length 31 feet 2 inches
Luminaire size in watt RCL 15SP230-150
Street type Minor industrial - MEO-10
Pole height aboveground 32 feet 10 inches
Embedded depth 5 feet 7 inches
Overall length 38 feet 5 inches
Luminaire size in watt RCL 40SC230-400
Street type Minor business - MEO-10
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 362/498
Pole height aboveground 32 feet 10 inches
Embedded depth 5 feet 7 inches
Overall length 38 feet 5 inches
Luminaire size in watt RCL 25SC230-250
M. Ballasts: Ballasts shall be of high quality grain oriented strip steel, high power factor, constant wattage and shall have a primary voltage rating of
120/240 volts. They shall be suitable for outdoor service and capable of starting the lamp at minus twenty degrees Fahrenheit (-20°F).
N. Concrete Light Standards: Light standards to be accepted by the village for maintenance shall be centrecon MEO-8 or MEO-10, centrifugally cast,
prestressed and steel reinforced and of breakaway design. The standard shall have smooth ground and polished surfaces. The cross section of the
standard shall contain a raceway extending throughout the length of the standard. The raceway shall have a minimum opening of one and one-half
inches (11/2") and shall not exceed two inches (2") at the top of the standard. A hand hole shall be provided, and shall be covered with a heat treated
cast aluminum door, fastened to nonferrous inserts in the standard with stainless steel bolts. All ornamental poles and fixtures shall be lumec "Transit"
series in textured dark bronze.
O. Ground Rod: The ground rod is to be no more than twelve inches (12") from the pole; five-eighths (5/8) diameter; eight feet (8') long, solid copper rod.
Ground rod should be four inches (4") below grade. The specification should be a ground wire #10 (green) from luminaire to ground rod.
P. Tests: After the installation is complete and at a time convenient to the village, all equipment shall be demonstrated to operate in accordance with the
drawings and specifications.
Q. Warranty: The contractor and his surety shall guaranty and warrant the equipment, material and workmanship, for a period of one year from the date of
final acceptance by the village. Any defective material or workmanship shall be repaired or replaced by said contractor to the satisfaction of the village
without cost to the village. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010)
10-6-8: LANDSCAPING WITHIN PUBLIC RIGHTS OF WAY:
A. Grass Seeding Or Sod Required: All unpaved areas within street rights of way shall be sodded with Kentucky bluegrass mixture or with such other
grass mixture as approved by the village board. Before the release of the twelve (12) month maintenance bond can be recommended by the village
engineer, all unpaved areas between the edge of the road pavement and the right of way line must support an adequate mat of grass. Provisions shall
be made to assure the growth of all landscaping. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010)
10-6-9: PRESERVATION PLANTING, MAINTENANCE, REPLACEMENT AND REMOVAL OF TREES:
A. Permit Required: No person shall plant, spray, fertilize, preserve, prune, remove, cut above the ground, or otherwise disturb any tree on private property
or any street on village owned property without a permit from the public works department. All such work shall be done in accordance with this section
and the standards set by the public works department.
Trees which are destroyed by vehicle accident or other means shall be replaced by the person responsible by a tree of like kind and total diameter. The
person causing the damage or destruction of the tree or his insurance so shall reimburse the village for the cost to install the tree or trees necessary to
replace the total diameter of the tree destroyed.
B. Existing Trees In Proposed Developments:
1. A tree location survey, conducted by a licensed Illinois arborist, is required for all areas to be developed. This plan shall be at the same scale as the
plans for the development, but not less than one inch equals fifty feet (1" = 50') and is to be submitted as part of the preliminary plan.
The survey shall show all trees six inches (6") in diameter and larger. All trees over twelve inches (12") in diameter must be identified by size and
species. In addition, all key trees; i.e., a tree classified by the arborist as significant, or those trees which are exceptionally good examples of their
species, shall be identified on the tree survey. Each tree surveyed must be identified with a number on the drawing and in the field. These trees must
be preserved as part of the seventy percent (70%) preservation requirement as provided for in subsection F2 of this section.
All proposed rights of way, easements and lots must be shown on the survey.
2. Areas which contain significant trees will be designated as environmentally sensitive areas and will be subject to the requirements of that section.
The village may require modifications of the proposed project in order to preserve the trees. Wherever possible large groups of trees must be left
completely undisturbed.
3. In the event existing trees are destroyed prior to any development plans being approved, the village may require developer or property owner to
replace such trees of like kind and total diameter prior to or subsequent to development.
4. Persons removing vegetation and trees in an ESA will be subject to fines and prosecution.
C. Parkway Trees; Trees Required: Parkway trees shall be planted in the parkway in front of each proposed lot. Existing trees shall be preserved, if
possible, as determined by the village engineer. Trees newly planted shall not be further apart than forty feet (40') with a minimum of one tree per
inside lot and two (2) trees per corner lot. The type of tree shall be limited to those varieties approved by the director of public works.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 363/498
1. Tree Caliper: Newly planted street trees shall be at least two and one-half inches (21/2") in caliper, measured six inches (6") from the ground.
2. Prohibited Trees: The planting of the following varieties of trees within public rights of way shall be prohibited:
Ash (Fraxnius) All varieties
Box elder (Acer negundo) All varieties
Catalpa (Catalpa) All varieties
Chinese elm (Ulmis parvifulia) All varieties
Crab apple (Malus) All varieties
Evergreen All varieties
Hawthorn (Crataegue) In variety
Mulberry (Morus alba) In variety
Poplar (Populus) All varieties
Service berry (Amelanchie/grandflora) All varieties
Soft maple (Acer disycarpum) In variety
Tree of heaven (Ailanthus) All varieties
Willow (Salix) All varieties
3. Plant Materials:
a. Source Of Supply:
(1) All plant materials shall conform to the current edition (ANSIZ60.1) of the "American Standard For Nursery Stock" as approved by the American
National Standards Institute, Inc.
(2) Plant materials may be inspected and approved by the director of public works, or his duly authorized representative, at the source of supply
prior to digging. All materials are to be of highest quality. Certification by a landscape architect may be accepted by the director of public works.
(3) All plant materials shall have been grown under climatic conditions similar to those in Chicago, Illinois.
(4) All plants shall be freshly dug. No heeled in plants or plants from cold storage will be accepted. One-sided plants or plants taken from tightly
planted nursery rows will also be rejected. All plants shall be typical of their species or variety and shall be sound, healthy, and vigorous, well
branched and densely foliated when in leaf. They shall be free of disease, insect pests and larvae. They shall have healthy, well developed root
systems. Trees with distorted shapes, large curves in the trunk or other defects will not be allowed.
b. Measurements: Caliber of trees up to four inches (4") shall be taken six inches (6") above the ground level. Trees over four inches (4") shall be
measured one foot (1') above the ground level.
c. Inspection:
(1) Certificates of inspection of plant materials required by the federal, state or other governmental agencies are to accompany all shipments within
the state of Illinois and outside Illinois.
(2) Inspection and approval by the director of public works at the source of supply does not abdicate the right of the director of public works to
reject any material after it has been delivered to the site. Material from nurseries of greater distances than three hundred fifty (350) miles may
not be selected prior to digging and delivery. A final determination of acceptability of the material will be made at the time of delivery.
d. Digging And Handling:
(1) Plant material indicated "B&B" shall be balled and burlapped with firm, natural balls of earth. The balls shall be of sufficient depth and width to
include adequate fibrous and feeding roots to ensure full recovery and development of the plants. No plant dug with a ball shall be accepted if
the ball is broken before or during delivery operations.
(2) Machine dug materials.
(A) Wire baskets used instead of burlap shall be lined with burlap inside the basket. Wire used for baskets shall be of a type which is not
rustproof.
(B) The ball size shall be increased at least two (2) sizes in diameter from those specified in ANSIZ60.1 when using a machine for digging which
digs a tapered ball similar to the Vermeer tree spade.
(3) Trees with broken major branches, or badly bruised or damaged bark are not acceptable.
(4) Roots, balls and crowns, if in leaf, of all plants shall be protected at all times from sun, and/or drying winds prior to and during delivery, and
between the delivery site and planting site.
(5) The contractor is to supply topsoil for backfilling of trees. Topsoil shall be reasonably free of subsoil, quack grass roots, noxious weed seeds,
stones, lumps, plants or their roots, and other extraneous matter. Topsoil shall not be used for planting operations while in a frozen or muddy
condition. All topsoil material shall be approved by the director of public works.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 364/498
(6) All tree pits shall be excavated to the depth below the finished grade required to accommodate a bed of topsoil not less than six inches (6") in
depth beneath the roots. The ball shall rest on this bed when the tree is properly set to a finished grade. All excavated material shall be removed
and legally disposed of from the site. The pits shall be backfilled with topsoil as the trees are set.
(7) The pit shall be excavated a minimum of five feet (5') radius around the tree. The soil within the pit shall be amended with topsoil and peat
moss.
(8) All balled and burlapped plants which cannot be planted immediately upon delivery to the site shall be well protected with soil, wet straw, or
other acceptable materials. All balled and burlapped plants shall be planted at their locations no later than three (3) days after delivery.
(9) Spring planting shall be completed prior to June 1 and fall planting shall not begin before October 1.
(10) All trees shall be mulched, and wrapped with approved material within seven (7) days of planting. All trees shall be braced with steel posts or
approved guys.
(11) All trees shall be watered as necessary to assist in establishment.
D. Screen Planting Required: Protective screen planting may be required to secure a reasonably effective physical barrier between residential properties
and adjoining uses to minimize adverse conditions of sight and sound. The screen planting plan shall be prepared by a landscape architect and shall
meet the approval of the village board.
E. Replacement Of Sick Or Diseased Trees: Any plant which does not survive the guarantee period or is alive but does not represent normal growth
characteristics of health and vigor for the species or variety as determined by the director of public works shall be replaced.
The trees which must be replaced shall be replaced with larger trees. The size of the replacement shall increase in diameter one inch (1") for each
growing season after the initial planting.
F. Environmentally Sensitive Areas: Environmentally sensitive areas (ESA) are those areas which have significant natural features such as large trees or
wetlands. These areas require special care be taken during any development. Wetland mitigation shall be in accordance with chapter 8 of this title.
1. Purpose: It is the standard public policy of the village to maintain, to the greatest extent possible, existing trees within the village.
2. ESAs Established And Defined: ESAs shall be established for all new construction in areas where significant numbers and/or sizes of trees exist.
The ESA is further defined as an area or stand of trees consisting of six (6) or more individual trees having a diameter of ten inches (10") or larger
per acre. The development plan shall include the preservation of a minimum of seventy percent (70%) of the significant trees on the site. Significant
trees are generally hardwoods, such as oak and hickory, but may include other species as determined by the village to be significant.
3. Existing ESAs: Existing ESAs are hereby established and located on the village ESA map. These areas are subject to all the requirements of this
section.
ESA Replacement Credit: The developer of properties where woodlands exist may develop or clear more area than may otherwise be permitted by
this section in accordance with the following table:
Percent Cleared For
Development Zoning District
80% Industrial and commercial
70% Multi-family
55% Single-family
However, where this option is utilized the developer shall comply with the following:
a. The developer shall designate a new woodland area on a part of the site not forested within the corporate limits of the village. A reforestation plan
shall be submitted showing the locations, size and type of all plant materials to be installed. Such material shall be of a suitable type and
compatible with the existing or native vegetation of the site.
b. The new woodland area shall consist of one and two-tenths (1.2) times the surface acreage of the woodland area disturbed pursuant to this
subsection. For purposes of calculation, the area to be mitigated shall be the total acreage of the wooded area less the area preserved and not
disturbed.
c. The number of replacement trees shall be determined by the total diameter of the significant trees removed or destroyed. All replacement trees,
including all off site mitigation trees, shall be guaranteed for two (2) years after final acceptance of the project. The acceptance trees are burr oak,
swamp white oak, red oak, sugar maple, approved hickory and other native trees as approved by the village.
If the development proposes to preserve more than eighty percent (80%) of the significant trees on site, then no replacement will be required.
If the development proposes to preserve more than seventy percent (70%), but less than eighty percent (80%), then one hundred percent (100%) of
the significant trees shall be replaced at 1.0 times their total diameter with trees of the same species ranging in size from one and one-half inch
(11/2") to four inches (4").
If the development proposes to preserve less than sixty percent (60%) of the significant trees then one hundred percent (100%) of the significant
trees removed shall be replaced at 1.5 times their total diameter with trees of the same species ranging in diameter from one and one-half inch
(11/2") to four inches (4").
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 365/498
If the development proposes to preserve less than sixty percent (60%), but more than fifty percent (50%), then one hundred percent (100%) of the
significant trees removed shall be replaced at two (2) times their total diameter with trees of the same species ranging in diameter from one and onehalf
inch (11/2") to four inches (4").
If the development proposes to preserve less than fifty percent (50%) of the significant trees, then one hundred percent (100%) of the significant
trees removed must be replaced at three (3) times their total diameter with trees of the same species ranging in diameter from one and one-half inch
(11/2") to four inches (4").
Any trees removed during construction will be replaced based on the percentage of trees preserved at the start of construction.
4. Building Activity Area: The building activity area shall be the area where building activity may take place and shall be as small as possible.
5. Trees Saved: All trees designated to be saved shall be protected by erecting and maintaining a six foot (6') chainlink fence at or beyond the drip line
of the tree. No construction operations, traffic or grade changes will be allowed within the drip line. In the event that any tree designated to be saved
is damaged, or the area within the drip line is damaged, the developer, as directed by the director of public works, shall immediately repair the
damage in accordance with standard horticultural practice for such work. If replacement of the tree is necessary the developer shall furnish, deliver
and plant a tree of the same species and variety and of the same size or furnish, deliver and plant at the locations designated by the director of
public works a number of trees of the same species and variety having a minimum diameter of two and one-half inches (21/2") planted as indicated
above, whose total size equals the size of the tree to be replaced.
6. Tree Protection: The procedure shall generally be: a lot stakeout plan at a scale of one inch equals twenty feet (1" = 20') shall be prepared and
submitted for approval. The location and grade of the dwelling unit, the actual building shape must be shown, type of foundation (i.e., walkout, slab,
etc.), all trees six inches (6") and larger, all easements, the existing lot contours. This stakeout plan shall be field checked by a village representative
and the project manager.
At the time of this inspection all the building corners shall be staked in the location proposed. The stakes shall include the proposed finished grades.
The village shall have final approval of the location, and grade and foundation details of the structure.
After the stakeout diagram and building locations and grades have been approved, the village and developer shall mark those trees to be removed.
A competent, licensed tree service shall remove only those trees marked for removal.
The building footprint plus a maximum of ten feet (10') shall be fenced as soon as the tree removal is completed. The limits of the fence shall be as
directed by the village. No equipment, material, spoils or construction vehicles are permitted in the tree preservation area. No work may be done on
the lot until the fence is installed. The fence shall remain in place until the building is completed.
The village shall have the authority to stop work on the lot if the fence is not maintained in a manner which protects the trees. If a subcontractor or
material supplier removes the fence at any location on the project three (3) times, then that subcontractor or material supplier will be permanently
removed from the project.
7. Conservation Easements: The village shall designate the limits of a conservation easement on the subject property. This conservation easement
shall prohibit the removal of any vegetation or grading without village approval.
8. Utility Improvements: The village may require utility easement in front yards for Commonwealth Edison, IBT, NIG and cable TV. Water, sewer and
storm sewer lines may be required to be located under the street. The service lines and driveway shall be located within the same corridor into the
lot.
9. Special Landscaping: Special landscaping on the lots and ROW may be required due to the special grading requirements on the lots. The
requirements include: wildflower mixes, ground covers, additional parkway trees of similar species to the existing trees in the ESA, prairie mixes and
other plant materials.
10. Special Grading Requirements: Mass earthmoving operations are prohibited in ESA. Each structure may be required to have a special or custom
foundation to meet the existing grades. All efforts will be made to conform the structure to the existing lot grade.
11. Tree Maintenance: During construction, the developer shall engage a licensed, competent tree expert for tree trimming and special care of trees
impacted by the construction. Tree care shall extend for three (3) years after completion of the work on the lot. The tree expert shall furnish yearly
reports to the village concerning the condition of the trees. In addition, the developer shall provide each initial purchaser of any lot within an ESA
established for trees a detailed explanation for the care and maintenance of those trees. Said explanation shall be reviewed and approved by the
director of public works.
12. Variations From Design Standards: In order to assist in the preservation of trees the village will consider: no sidewalk, reduced ROW width, varying
building setback requirements, and lot grading requirements, bio swales, permeable pavement, and underground stormwater storage.
13. Open Space Requirements: The village will require larger than standard areas to be donated or set aside as open space in the ESA. Whenever
possible, tree conservation areas will be tied into wetland mitigation plans. Access from a village street must be provided to any designated tree
conservation area, and said access shall be at least twenty feet (20') wide where the access abuts the village street.
14. ESA Mitigation: If an ESA must be damaged, removed, or adversely impacted the damaged area shall be mitigated by the construction of an ESA
at generally the rate of one and one-half (11/2) acres for each acre damaged. The actual size required will depend on the damage and the quality of
the damaged tree.
G. Nomenclature: The plants indicated to be provided shall be true to name and the nomenclature shall generally conform with that accepted in the
nursery trade.
H. Substitutions: Substitutions for species will not be permitted. If proof is submitted that any plant specified is not obtainable, a proposal will be considered
for use of nearest equivalent size or variety. Such proof shall be substantiated in writing to the village. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010)
10-6-10: BLASTING:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 366/498
No blasting shall take place in connection with any work in a subdivision until appropriate village authorities have been notified and the applicable village
ordinances complied with. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010)
10-6-11: MARKERS:
Iron pipe or steel bars not less than one-half inch (1/2") in diameter and twenty four inches (24") long shall be set at the intersection of street centerlines
and at all corners of lots. Markers shall be set level with the finished grade. The subdivider shall replace all or verify the existence of the iron pipes of all lot
corners and all bends in property lines after the completion of all construction and before time of final acceptance of the subdivision by the village board of
trustees. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010)
10-6-12: WATER RETENTION OR DETENTION FACILITIES:
Stormwater storage facilities shall be constructed. Stormwater storage facilities may be either detention or retention ponds. All facilities shall be in
accordance with the following guidelines:
A. Drainage Plan Submitted Requirements: Each applicant shall submit the following information, depending on development size, to ensure that the
provisions of this title are met. The submittal shall include sufficient information to evaluate the environmental characteristics of the property, the
potential adverse impacts of the development on water resources both on site and downstream, and the effectiveness of the proposed drainage plan in
managing stormwater runoff. The applicant shall certify on the drawings that all clearing, grading, drainage, and construction shall be accomplished in
strict conformance with the drainage plan. The following information shall be submitted for both existing and proposed property conditions.
Properties smaller than ten (10) acres shall submit only the basic drainage plan called for in subsection B of this section. Properties larger than ten (10)
acres shall comply with the submittal requirement of both the basic drainage plan and the advance drainage plan of subsection B of this section.
B. Basic Drainage Plan:
1. Topographic Map: A topographic survey of the property at one foot (1') contours under existing and proposed condition, and areas upstream and
downstream, necessary to determine off site impacts of the proposed drainage plan. The map shall be keyed to a consistent USGS datum.
2. Drainage System: Mapping and descriptions, where relevant, of existing and proposed drainage system features of the property and immediate
vicinity including:
a. The banks and centerline of streams and channels;
b. Shoreline of lakes, ponds, and detention basins;
c. Farm drains and tiles;
d. Subwatershed boundaries within the property;
e. Watershed soils classifications;
f. The property's location within the larger watershed;
g. Locations, size and slope of stormwater conduits and drainage swales;
h. Sanitary sewers;
i. Depressional storage areas;
j. Delineation of upstream and downstream drainage features and watersheds which might be affected by the development;
k. Detention facilities;
l. Roads and streets and associated stormwater inlets;
m. Base flood elevation, and regulatory floodway where identified for the property; and
n. Basis of design for the final drainage network components.
3. Environmental Features: A depiction of environmental features of the property and immediate vicinity including the following:
a. The limits of wetland areas;
b. And designated natural areas; and
c. Any proposed environmental mitigation features.
4. Advanced Drainage Plan: The same information as required in this subsection B is required for properties larger than ten (10) acres along with the
following additional information for the minor drainage system's design runoff event and the 100-year runoff event of critical duration:
a. Elevations and maps of 100-year flooding;
b. Cross section data for open channel flow paths and designated overland flow paths;
c. Direction of storm flows;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 367/498
d. Flow rates and velocities at representative points in the drainage system; and
e. A statement by the design engineer of the drainage system's provisions for handling event greater than the 100-year's runoff.
C. Design Criteria, Standards And Methods:
1. Release Rates: The drainage system for a property shall be designated to control the peak rate of discharge from the property for the 2-year, 24-
hour and 100-year, 24-hour events to levels which will not cause an increase in flooding or channel instability downstream when considered in
aggregate with other developed properties and downstream drainage capacities. The peak 100-year discharge shall not be greater than 0.042 cfs
per acre of property drained.
2. Rainfall: Unless a continuous simulation approach to drainage system hydrology is used, all design rainfall events shall be based on the Illinois state
water survey's bulletin 70. The first quartile point rainfall distribution shall be used for the design and analysis of conveyance systems with critical
durations less than or equal to twelve (12) hours. The third quartile point rainfall distribution shall be used for the design and analysis of detention
basins and conveyance system with critical durations greater than twelve (12) hours and less than or equal to twenty four (24) hours. The fourth
quartile distribution shall be used in the design and analysis of systems with durations greater than twenty four (24) hours. The first, third, and fourth
quartile distributions described by huff are presented in table 37 of bulletin 70. The SCS type II distribution may be used as an alternate to the huff
distributions.
Antecedent Moisture: Computations of runoff hydrographs which do not rely on a continuous accounting of antecedent moisture conditions shall
assume a conservative wet antecedent moisture condition as a minimum.
3. Use Of Detention And Retention Areas And Design:
a. Backwater on the outlet structure from the downstream drainage system shall be evaluated when designing the outlet.
b. Adequate overflow channels or structures shall be provided and designed as simply as possible to require no attention for proper operation.
Design shall be for a storm of the 100-year frequency.
c. An overland flood route system shall be designed with adequate capacity to convey the stormwater runoff from the upstream tributary area and the
development itself through the development to the receiving stream for a 100-year storm. The design of this system shall assume the upstream
tributary is fully developed, all stormwater storage areas are completely full, the storm sewer system has totally failed or is obstructed and the
entire watershed is completely saturated.
The lowest finished floor of any structure, including the basement, shall be a minimum of two feet (2') above the overflow flood route. If the soils
between the stormwater storage area or overland flood route and the structure are compacted, impervious clay and structure is not a walkout or
English basement, the village engineer may approve structures with basement floors below the overflow or overland flood route water surface
elevation. However, the lowest opening must be a minimum of two feet (2') above the overflow elevation and in no case can the lowest floor,
including the basement, be below two feet (2') above the FEMA 100-year flood elevation. The village engineer may require soil borings to
determine the condition of the clay. Where the flood route passes between buildings, there shall be no window wells adjacent to the flood route.
All developments shall have positive overland drainage to provide for the total failure of the storm sewer system.
The lowest finished floor of any structure, including the basement, shall be a minimum of two feet (2') above the FEMA 100-year flood elevation.
The basement floor elevation shall also be a minimum of two feet (2') above the elevation of the 100-year flood elevation as defined in chapter 8 of
this title.
d. The detention facility shall completely drain within seventy two (72) hours. Under drains are required and shall be six inches (6") perforated plastic
pipe wrapped in fabric and surrounded by four inches (4") of washed river gravel.
e. Velocity dissipation measures shall be incorporated into all basin designs to minimize erosion at inlets and outlets.
f. In detention areas, the minimum bottom slopes shall be one percent (1%). An approved "flow through" practice shall be provided for low flows in all
detention basins. Paved ditches cannot be used as a low flow channel.
g. The entire detention area shall be able to support mowing equipment.
h. All detention or retention areas shall have a minimum of one hundred feet (100') of village street frontage.
i. As an alternative to the specified design elements, stormwater storage facilities can, if approved by the director of public works, be constructed as
wetland areas. These areas must be designed in accordance with section 10-6-17 of this chapter. The maximum allowable difference in elevation
between the normal water surface and the high water line shall be not more than two feet (2') in ponds constructed as wetlands.
j. Detention areas shall be designed so that the bottom area shall have no standing water after seventy two (72) hours for any storm less than the
100-year event.
k. All incoming storm sewers shall have either a concrete head wall, or a concrete flared end section with a trash rack constructed in accordance with
IDOT standards and shall be supported by two (2) timber piles.
l. Where possible, a mechanical drain shall be connected to the storm sewer to allow complete drainage of the retention facility. Armco or approved
equal control gate shall be used. Access to the control gate shall be paved.
m. The depth of a retention facility shall be not less than ten feet (10') over at least thirty percent (30%) of the pond.
n. The maximum allowable difference in elevation between the normal water surface in retention areas and the bottom of detention areas to the high
water line shall be five feet (5') and the side slope in this maximum five foot (5') area shall not be greater than four to one (4:1).
o. All retention areas shall have permanent erosion protection at the normal water surface.
p. Retention facilities shall have a water surface area not less than two (2) acres at the normal water level. Detention areas shall be a minimum size
of two (2) acres.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 368/498
q. The entire area of a facility shall be graded and seeded. A minimum of fifteen (15) trees per acre sized and planted in accordance with the
requirements of section 10-6-9 of this chapter shall be installed.
r. The distance from the normal water surface to the nearest lot line shall not be less than one hundred feet (100') for a minimum of fifty percent
(50%) of the lake shoreline. High water line may reach the nearest lot line but shall not encroach on the lot and shall not be closer than thirty feet
(30') to any building.
s. All embankments used to create detention or retention areas shall be designed by a registered professional engineer. The construction of all
embankments shall be certified by a registered professional engineer with a specialty in geotechnical engineering.
t. Storage in floodplain or flood fringe areas is allowed only with compensatory storage equal to one and five-tenths (1.5) times the volume below the
base flood elevation occupied by the storage area, including any berms.
u. The applicant shall demonstrate the operation in all streamflow and backwater conditions. Compensatory storage shall be opposite or adjacent to
the area occupied by detention.
v. The minimum outlet restrictor size shall be three and one-half inches (31/2"); however, the pond size shall be as determined by the release rate as
specified in subsection C1 of this section.
w. The elevation of the rim of all storm sewer structures tributary to any detention or retention pond shall be a minimum of one foot (1') above the
high water elevation, or the elevation of the hydraulic grade line, whichever is higher.
4. Stormwater Plans: Plans, specifications and all calculations for stormwater control shall be submitted for review and approval as part of final
engineering. The estimated cost of the improvements shall be included in any required guarantee as part of the storm sewer system.
5. Groundwater Recharge: The ability to retain and maximize the groundwater recharge capacity of the area being developed is encouraged. Design of
the stormwater storage system shall give consideration to providing groundwater recharge. Design calculations and details shall be provided with
final engineering. The use of natural gravel deposits in storage areas, flattening of drainage slopes, and the retention of existing topography are
examples. A detailed analysis of the downstream system may be required.
6. Compliance; Release Rates: All work shall be in accordance with the requirements of the metropolitan reclamation district and the Illinois department
of transportation standard specifications. In addition, the controlled release rate shall not exceed the safe capacity of the downstream storm sewer
system. A detailed analysis of the downstream system may be required.
7. Deposit Of Funds: In developments where less than one acre- foot of storage is required, the developer shall deposit with the village the funds
necessary to construct the required storage off site or construct the stormwater storage facility, as directed by the village engineer. The cost shall be
based on an estimate approved by the director of public works. The funds become the property of the village and if not used within ten (10) years,
may be transferred to the general fund.
8. Acceptance Of Storage Facilities: Storage facilities not in dedicated rights of way or on other village property must be either accepted by a park
district, lawful homeowners' association or conveyed to the property owner.
9. Maintenance Of Facility: If the facility is conveyed to a homeowners association, a covenant in the declaration creating such an association shall
provide that the association shall maintain the facility and if not, the village will maintain the facility and the cost of such maintenance and repair will
constitute a lien on the development.
D. Retention Area Stocked With Fish: Upon the completion of any retention area and as approved by the director of public works, the developer shall have
the area stocked with fish, the type and amounts of which shall be recommended by the state of Illinois department of conservation. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-
2-2010)
10-6-13: IMPROVEMENT OF EXISTING STREAMS AND WATERCOURSES:
In certain sectors of the village, existing streams or watercourses are dominant topographic features and are important to the drainage patterns and
system of the village. When an area to be subdivided includes a stream or watercourse, the following work shall be completed by the subdivider.
A. Preservation Of Natural Character: The natural character of the stream or watercourse shall be disturbed as little as possible unless such character is
contributory to flooding or ponding conditions within the area that affects the usability of the land.
B. Cleaning And Dredging: All rubbish, junk, dead trees or other extraneous matter shall be removed from the stream or watercourse and the channel shall
be altered as necessary to permit the natural flow of water.
C. Bank Stabilization: The banks of all streams or watercourses shall be stabilized, where there is danger of erosion, with plant materials or other materials
as required by the village board.
D. Dedication And Design: Dedication and design of areas immediately adjacent to both banks of Poplar Creek shall be approved by the director of public
works. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010)
10-6-14: INSPECTION OF SURFACE IMPROVEMENTS:
A. Inspection Required: All grading, paving, landscaping or other improvements as required by this title shall be inspected during the course of
construction and upon completion by the director of public works of the village. All retaining walls shall be inspected and approved by a licensed
professional engineer provided by and paid for by the developer.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 369/498
B. Notification Required: During the course of construction of the improvements, the subdivider shall notify the village forty eight (48) hours before any
required inspection.
C. Inspection Fees: The subdivider shall pay the cost of all inspection services to the village collector. The fee shall be the cost plus two and one-half
percent (2.5%) of the guaranteed amount or one hundred twenty five percent (125%) of the public improvements in a shopping center. The minimum
charge for inspection of commercial or industrial areas shall be one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). There will be additional fees for special inspections,
such as soil or concrete or structural engineering. Any costs to the village for inspections outside normal village hours, or by consulting engineer or
specialists will be paid for by the developer. All reinspections required will be paid for by the developer at the current hourly rate charged by the village.
(Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010)
10-6-15: FEES FOR REVIEW OF DEVELOPMENT PLANS, AGREEMENTS:
A. Submittal: Whenever any person submits any development plans, agreements and related documents, applications for zoning or zoning amendments
and subdivision plans for review or approval by the village, all fees as established by ordinance and all direct hourly costs incurred by the village in
connection with the review by professional advisors and consultants and any legal fees in connection therewith, of said plans, agreements and related
documents, application for zoning or zoning amendments or subdivision approvals, shall be reimbursed to the village by the party, or parties, seeking
said reviews or approvals. In addition, the developer shall pay 1.5 percent of the total letter of credit, bond or cash deposit as a review fee.
B. Implementation: For the purpose of insuring the implementation of the aforementioned policy, the village manager shall cause separate and current
accounts to be kept of any such costs incurred by the village with respect to any of the aforesaid application.
C. Payment: No permits shall be issued for any development or no agreement signed, or, no final approval of any annexation or zoning amendments or
subdivision approval shall be granted until and unless the applicant has reimbursed the village for all such costs incurred in connection with the review
of said application.
D. Time Of Payment: All fees billed under this section shall be payable within thirty (30) days after submittal to the person by the village.
E. Statement: Any person making application to the village for review of plans, agreements and related documents, annexation, zoning changes or
amendments and subdivision approvals, shall sign a statement which shall read substantially as follows:
I/We , do hereby certify that I/We have read Ordinance No. of the Village of Streamwood, and do hereby agree to be bound by the
conditions of said Ordinance and to pay all fees in connection therewith, prior to any final approvals of any plans, agreements and related documents,
annexation agreements, zoning changes or zoning amendments or subdivision approvals.
/s/
ATTEST:
(Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010)
10-6-16: LANDSCAPING FOR RESIDENTIAL CONSTRUCTION:
A. Sod Required In All Residential Areas: Sod shall be required in all front yards, corner side yards, interior side yards and rear yards. Conservation
easements and ESA may be substituted for sod requirements.
B. Restrictions: Sod shall be of a Kentucky bluegrass mixture or with such other grass mixture as approved by the village board. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-
2010)
10-6-17: WETLAND STANDARDS:
A. Wetland Standards: All wetland areas on a site must have a landscaping plan and a buffer area plan. All direct impacts require a complete mitigation
plan with 1.5 to one (1.5:1) mitigation. All impacts will require a maintenance and monitoring plan. The purpose here is to require the developer to
"mitigate" or compensate for the impacts the development will have on the wetland, such as changes in drainage or filling parts of the wetland.
Native Illinois plants should be used including wildflowers, shrubs, prairie grasses and trees. The seed base for these plants must be within seventy
five (75) miles of the village. All plant materials shall be suitable for the soil types and hydric conditions present in the wetland. All of the following plant
species must be included in the buffer area. The plants for the wetland mitigation must be approved on a case by case basis and must fit with the
hydrology and soil type present in the area to be mitigated.
Prairie Forb Plugs (4" Plugs)
Common Name Botanical Name
Black eyed Susan Rudbeckia hirta
Blue iris Iris shrevei
Carolina anemone Anemone caroliniana
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 370/498
Columbine Aquelegia caerulea
Cornflower Centaurea gyanns
Cream wild indigo Baptisia leucophaea
Dry hairy green milkweed Asclepias hirtella
Foxglove Digitalis purpurea
Gaillardia Gaillardia artistata
Lance leaved coreopsis Coreopsis lanceolata
Moist sullivant's milkweed Asclepias sullivantis
New England aster Aster novase-angliae
Pale purple coneflower Echinacea pallida
Perennial lupine Lupinus perennis
Plains coreopsis Coreopsis tinctoria
Prairie bergamot Monarda fistulosa
Prairie blazing star Liatris pycnostachya
Prairie coreopsis Coreopsis plamata
Prairie phlox Phlox pilosa
Purple prairie clover Petalostenum purpureum
Pussytoes Antennaria neglecta Greene
Shooting star Dodecatheon meadia
Smoot aster Aster laevis
Sweet Williams pinks Dianthus barbatus
Tickseed sunflower Bidens aristosa
White yarrow Achillea millefolium
Yellow coneflower Ratibida pinnata
Native Trees And Shrubs
Common Name Botanical Name
Aerate viburnum Viburnum dentatum
American hazelnut Corylus americana
Black alder Alnue glutinosa
Black willow Salix nigra
Button bush Cephalanthus occidentalis
Gray dogwood Cornue racemosa
Nannyberry viburnum Viburnum lentago
Pin oak Quercus palustris
Red maple Acer rubrum
Red osier dogwood Cornus stononifera
River birch Betula nigra
Swamp white oak Quercus bicolor
Sycamore Platanus occidentalis
Winterberry Ilex verticillata
Trees shall be balled and burlapped, be a minimum size of two and one-half inches (21/2") in diameter. Shrubs shall be balled and burlapped and be a
minimum of twenty four inches (24") in height.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 371/498
Permanent Prairie Matrix
Common Name Botanical Name
Big bluestem Andropogon gerardii
Bottlebrush grass Elymus hystrix
Canada wild rye Elymus canadensis
Indian grass Sorghastrum nutans
Little bluestem Schizachyrium scoparium
Prairie dropseed Sporobolus heterolpis
Side oats grama Bouteloua curtipendula
Switch grass Panicum virgatum
Virginia wild rye Elymus virginicus
B. Water Depth: Fifty percent (50%) open water - fifty percent (50%) dry land water depth can vary from one foot (1') to ten feet (10'). To provide suitable
fish habitat, thirty percent (30%) of the surface area of the open water must be ten feet (10') deep or greater.
C. Stormwater Storage: The mitigation plan can allow for stormwater storage. The regulations of section 10-6-12 of this chapter generally apply except as
modified in this section.
D. Side Slopes: Side slopes from high water into the wet area may not exceed ten to one (10:1) up to eighteen inches (18") of water depth; below eighteen
inches (18") the maximum slope shall not be greater than five to one (5:1) or the angle of repose of the area soils whichever is a flatter slope.
E. Storm Sewer Inlets: The number of storm sewer inlets must be as low as possible. All storm sewer inlets must include forebays, silt traps or basins, and
be designed to reduce the energy of the incoming water. The outlet control structure must be capable of allowing the normal water level to be lowered
by two feet (2').
F. Soil Borings: Soil borings are required. Organic soils removed from the wetland must be used or returned into the mitigation area.
G. Buffer Strip: A one hundred foot (100') buffer strip is required. The buffer strip is to provide a transition from the wetland to the surrounding areas. This
strip must be planted with a large variety of species and types, including three (3) trees, five hundred (500) square feet of forb plugs for every four
thousand five hundred (4,500) square feet of buffer strip. The remaining area is to be planted with prairie grasses. The buffer strip shall have a
minimum of twelve inches (12") of organic topsoil. The topsoil must be placed so that it is not compacted. The buffer strip slope may not exceed five to
one (5:1). A path must be installed around the perimeter of the buffer strip. Said path must follow the same standards for path construction as in all
other areas of the village and outlined in section 10-6-18 of this chapter. A two (2) rail, split rail fence must be installed along the property line.
H. Conservation Easement: A conservation easement shall be established for the entire area including the buffer strip. The conservation easement shall
provide protection against any regrading or alteration and require a U.S. army corps of engineers permit for any major work.
I. Wildlife Habitat: Suitable wildlife habitat shall be provided and encouraged through the use of protected areas, islands and vegetation. The developer
shall provide wood duck nest boxes at the rate of three (3) boxes per acre for water wetlands. All suitable permanent ponds must be stocked with fish
as provided in subsection 10-6-12D of this chapter.
J. Mitigation Plan: All wetland area to be mitigated shall have one and five-tenths (1.5) acres of wetland for each one (1.0) acre damaged or destroyed. All
wetland areas on a project must have a mitigation plan.
K. Village Approval Of Mitigation Plan: The wetlands mitigation plan must be prepared by qualified professionals with considerable experience in this type
of work. The wetland mitigation plan must be approved by the village prior to approval by the corps of engineers. Any revisions made by the corps of
engineers must be approved by the village.
L. Maintenance By Developer: The developer shall provide all necessary maintenance for a period of three (3) years after completion of all work. This
maintenance shall include any necessary burning, cleaning, reseeding, silt removal, mowing or plant replacement. The developer shall annually submit
to the village, a detailed report by a qualified professional concerning the effectiveness of the mitigation plan. This report shall include number and
names of species present, percent coverage of proposed species, general growth rate and location and water depth.
M. Inventory Of Existing Plants: The mitigation plan must include a complete inventory of the existing plants and animals present on the site.
N. Compliance With State Requirements: The project must comply with the requirements of the Illinois endangered species protection act and any
recommendations made by the IDOC as part of the IESPA. All undeveloped property must have an IESPA report completed by the IDOC.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 372/498
O. Seeded Areas: All seeded areas must be mulched.
P. Wetlands Covered In This Section: The wetlands covered under this section are those as defined by the 1989 U.S. army corps of engineers "Wetland
Delineation Manual".
Q. Guarantee: All plants shall be covered by a two (2) year guarantee after final acceptance. A guarantee equal to ten percent (10%) of the original cost
shall be maintained for the entire guarantee period.
R. Mitigation Rate: Wetlands that do not require mitigation by the U.S. army corps of engineers must be mitigated at a rate of 1.5 acres to one acre.
S. Mitigation Banks: In cases where the U.S. army corps of engineers does require mitigation and the developer desires to mitigate off site, the developer
will be required to use an off site mitigation bank approved by the village, in conformance with acceptable standards for off site mitigation banks as
established by the army corps of engineers. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010)
10-6-18: BICYCLE PATHS AND WALKING TRAILS:
A. All materials used shall conform to IDOT standards for hot mix asphalt and crushed limestone and filter fabric.
B. All paths shall conform to American Association Of State Highway And Transportation Officials (AASHTO) standards.
C. All off road paths and trails shall be a minimum of eight feet (8') wide and shall consist of four inches (4") of crushed stone and four inches (4") of hot
mix asphalt. However, the director of public works may approve reduced widths, and eliminate the asphalt surface in areas of poor soil or in wetland
areas. All paths and trails shall be constructed over filter fabric which weighs a minimum of four and five-tenths (4.5) ounces per square yard.
D. All on road paths shall be a minimum of five feet (5') in width. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010)
10-6-19: DRIVEWAY CULVERTS:
A. Permit Required: Driveway culvert permits are required in all areas of the village where the street, whether public or private, does not have curb and
gutter. The applicant shall install a culvert under the proposed driveway to any new residential structure or upon the replacement or improvement of an
existing driveway.
B. Construction Requirements: The size of the culvert shall be determined by the village engineer, but in no event shall the size of the driveway culvert be
less than twelve inches (12") in diameter. The culvert shall be constructed of reinforced, concrete pipe. A reinforced, concrete, flared end section shall
be installed on each end of the culvert. The top opening of the flared end section shall be at least two feet (2') beyond the edge of the driveway. If the
applicant desires to extend the culvert completely across the lot frontage, a four foot (4') diameter manhole must be installed at both lot lines unless
otherwise approved by the village engineer. Connection to an existing manhole is permitted.
C. Drainage Plan Required: The applicant shall submit for review any necessary calculations and drainage plans as required by the village engineer to
determine the correct culvert size. The culvert shall be capable of transmitting a rainstorm in accordance with section 10-5-2 of this title.
D. Drainage Ditch; Grading; Retaining Walls: The drainage ditch which the culvert serves shall be graded with maximum side slopes of three to one (3:1)
(3 horizontal to 1 vertical). No retaining walls shall be constructed within the right of way. For drainage ditches adjacent to public streets, the entire right
of way, from the edge of the pavement to the property line, must be filled with a minimum of four inches (4") of topsoil and must be sodded. For
drainage ditches adjacent to private streets, the entire area, from the edge of the pavement to five feet (5') beyond the ditch bottom toward the
residence side of the ditch, must be filled with a minimum of four inches (4") of topsoil and must be sodded. The minimum slope of the ditch bottom is
two percent (2%). If the ditch slope is less than two percent (2%), the ditch must be piped across the lot by the applicant. Parkway trees must be
installed in accordance with section 10-6-9 of this chapter.
E. As Built Drawing: The applicant shall submit an as built drawing signed by a registered land surveyor showing the ditch grades and culvert grades
before paving the driveway.
F. Maintenance In Right Of Way: In the event the culvert and ditch are in the right of way, the applicant shall remain responsible for the condition of the
culvert and the grading of the culvert until final acceptance of the subdivision, or for two (2) years after the occupancy permit is issued, whichever is
later. The village shall maintain the driveway culvert beginning at a date two (2) years after final acceptance of the subdivision or two (2) years after the
occupancy permit is issued for the home, whichever is later.
G. Maintenance On Private Property: In the event the culvert and ditch are on private property, the grading and maintenance of the culvert and ditch shall
be the responsibility of the property owner. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010)
Chapter 7
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 373/498
10-7-1: ORGANIZATION:
The following offices of the government of the village are concerned with the administration of this title:
A. Village Board: The village board is vested with the following responsibilities in regard to subdivision control: (Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010)
1. Plans And Plats: Approval or disapproval of all preliminary plans and final plats referred to it by the planning and zoning board.
2. Variations: Approval or disapproval of all variations and exceptions recommended by the planning and zoning board. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010;
amd. Ord. 2015-9, 5-7-2015)
3. Amendments: Amendment of the regulations of this title when found necessary and desirable, as hereinafter provided.
4. Enforcement: Initiation of appropriate proceedings to enforce the provisions of this title. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010)
B. Village Planning And Zoning Board: The village planning and zoning board shall hold public hearings and meetings for the purpose of making
recommendations to the village board regarding a proposed subdivision project. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010; amd. Ord. 2015-9, 5-7-2015)
1. Plans and plats.
2. Variations and amendments to this title.
C. Community Development Department: The community development department shall administer the provisions of this title, and in furtherance of said
authority shall:
1. Maintain Regulations: Maintain permanent and current records of this title, including amendments thereto.
2. File Plans And Plats: Receive and file all preliminary plans and final plats (together with applications).
3. Liaison With Concerned Agencies: Forward copies of the preliminary plan to other appropriate offices and agencies for their recommendations and
report. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010)
4. Liaison With Village Board And Planning And Zoning Board: Forward, with recommendations, to the village board and planning and zoning board all
preliminary plans. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010; amd. Ord. 2015-9, 5-7-2015)
5. File All Checked Plats: Receive and file all final plats, and check their compliance with the preliminary plan.
6. Forward Plats To Village Board: Forward with recommendations to the village board all final plats.
7. Other Determinations: Make all other determinations required by the regulations herein.
D. Village Engineer:
1. Review Of Plans: The village engineer shall review all preliminary and final subdivision and engineering plans and make determinations and
recommendations in the areas of design standards and engineering specifications, as stipulated herein.
2. Inspection Of Work: The village engineer shall inspect all improvements required by this title both during construction and after completion to ensure
compliance with this title and with good construction practice.
3. Conflict Of Interest: The village engineer or director of community development shall not be retained by a subdivider or other interested party to
perform engineering work in any subdivision subject to the application of this title. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010)
10-7-2: ENFORCEMENT:
A. Village Manager To Administer Provisions: It shall be the duty of the village manager to administer this title and to bring any violations or lack of
compliance herewith to the attention of the village attorney.
B. Compliance Required Before Sale Of Lots Or Issuance Of Building Permit: No owner, or agent of the owner, of any parcel of land located in a proposed
subdivision shall transfer or sell such parcel, nor shall any public official issue a building permit for the construction of buildings or structures within a
proposed subdivision, before the final plat of said subdivision has been approved by the village board, in accordance with the provisions of this title,
and filed with the recorder of deeds of Cook County, Illinois.
C. Use Of Metes And Bounds Measure Prohibited: The subdivision of any lot or any parcel of land by the use of metes and bounds for the purpose of sale,
transfer or lease with the intent of evading this title will not be permitted. All such described subdivisions shall be subject to all of the requirements and
regulations contained in this title.
D. Compliance Required Before Plat Approval: No final plat of subdivision shall be approved which does not comply with all the provisions of this title.
(Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010)
10-7-3: VARIATIONS AND EXCEPTIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 374/498
A. Hardships: Where the planning and zoning board finds that extraordinary hardships or particular difficulties regarding the physical development of land
may result from strict compliance with these regulations, it may recommend variations or exceptions to the regulations so that substantial justice may
be done and the public interest secured, provided that such variation or exception shall not have the effect of nullifying the interest and purpose of this
title; and further provided, the planning and zoning board shall not recommend variations or exceptions to the regulations of this title unless it shall
make findings based upon the evidence presented to it in each specific case that: (Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010; amd. Ord. 2015-9, 5-7-2015)
1. Public Welfare Protected: The granting of the variation will not be detrimental to the public safety, health or welfare or injurious to other property or
improvements in the neighborhood in which the property is located.
2. Unique Conditions: The conditions upon which the request for a variation is based are unique to the property for which the variation is sought and
are not applicable, generally, to other property.
3. Particular Physical Conditions: Because of the particular physical surroundings, shape or topographical conditions of the specific property involved, a
particular hardship to the owner would result, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience, if the strict letter of the regulations were carried out. (Ord.
2010-27, 12-2-2010)
B. Conditions: In recommending variations and exceptions, the planning and zoning board may require such conditions as will, in its judgment, secure
substantially the objectives of the standards or requirements of this title.
C. Procedure: A petition for any such variance shall be submitted in writing by the subdivider at the time the preliminary plan is filed for consideration by
the planning and zoning board. The petition shall state fully the grounds for the application and all of the facts relied upon by the petitioner.
D. Recommendations: Such variations and exceptions as may be recommended by the planning and zoning board shall be forwarded to the village board
in writing, substantiating the recommended variations and/or exceptions. The village board may approve such variations or exceptions from the
requirements of this title in specific cases as listed on the final plat, which in its opinion do not adversely affect the adopted comprehensive plan or the
interest and purpose of this title. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010; amd. Ord. 2015-9, 5-7-2015)
10-7-4: APPEALS:
Any person aggrieved by an objection to a plat, or a failure to approve a plat, may appeal therefrom to the village board and then may appeal within sixty
(60) days of notification of such objection or rejection of the plat, by presenting to a court of record a petition for a writ of certiorari directed to the village
board. The court shall direct that the plat be approved if it finds that the action of the village board is arbitrary, unreasonable, or discriminatory. (Ord. 2010-
27, 12-2-2010)
10-7-5: AMENDMENTS:
For the purpose of promoting the public health, safety and general welfare, the village board may from time to time amend the regulations imposed by this
title. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010)
10-7-6: FEES:
A. Submission Of Application And Fees: At the time of submittal of the preliminary plan, the plan and required documents shall be submitted to the
community development director with a completed application and the appropriate application fee as listed below.
B. Deposit Fee:
1. In order to cover the costs of plan examination, which include, but are not limited to, staff costs, outside consultants, attorney costs, legal
stenographers, administrative costs, etc., and other expenses incidental to the approval process of a subdivision or development, the applicant or
petitioner shall deposit a fee at the time of application for approval of a preliminary plan. Such fee shall be based on the projected number of lots or
dwelling units to be created. All expenses incurred by the village in the process of the preliminary review process will be deducted from the deposit.
There shall be no refund of any portion of the fee if the applicant fails to apply for final approval within one year of the granting of the preliminary
approval. There shall be no fee for the preliminary consultations prior to the application for preliminary approval.
2. At the time of application for approval of the final plat, the applicant's deposit account will be reviewed. If the deposit account has a negative balance,
the applicant will be required to deposit an amount sufficient to satisfy the negative balance and ensure a surplus exists to cover the village expenses
to be incurred in the final plat and final engineering review. After final approval by the village board of trustees, the deposit account will again be
reviewed. If the account has a negative balance, that negative balance must be paid prior to recording of the plat. If the account has a positive
balance sufficient to cover all recording fees, the surplus will be refunded to the applicant.
C. Development Fees Schedule: The development fees schedule is updated by the village periodically by ordinance. The current development fees for the
village are as follows:
1. Application fees:
Residential developments with no variations:
1 to 100 units $1,000.00
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 375/498
101 to 250 units 2,500.00
Over 250 units 3,250.00
Commercial and industrial developments:
Less than 10,000 square feet 500.00
10,000 to 50,000 square feet 750.00
Over 50,000 square feet 1,000.00
Subdivision of land only:
2 lots or less 500.00
3 to 10 lots 1,000.00
11 or more lots 1,500.00
Residential development with variations and PUD:
1 to 100 units 1,500.00
101 to 250 units 3,000.00
Over 250 units 3,750.00
Note: For applicants including more than one request, only the highest fee is charged.
2. Deposit fees:
Residential developments with no variations:
1 to 100 units 2,000.00
101 to 250 units 4,000.00
Over 250 units 5,000.00
Commercial and industrial developments:
Less than 10,000 square feet 1,000.00
10,000 to 50,000 square feet 2,000.00
Over 50,000 square feet 3,000.00
Subdivision of land only:
2 lots or less 1,000.00
3 to 10 lots 1,500.00
11 or more lots 2,000.00
Residential development with variations and PUD:
1 to 100 units 3,000.00
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 376/498
101 to 250 units 4,000.00
Over 250 units 6,000.00
D. Fees Charged Against Deposit: Fees charged against deposit include, but are not limited to, the following:
1. Meetings with the developer or subdivider etc., will be charged at two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per hour for the attendance of all staff members
deemed necessary by the village; this fee shall be the same hourly rate regardless of the number of staff members in attendance at such meetings.
2. The prevailing hourly charges of all consultants and attorneys deemed necessary by the village, including the village attorney, for time spent on
reviewing submittals and attending meetings or conferences with the applicant or petitioner.
3. A fifteen percent (15%) fee of the total charges of all outside consultants shall be added as an administrative fee.
4. Other fees, as applicable.
5. In addition to the fees listed above, the subdivider shall also bear the cost of recording the plat.
E. Developer Contribution: The developer shall make a contribution, at the time of final plat recordation, of forty dollars ($40.00) per lot to cover the cost of
the village's update to the digital base map for the inclusion of the new subdivision. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010)
10-7-7: PENALTY:
Any person who fails to comply with, or violates any of the provisions of this title shall be subject to a fine as set forth in section 1-4-1 of this code, and a
separate offense shall be deemed committed for each day the violation continues. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010)
Chapter 8
FLOODPLAIN
10-8-1: PURPOSE:
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the police powers granted to this village by 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-2-1, 5/11-12-12, 5/11-30-2, 5/11-30-8, and
5/11-31-2 (1994). The purpose of this chapter is to maintain the village's eligibility in the national flood insurance program; to minimize potential losses due
to periodic flooding including loss of life, loss of property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary
public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general
welfare; and to preserve and enhance the quality of surface waters, conserve economic and natural values and provide for the wise utilization of water and
related land resources. This chapter is adopted in order to accomplish the following specific purposes:
A. To meet the requirements of 615 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/18g, rivers, lakes and streams act;
B. To assure that new development does not increase the flood or drainage hazards to others, or create unstable conditions susceptible to erosion;
C. To protect new buildings and major improvements to buildings from flood damage;
D. To protect human life and health from the hazards of flooding;
E. To lessen the burden on the taxpayer for flood control projects, repairs to flood damaged public facilities and utilities, and flood rescue and relief
operations;
F. To make federally subsidized flood insurance available for property in the village by fulfilling the requirements of the national flood insurance program;
G. To comply with the rules and regulations of the national flood insurance program codified as 44 CFR 59-79, as amended;
H. To protect, conserve, and promote the orderly development of land and water resources; and
I. To preserve the natural characteristics and functions of watercourses and floodplains in order to moderate flood and storm water impacts, improve water
quality, reduce soil erosion, protect aquatic and riparian habitat, provide recreational opportunities, provide aesthetic benefits and enhance community
and economic development. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010)
10-8-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions are adopted:
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE: A structure which is on the same parcel of property as the principal structure to be insured and the use of which is incidental
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 377/498
to the use of the principal structure.
ACT: An act in relation to the regulation of the rivers, lakes and streams of the state of Illinois, 615 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/5 et seq.
APPLICANT: Any person, firm, corporation or agency which submits an application.
APPROPRIATE USE: Only uses of the designated floodway that are permissible and will be considered for permit issuance. The only uses that will be
allowed are as specified in section 10-8-7-2 of this chapter.
BASE FLOOD: The flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. The base flood is also known as the 100-
year frequency flood event. Application of the base flood elevation at any location is as defined in section 10-8-5 of this chapter.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE): The elevation in relation to mean sea level of the crest of the base flood.
BUILDING: A structure that is principally aboveground and is enclosed by walls and a roof. The term includes a gas or liquid storage tank, a manufactured
home, mobile home or a prefabricated building. This term also includes recreational vehicles and travel trailers to be installed on a site for more than one
hundred eighty (180) days, unless fully licensed and ready for highway use.
CHANNEL: Any river, stream, creek, brook, branch, natural or artificial depression, ponded area, flowage, slough, ditch, conduit, culvert, gully, ravine,
wash, or natural or manmade drainageway, which has a definite bed and banks or shoreline, in or into which surface or ground water flows, either
perennially or intermittently.
CHANNEL MODIFICATION: Alteration of a channel by changing the physical dimensions or materials of its bed or banks. Channel modification includes
damming, riprapping (or other armoring), widening, deepening, straightening, relocating, lining and significant removal of native vegetation from the bottom
or banks. Channel modification does not include the clearing of dead or dying vegetation, debris, or trash from the channel. Channelization is a severe
form of channel modification involving a significant change in the channel cross section and typically involving relocation of the existing channel (e.g.,
straightening).
COMPENSATORY STORAGE: An artificially excavated, hydraulically equivalent volume of storage within the SFHA used to balance the loss of natural
flood storage capacity when artificial fill or structures are placed within the floodplain. The uncompensated loss of natural floodplain storage can increase
off site floodwater elevations and flows.
CONDITIONAL APPROVAL OF A DESIGNATED FLOODWAY MAP CHANGE: Preconstruction approval by IDNR/OWR and FEMA of a proposed change
to the floodway map. The preconstruction approval, pursuant to this part, gives assurances to the property owner that once an appropriate use is
constructed according to permitted plans, the floodway map can be changed, as previously agreed, upon review and acceptance of as built plans.
CONDITIONAL LETTER OF MAP REVISION (CLOMR): A letter which indicates that FEMA will revise base flood elevations, flood insurance rate zones,
flood boundaries or floodway as shown on an effective flood hazard boundary map or flood insurance rate map, once the as built plans are submitted and
approved.
CONTROL STRUCTURE: A structure designed to control the rate of flow that passes through the structure, given a specific upstream and downstream
water surface elevation.
CRITICAL FACILITY: Any public or private facility which, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the disaster or would increase the hazard to life
and health. Examples are public buildings, emergency operations and communication centers, etc.
DAM: All obstructions, wall embankments or barriers, together with their abutments and appurtenant works, if any, constructed for the purpose of storing or
diverting water or creating a pool. Underground water storage tanks are not included.
DESIGNATED FLOODWAY: The channel, including on stream lakes, and that portion of the floodplain adjacent to a stream or watercourse as designated
by IDNR/OWR, which is needed to store and convey the existing 100-year frequency flood discharge with no more than a 0.1 foot increase in stage due to
the loss of flood conveyance or storage, and no more than a ten percent (10%) increase in velocities.
A. The floodways are designated for the south branch of Poplar Creek on the following map number 17031C and panel(s) 0162J, 0164J, 0166J, 0167J,
0168J, 0169J, 0306J, 0307J dated August 19, 2008, respectively, and such amendments or revisions to such study and maps as may be prepared
from time to time, on the flood boundary and floodway map prepared by FEMA (or the department of housing and urban development) and for the
south branch of Poplar Creek on the regulatory floodplain map prepared by IDNR/OWR and dated July 1, 1977. When two (2) floodway maps exist
for a waterway, the more restrictive floodway limit shall prevail.
B. The floodways for those parts of unincorporated Cook County that are within the one and one-half (11/2) mile extraterritorial jurisdiction of the village
and may be annexed into the village are designated for the south branch of Poplar Creek on the following map number 17031C and panel(s) 0161J
and 0163J dated August 19, 2008, respectively, and such amendments or revisions to such study and maps as may be prepared from time to time,
of the flood boundary and floodway map prepared by FEMA (or the department of housing and urban development) and for the south branch of
Poplar Creek on the regulatory floodplain map prepared by IDNR/OWR and dated July 1, 1977.
C. To locate the designated floodway boundary on any site, the designated floodway boundary should be scaled off the designated floodway map and
located on a site plan, using reference marks common to both maps. Where interpretation is needed to determine the exact location of the
designated floodway boundary, IDNR/OWR should be contacted for the interpretation.
DEVELOPMENT: Any manmade change to real estate, including:
A. Construction, reconstruction, repair, or placement of a building or any addition to a building.
B. Installing a manufactured home on a site, preparing a site for a manufactured home, or installing a travel trailer or recreational vehicle on a site for
more than one hundred eighty (180) days. If the travel trailer or recreational vehicle is on site for more than one hundred eighty (180) days, it must be
fully licensed and ready for highway use.
C. Drilling, mining, installing utilities, construction of roads, bridges, or similar projects.
D. Demolition of a structure or redevelopment of a site.
E. Clearing of land as an adjunct of construction.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 378/498
F. Construction or erection of levees, walls, fences, dams, or culverts; channel modification; filling, dredging, grading, excavating, paving, or other
nonagricultural alterations of the ground surface; storage of materials; deposit of solid or liquid waste.
G. Any other activity of man that might change the direction, height, or velocity of flood or surface water, including extensive vegetation removal.
Development does not include routine maintenance of existing buildings and facilities such as reroofing or resurfacing of roads when there is no increase
in elevation, or gardening, plowing, and similar agricultural practices that do not involve filling, grading, or construction of levees.
ELEVATION CERTIFICATES: A form published by FEMA that is used to certify the elevation to which a building has been elevated.
EROSION: The general process whereby soils are moved by flowing water or wave action.
EXEMPT ORGANIZATIONS: Organizations which are exempt from this chapter per Illinois Compiled Statutes (ILCS) including state, federal or local units
of government.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) has been completed before April 1, 1990.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: The preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
FEMA: Federal emergency management agency and its regulations at 44 CFR 59-79 revised as of October 1, 2001. This incorporation does not include
any later editions or amendments.
FLOOD: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from overflow of inland or tidal waves, or the
unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
FLOOD FREQUENCY: A period of years, based on a statistical analysis, during which a flood of a stated magnitude may be expected to be equaled or
exceeded.
FLOOD FRINGE: That portion of the floodplain outside of the designated floodway.
FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP: An official map of a community where the boundaries of the flood having special hazard areas have been designated
as zone A.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAPS (FIRM): A map prepared by FEMA that depicts the special flood hazard area (SFHA) within a community. This map
includes insurance rate zones and floodplains and may or may not depict floodways.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY: An examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations.
FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION (FPE): The elevation of the base flood or 100-year frequency flood plus two feet (2') of freeboard at any given location
in the SFHA.
FLOODPLAIN: That land typically adjacent to a body of water with ground surface elevations at or below the base flood or the 100-year frequency flood
elevation. Floodplains may also include detached special flood hazard areas, ponding areas, etc. The floodplain is also known as the special flood hazard
area (SFHA).
A. The floodplains are those lands within the jurisdiction of the village that are subject to inundation by the base flood or 100-year frequency flood. The
SFHAs of the village are generally identified as such on the following map number 17031C and panel(s) 0162J, 0164J, 0166J, 0167J, 0168J, 0169J,
0306J, 0307J dated August 19, 2008, respectively, and such amendments or revisions to such study and maps as may be prepared from time to
time, on the flood boundary and floodway map prepared by FEMA (or the department of housing and urban development).
B. The SFHAs for those parts of unincorporated Cook County that are within the one and one-half (11/2) mile extraterritorial jurisdiction of the village
and may be annexed into the village are designated for the south branch of Poplar Creek on the following map number 17031C and panel(s) 0161J
and 0163J dated August 19, 2008, respectively, and such amendments or revisions to such study and maps as may be prepared from time to time,
on the flood boundary and floodway map prepared by FEMA (or the department of housing and urban development).
FLOODPROOFING: Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood
damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODPROOFING CERTIFICATE: A form published by FEMA that is used to certify that a building has been designed and constructed to be structurally
dry floodproofed to the flood protection elevation.
FREEBOARD: An increment of elevation added to the base flood elevation to provide a factor of safety for uncertainties in calculations, future watershed
development, unknown localized conditions, wave actions and unpredictable effects such as those caused by ice or debris jams.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE: Any structure that is:
A. Listed individually in the national register of historic places or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the national register;
B. Certified or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as contributing to the historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the
secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
C. Individually listed on the state inventory of historic places by the Illinois historic preservation agency;
D. Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places that has been certified by the Illinois historic preservation agency.
HYDROLOGIC AND HYDRAULIC CALCULATIONS: Engineering analyses which determine expected flood flows and flood elevations based on land
characteristics and rainfall events.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 379/498
IDNR/OWR: Illinois department of natural resources, office of water resources.
LETTER OF MAP AMENDMENT (LOMA): Official determination by FEMA that a specific structure is not in a 100-year flood zone; amends the effective
flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) or FIRM.
LETTER OF MAP REVISION (LOMR): Letter that revises base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevations, flood insurance rate zones, flood boundaries
or floodways as shown on an effective FHBM or FIRM.
LOWEST FLOOR: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure usable solely for parking
of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided that such enclosure is
not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirements.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designated for use with or
without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term manufactured home also includes park trailers, travel trailers and other
similar vehicles placed on site for more than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational
vehicle".
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent
or sale.
MITIGATION: Includes those measures necessary to minimize the negative effects which floodplain development activities might have on the public
health, safety and welfare. Examples of mitigation include compensatory storage, soil erosion and sedimentation control, and channel restoration.
Mitigation may also include those activities taken to reduce a structure's susceptibility to flooding.
NGVD: National geodetic vertical datum of 1929. Reference surface set by the national geodetic survey deduced from a continental adjustment of all
existing adjustments in 1929.
NATURAL: When used in reference to channels means those channels formed by the existing surface topography of the earth prior to changes made by
man. A natural stream tends to follow a meandering path; its floodplain is not constrained by levees; the area near the bank has not been cleared, mowed
or cultivated; the stream flows over soil and geologic materials typical of the area with no substantial alteration of the course or cross section of the stream
caused by filling or excavating. A modified channel may regain some natural characteristics over time as the channel meanders and vegetation is
reestablished. Similarly, a modified channel may be restored to more natural conditions by man through regrading and revegetation.
NEW CONSTRUCTION: Structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation
adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: Manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the
lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) has been completed on or after April 1, 1990.
ORDINARY HIGH WATER MARK (OHWM): The point on the bank or shore up to which the presence and action of surface water is so continuous so as to
leave a distinctive mark such as by erosion, destruction or prevention of terrestrial vegetation, predominance of aquatic vegetation or other easily
recognized characteristics.
PUBLIC BODIES OF WATERS: All open public streams and lakes capable of being navigated by watercraft, in whole or in part, for commercial uses and
purposes, and all lakes, rivers, and streams which in their natural condition were capable of being improved and made navigable, or that are connected
with or discharge their waters into navigable lakes or rivers within, or upon the borders of the state of Illinois, together with all bayous, sloughs,
backwaters, and submerged lands that are open to the main channel or body of water directly accessible thereto.
PUBLIC FLOOD CONTROL PROJECT: A flood control project which will be operated and maintained by a public agency to reduce flood damages to
existing buildings and structures which includes a hydrologic and hydraulic study of the existing and proposed conditions of the watershed. Nothing in this
definition shall preclude the design, engineering, construction or financing, in whole or in part, of a flood control project by persons or parties who are not
public agencies.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE OR TRAVEL TRAILER: A vehicle which is:
A. Built on a single chassis;
B. Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection;
C. Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and
D. Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
REGISTERED LAND SURVEYOR: A land surveyor registered in the state of Illinois, under the Illinois land surveyors act1.
REGISTERED PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER: An engineer registered in the state of Illinois, under the Illinois professional engineering practice act2.
REPAIR, REMODELING OR MAINTENANCE: Development activities which do not result in any increases in the outside dimensions of a building or any
changes to the dimensions of a structure.
REPETITIVE LOSS: Flood related damages sustained by a structure on two (2) separate occasions during a ten (10) year period for which the cost of
repairs at the time of each such flood event, on the average, equals or exceeds twenty five percent (25%) of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
RETENTION/DETENTION FACILITY: A retention facility stores stormwater runoff without a gravity release. A detention facility provides for storage of
stormwater runoff and controlled release of this runoff during and after a flood or storm.
RIVERINE SFHA: Any SFHA subject to flooding from a river, creek, intermittent stream, ditch, on stream lake system or any other identified channel. This
term does not include areas subject to flooding from lakes, ponding areas, areas of sheet flow, or other areas not subject to overbank flooding.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 380/498
RUNOFF: The water derived from melting snow or rain falling on the land surface, flowing over the surface of the ground or collected in channels or
conduits.
SEDIMENTATION: The processes that deposit soils, debris, and other materials either on other ground surfaces or in bodies of water or watercourses.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA): Any base flood area subject to flooding from a river, creek, intermittent stream, ditch, or any other identified
channel or ponding area shown on a flood hazard boundary map or flood insurance rate map as zone A, AO, A1-30, AE, A99, AH, VO, V30, VE, V, M, E,
or D.
START OF CONSTRUCTION: Includes substantial improvement, and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of
construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date.
The "actual start" means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the
installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or placement of a manufactured home on a foundation.
STRUCTURE: The results of a manmade change to the land constructed on or below the ground, including the construction, reconstruction or placement
of a building or any addition to a building; installing a manufactured home on a site; preparing a site for a manufactured home or installing a travel trailer on
a site for more than one hundred eighty (180) days unless they are fully licensed and ready for highway use.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damage condition would
equal or exceed fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred, regardless of the actual repair work performed.
Volunteer labor and materials must be included in this determination. Damage of less than fifty percent (50%) of the fair market value will be applied to the
repetitive loss calculations.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: Substantial improvements shall be:
A. Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market
value of the structure before the "start of construction" of the improvement.
B. For the purposes of this definition "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other
structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
C. The term does not, however, include either:
1. Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely
necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
2. Any alteration of a "historic structure" listed on the national register of historic places or the Illinois register of historic places, provided that the
alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure.
TRANSITION SECTION: Reaches of the stream or floodway where water flows from a narrow cross section to a wide cross section or vice versa.
VIOLATION: The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or
other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance is presumed to be in violation until such time as
that documentation is provided. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010)
10-8-3: HOW TO USE CHAPTER:
The village engineer shall be responsible for fulfilling all of the duties listed in section 10-8-4 of this chapter. To fulfill those duties, the village engineer first
should use the criteria listed in section 10-8-5, "Base Flood Elevation", of this chapter, to determine whether the development site is located within a
floodplain. Once it has been determined that a site is located within a floodplain, the village engineer must determine whether the development site is
within a flood fringe, a designated floodway, or within an SFHA or floodplain for which no floodway has been identified.
A. If the site is within a flood fringe, the village engineer shall require that the minimum requirements of section 10-8-6 of this chapter be met.
B. If the site is within a floodway, the village engineer shall require that the minimum requirements of section 10-8-7 of this chapter be met.
C. If the site is located within an SFHA or floodplain for which no detailed study has been completed and approved, the village engineer shall require that
the minimum requirements of section 10-8-8 of this chapter be met.
D. In addition, the general requirements of section 10-8-9 of this chapter shall be met for all developments meeting the requirements of section 10-8-6, 10-
8-7, or 10-8-8 of this chapter.
E. The village engineer shall assure that all subdivision proposals shall meet the requirements of section 10-8-10 of this chapter.
F. If a variance is to be granted for a proposal, the village engineer shall review the requirements of section 10-8-11 of this chapter to make sure they are
met. In addition, the village engineer shall complete all notification requirements.
G. In order to assure that property owners obtain permits as required in this chapter, the village engineer may take any and all actions as outlined in
section 10-8-13 of this chapter. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010)
10-8-4: DUTIES OF ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL(S):
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 381/498
The village engineer shall be responsible for the general administration and enforcement of this chapter which shall include the following. (Ord. 2010-27,
12-2-2010)
10-8-4-1: DETERMINING FLOODPLAIN DESIGNATION:
A. Check all new development sites to determine whether they are in a special flood hazard area (SFHA).
B. If they are in an SFHA, determine whether they are in a floodway, flood fringe or in a floodplain for which a detailed study has not been conducted and
which drains more than one square mile.
C. Check whether the development is potentially within an extended SFHA (with a drainage area less than 1 square mile), indicating that the development
would have adverse impacts regarding storage, conveyance, or inundation which would be the basis for the applicant being required to delineate the
floodplain and floodway and be subject to the remaining sections of this chapter. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010)
10-8-4-2: PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER REVIEW:
If the development site is within a floodway or in a floodplain for which a detailed study has not been conducted and which drains more than one square
mile, the permit shall be referred to a registered professional engineer (PE) under the employ or contract of the village for review to ensure that the
development meets the requirements of section 10-8-7 or 10-8-8 of this chapter. In the case of an appropriate use, the PE shall state in writing that the
development meets the requirements of section 10-8-7 of this chapter. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010)
10-8-4-3: DAM SAFETY REQUIREMENTS:
Ensure that an IDNR/OWR permit has been issued or a letter indicating no permit is required, if the proposed development activity includes construction of
a "dam" as defined in section 10-8-2 of this chapter. Regulated dams may include weirs, restrictive culverts or impoundment structures. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-
2-2010)
10-8-4-4: OTHER PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
Ensure that any and all required federal, state and local permits are received prior to the issuance of a floodplain development permit. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-
2010)
10-8-4-5: PLAN REVIEW AND PERMIT ISSUANCE:
Ensure that all development activities within the SFHAs of the jurisdiction of the village meet the requirements of this chapter, and issue a floodplain
development permit in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and other regulations of this community when the development meets the conditions
of this chapter. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010)
10-8-4-6: INSPECTION REVIEW:
Inspect all development projects before, during and after construction to assure proper elevation of the structure and to ensure compliance with the
provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010)
10-8-4-7: DAMAGE DETERMINATIONS:
Make damage determinations of all damaged buildings in the SFHA after a flood to determine substantially damaged structures which must comply with
section 10-8-9-3 of this chapter. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010)
10-8-4-8: ELEVATION AND FLOODPROOFING CERTIFICATES:
Maintain permit files including:
A. An elevation certificate certifying the elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) of a residential or nonresidential building subject to this chapter,
and/or
B. The elevation to which a nonresidential building has been floodproofed, using a floodproofing certificate, for all buildings subject to section 10-8-9 of this
chapter,
for public inspection and provide copies of same. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 382/498
10-8-4-9: RECORDS FOR PUBLIC INSPECTION:
Maintain for public inspection and furnish upon request base flood data, SFHA and designated floodway maps, copies of federal or state permit
documents, variance documentation, conditional letter of map revision, letter of map revision, letter of map amendment and "as built" elevation and
floodproofing and/or elevation certificates for all buildings constructed subject to this chapter. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010)
10-8-4-10: STATE PERMITS:
Ensure that construction authorization has been granted by IDNR/OWR, for all development projects subject to sections 10-8-7 and 10-8-8 of this chapter,
unless enforcement responsibility has been delegated to the village. However, the following review approvals are not delegated to the village and shall
require review or permits from IDNR/OWR:
A. Organizations which are exempt from this chapter, as per the Illinois Compiled Statutes;
B. IDNR/OWR projects, dams or impoundment structures as defined in section 10-8-2 of this chapter and all other state, federal or local unit of government
projects, including projects of the village and county, except for those projects meeting the requirements of subsection 10-8-7-2E of this chapter;
C. An engineer's determination that an existing bridge or culvert crossing is not a source of flood damage and the analysis indicating the proposed flood
profile, per subsection 10-8-7-2C5 of this chapter;
D. An engineer's analysis of the flood profile due to subsection 10-8-7-2C4 of this chapter;
E. Alternative transition sections and hydraulically equivalent compensatory storage as indicated in section 10-8-7-2 of this chapter;
F. Permit issuance of structures within, under, or over publicly navigable rivers, lakes and streams;
G. Any changes in the base flood elevation or floodway locations; and
H. Base flood elevation determinations where none now exist. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010)
10-8-4-11: COOPERATION WITH OTHER AGENCIES:
A. Cooperate with state and federal floodplain management agencies to improve base flood or 100-year frequency flood and floodway data and to improve
the administration of this chapter;
B. Submit data to IDNR/OWR and FEMA for proposed revisions of a regulatory map within six (6) months whenever a modification of the floodplain may
change the base flood elevation or result in a change to the floodplain map;
C. Submit reports as required for the national flood insurance program; and
D. Notify FEMA of any proposed amendments to this chapter. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010)
10-8-4-12: PROMULGATE REGULATIONS:
Promulgate rules and regulations as necessary to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter, subject however to the review and approval of
IDNR/OWR and FEMA for any ordinance changes. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010)
10-8-5: BASE FLOOD ELEVATION:
This chapter's protection standard is based on the flood insurance study for the village. If a base flood elevation or 100-year frequency flood elevation is
not available for a particular site, then the protection standard shall be according to the best existing data available in the Illinois state water survey's
floodplain information repository that has been approved by IDNR/OWR and FEMA. When a party disagrees with the best available data, he/she shall
finance the detailed engineering study needed to replace existing data with better data and submit it to IDNR/OWR and FEMA for approval prior to any
development of the site.
A. The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for the SFHAs of the south branch of Poplar Creek shall be as delineated on the 100-year flood
profiles in the flood insurance study of the village prepared by FEMA (or the department of housing and urban development) and dated August 19,
2008, and such amendments to such study and maps as may be prepared from time to time.
B. The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for the SFHAs of those parts of unincorporated Cook County that are within the one and one-half
(11/2) mile extraterritorial jurisdiction of the village or that may be annexed into the village shall be as delineated on the 100-year flood profiles in the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 383/498
flood insurance study of Cook County prepared by FEMA (or the department of housing and urban development) and dated August 19, 2008, and such
amendments or revisions to such study and maps as may be prepared from time to time.
C. The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for each SFHA delineated as an "AH zone" or "AO zone" shall be that elevation (or depth)
delineated on the flood insurance rate map of the village.
D. The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for each of the remaining SFHAs delineated as an "A zone" on the flood insurance rate map of the
village shall be according to the best existing data available in the Illinois state water survey floodplain information repository. When no base flood or
100-year frequency flood elevation exists, the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for a riverine SFHA shall be determined from a
backwater model, such as HEC-II, WSP-2, or a dynamic model such as HIP. The flood flows used in the hydraulic models shall be obtained from a
hydrologic model, such as HEC-I, TR-20, or HIP, or by techniques presented in various publications prepared by the United States geological survey
for estimating peak flood discharges. Along any watercourses draining more than one square mile, the above analyses shall be submitted to
IDNR/OWR for approval. Once approved it must be submitted to the Illinois state water survey floodplain information repository for filing. For a
nonriverine SFHA, the base flood elevation shall be the historic flood of record plus three feet (3'), unless calculated by a detailed engineering study
and approved by IDNR/OWR for drainage areas greater than one square mile. For an unmapped extended SFHA (with a drainage area less than 1
square mile) which has been identified by the village engineer pursuant to subsection 10-8-4-1C of this chapter, the base flood elevation shall be
determined by the applicant utilizing a method as approved in this subsection, with concurrence of the village engineer. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010)
10-8-6: OCCUPATION AND USE OF FLOOD FRINGE AREAS:
Development in and/or filling of the flood fringe will be permitted if protection is provided against the base flood or 100-year frequency flood by proper
elevation, and compensatory storage, and other applicable provisions of this chapter. No use will be permitted which adversely affects the capacity of
drainage facilities or systems. Developments located within the flood fringe shall meet the requirements of this section, along with the requirements of
section 10-8-9 of this chapter. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010)
10-8-6-1: DEVELOPMENT PERMIT:
No person, firm, corporation, or governmental body not exempted by law shall commence any development in the SFHA without first obtaining a
development permit from the village engineer.
A. The application shall be accompanied by drawings of the site, drawn to scale, showing property line dimensions and legal description for the property
and sealed by a licensed engineer, architect or land surveyor; existing grade elevations in MSL, 1929 adjustment datum or NGVD and all changes in
grade resulting from excavation or filling; the location and dimensions of all buildings and additions to buildings. For all proposed buildings, the
elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) and lowest adjacent grade shall be shown on the submitted plans and the development will be
subject to the requirements of section 10-8-9 of this chapter.
B. Any development located on land that can be shown to be higher than the base flood elevation of the current flood insurance rate map and which has
not been filled after the date of the site's first flood insurance rate map without a permit as required by this chapter is not in the SFHA and, therefore,
not subject to the requirements of this chapter. Conversely, any development located on land shown to be below the base flood elevation and
hydraulically connected, but shown on the current flood insurance rate map is subject to the provisions of this chapter. The village engineer shall
maintain documentation of the existing ground elevation at the development site and certification that this ground elevation existed prior to the date of
the site's first flood insurance rate map identification.
C. A soil erosion and sediment control plan for disturbed areas shall be submitted. This plan shall include a description of the sequence of grading
activities and the temporary sediment and erosion control measures to be implemented to mitigate their effects. This plan shall also include a
description of final stabilization and revegetation measures, and the identification of a responsible party to ensure postconstruction maintenance.
D. The village engineer shall be responsible for obtaining from the applicant copies of all other federal, state, and local permits, approvals or permit not
required letters that may be required for this type of activity. The village engineer shall not issue a permit unless all other federal, state, and local
permits have been obtained.
E. No construction shall be commenced on any lot which is in an identified SFHA. All such lots shall be reconfigured to be completely out of the SFHA. A
FEMA letter of map revision or map amendment shall be received by the village engineer prior to any building construction on such lot. A conditional
letter of map revision shall be received before any work of any kind is permitted on the lot. The lowest finished floor of any building on any such lot shall
be a minimum of two feet (2') above the BFE. The developer or subdivider of such lot shall post a letter of credit in the amount of one hundred twenty
five percent (125%) of the estimated cost of compliance with and completion of the FEMA process. The village engineer shall determine the amount of
the required guarantee. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010)
10-8-6-2: PREVENTING INCREASED DAMAGES:
No development in the flood fringe shall create a threat to public health and safety.
A. Elevation Of Site: If fill is being used to elevate the site above the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation, the applicant shall submit sufficient
data and obtain a letter of map revision (LOMR) from FEMA for the purpose of removing the site from the floodplain.
B. Compensatory Storage: Whenever any portion of a floodplain is authorized for use, the volume of space which will be occupied by the authorized fill or
structure below the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation shall be compensated for and balanced by a hydraulically equivalent volume of
excavation taken from below the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation. The excavation volume shall be at least equal to 1.5 times the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 384/498
volume of storage lost due to the fill or structure. In the case of streams and watercourses, such excavation shall be made opposite or adjacent to the
areas so filled or occupied. All floodplain storage lost below the existing 10-year flood elevation shall be replaced below the proposed 10-year flood
elevation. All floodplain storage lost above the existing 10-year flood elevation shall be replaced above the proposed 10-year flood elevation. All such
excavations shall be constructed to drain freely and openly to the watercourse. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010)
10-8-7: OCCUPATION AND USE OF IDENTIFIED FLOODWAYS:
This section applies to proposed development, redevelopment, site modification or building modification within a designated floodway. The designated
floodway for the south branch of Poplar Creek shall be as delineated on the designated floodway maps designated by IDNR/OWR according to and
referenced in section 10-8-2 of this chapter. Only those uses and structures will be permitted which meet the criteria in this section. All floodway
modifications shall be the minimum necessary to accomplish the purpose of the project. The development shall also meet the requirements of section 10-
8-9 of this chapter. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010)
10-8-7-1: DEVELOPMENT PERMIT:
No person, firm, corporation or governmental body not exempted by state law shall commence any development in a floodway without first obtaining a
development permit from the village engineer and IDNR/OWR.
A. Application for a development permit shall be made on a form provided by the village engineer. The application shall include the following information:
1. Name and address of applicant.
2. Site location (including legal description) of the property, drawn to scale, on the designated floodway map, indicating whether it is proposed to be in
an incorporated or unincorporated area.
3. Name of stream or body of water affected.
4. Description of proposed activity.
5. Statement of purpose of proposed activity.
6. Anticipated dates of initiation and completion of activity.
7. Name and mailing address of the owner of the subject property if different from the applicant.
8. Signature of the applicant or the applicant's agent.
9. If the applicant is a corporation, the president or other authorized officer shall sign the application form.
10. If the applicant is a partnership, each partner shall sign the application form.
11. If the applicant is a land trust, the trust officer shall sign the name of the trustee by him (her) as trust officer. A disclosure affidavit shall be filed with
the application, identifying each beneficiary of the trust by name and address and defining the respective interest therein.
12. Plans of the proposed activity shall be provided which include, as a minimum:
a. A vicinity map showing the site of the activity, name of the waterway, boundary lines, names of roads in the vicinity of the site, graphic or numerical
scale, and north arrow;
b. A plan view of the project and engineering study each showing existing and proposed conditions including principal dimensions of the structure or
work, elevations in mean sea level (1929 adjustment) datum or NGVD (North American vertical datum), adjacent property lines and ownership,
drainage and flood control easements, location of any channels and any existing or future access roads, distance between proposed activity and
navigation channel (when the proposed construction is near a commercially navigable body of water), designated floodway limit, floodplain limit,
specifications and dimensions of any proposed channel modifications, location and orientation of cross sections, north arrow, and a graphic or
numerical scale;
c. Cross section views of the project and engineering study each showing existing and proposed conditions including principal dimensions of the
work as shown in plan view, existing and proposed elevations, normal water elevation, 10-year frequency flood elevation, 100-year frequency flood
elevation, and graphic or numerical scales (horizontal and vertical);
d. A soil erosion and sediment control plan for disturbed areas. This plan shall include a description of the sequence of grading activities and the
temporary sediment and erosion control measures to be implemented to mitigate their effects. This plan shall also include a description of final
stabilization and revegetation measures, and the identification of a responsible party to ensure postconstruction maintenance; and
e. A copy of the designated floodway map, marked to reflect any proposed change in the designated floodway location.
13. Any and all other federal, state, and local permits or approval letters that may be required for this type of development.
14. Engineering calculations and supporting data shall be submitted showing that the proposed work will meet the permit criteria of section 10-8-7-2 of
this chapter.
15. If the designated floodway delineation, base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation will change due to the proposed project, the application will
not be considered complete until IDNR/OWR has indicated conditional approval of the designated floodway map change. No structures may be built
until a letter of map revision has been approved by FEMA.
16. The application for a structure shall be accompanied by drawings of the site, drawn to scale showing property line dimensions and existing ground
elevations and all changes in grade resulting from any proposed excavation or filling, and floodplain and floodway limits; sealed by a registered
professional engineer, licensed architect or registered land surveyor; the location and dimensions of all buildings and additions to buildings; and the
elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) of all proposed buildings subject to the requirements of section 10-8-9 of this chapter.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 385/498
17. If the proposed project involves a channel modification, the applicant shall submit the following information:
a. A discussion of the purpose of and need for the proposed work;
b. A discussion of the feasibility of using alternative locations or methods to accomplish the purpose of the proposed work;
c. An analysis of the extent and permanence of the impacts each feasible alternative identified in this section 10-8-7 would have on the physical and
biological conditions of the body of water affected; and
d. An analysis of the impacts of the proposed project, considering cumulative effects on the physical and biological conditions of the body of water
affected.
B. The village engineer shall be responsible for obtaining from the applicant copies of all other federal, state, and local permits and approvals that may be
required for this type of activity. The village engineer shall not issue the development permit unless all required federal and state permits have been
obtained. A registered professional engineer, under the employ or contract of the village shall review and approve applications reviewed under this
section. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010)
10-8-7-2: PREVENTING INCREASED DAMAGES; LIST OF APPROPRIATE USES:
The only development in a floodway which will be allowed are appropriate uses, which will not cause a rise in the base flood elevation, and which will not
create a damaging or potentially damaging increase in flood heights or velocity or be a threat to public health and safety and welfare or impair the natural
hydrologic and hydraulic functions of the floodway or channel, or permanently impair existing water quality or aquatic habitat. Construction impacts shall be
minimized by appropriate mitigation methods as called for in this chapter. Only those appropriate uses listed in 17 Illinois administrative code part 3708 will
be allowed. The approved appropriate uses are as follows:
A. Uses Designated:
1. Flood control structures, dikes, dams and other public works or private improvements relating to the control of drainage, flooding, erosion, or water
quality or habitat for fish and wildlife;
2. Structures or facilities relating to the use of, or requiring access to, the water or shoreline, such as pumping and treatment facilities, and facilities and
improvements related to recreational boating, commercial shipping and other functionally water dependent uses;
3. Storm and sanitary sewer outfalls;
4. Underground and overhead utilities;
5. Recreational facilities such as playing fields and trail systems, including any related fencing (at least 50 percent open when viewed from any one
direction) built parallel to the direction of flood flows, and including open air pavilions and toilet facilities (4 stall maximum) that will not block flood
flows nor reduce floodway storage;
6. Bridges, culverts, roadways, sidewalks, railways, runways and taxiways and any modification thereto;
7. Designated floodway regrading, without fill, to create a positive nonerosive slope toward a watercourse;
8. Floodproofing activities to protect previously existing lawful structures including the construction of watertight window wells, elevating structures, or
construction of floodwalls around residential, commercial or industrial principal structures where the outside toe of the floodwall shall be no more than
ten feet (10') away from the exterior wall of the existing structure, and, which are not considered substantial improvements to the structure;
9. The replacement, reconstruction, or repair of a damaged building, provided that the outside dimensions are not increased, and if the building was
damaged to fifty percent (50%) or more of the market value before the damage occurred, the building will be protected from flooding to the flood
protection elevation.
B. Nonappropriate Uses: Appropriate uses do not include the construction or placement of any new structures, fill, building additions, buildings on stilts,
excavation or channel modifications done to accommodate otherwise nonappropriate uses in the floodway, fencing (including landscaping or planting
designed to act as a fence) and storage of materials except as specifically defined above as an appropriate use.
C. Engineering And Mitigation Criteria: Within the designated floodway as identified on the floodway maps designated by IDNR/OWR, the construction of
an appropriate use will be considered permissible; provided, that the proposed project meets the following engineering and mitigation criteria and is so
stated in writing with supporting plans, calculations and data by a registered professional engineer and provided that any structure meets the protection
requirements of section 10-8-9 of this chapter:
1. Preservation Of Flood Conveyance So As Not To Increase Flood Stages Upstream: For appropriate uses other than bridge or culvert crossings, on
stream structures or dams, all effective designated floodway conveyance lost due to the project will be replaced for all flood events up to and
including the 100-year frequency flood. In calculating effective designated floodway conveyance, the following factors shall be taken into
consideration:
a. "K" = (1.486/n)(AR2/3)
where "n" is Manning's roughness factor, "A" is the effective flow area of the cross section, and "R" is the ratio of the area to the wetted perimeter.
(See "Open Channel Hydraulics", Ven Te Chow, 1959, McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York.)
b. The same Manning's "n" value shall be used for both existing and proposed conditions unless a recorded maintenance agreement with a federal,
state, or local unit of government can assure the proposed conditions will be maintained or the land cover is changing from a vegetative to a
nonvegetative land cover.
c. Transition sections shall be provided and used in calculations of effective designated floodway conveyance. The following expansion and
contraction ratios shall be used unless an applicant's engineer can prove to IDNR/OWR through engineering calculations or model tests that more
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 386/498
abrupt transitions may be used with the same efficiency:
(1) When water is flowing from a narrow section to a wider section, the water should be assumed to expand no faster than at a rate of one foot (1')
horizontal for every four feet (4') of the flooded stream's length.
(2) When water is flowing from a wide section to a narrow section, the water should be assumed to contract no faster than at a rate of one foot (1')
horizontal for every one foot (1') of the flooded stream's length.
(3) When expanding or contracting flows in a vertical direction, a minimum of one foot (1') vertical transition for every ten feet (10') of stream length
shall be used.
(4) Transition sections shall be provided between cross sections with rapid expansions and contractions and when meeting the designated
floodway delineation on adjacent properties.
(5) All cross sections used in the calculations shall be located perpendicular to flood flows.
2. Preservation Of Floodway Storage So As Not To Increase Downstream Flooding: Compensatory storage shall be provided for any designated
floodway storage lost due to the proposed work from the volume of fill or structures placed and the impact of any related flood control projects.
Compensatory storage for fill or structures shall be equal to at least 1.5 times the volume of floodplain storage lost. Artificially created storage lost
due to a reduction in head loss behind a bridge shall not be required to be replaced. The compensatory designated floodway storage shall be placed
between the proposed normal water elevation and the proposed 100-year flood elevation. All designated floodway storage lost below the existing 10-
year flood elevation shall be replaced below the proposed 10-year flood elevation. All designated floodway storage lost above the existing 10-year
flood elevation shall be replaced above the proposed 10-year flood elevation. All such excavations shall be constructed to drain freely and openly to
the watercourse. If the compensatory storage will not be placed at the location of the proposed construction, the applicant's engineer shall
demonstrate to IDNR/OWR through a determination of flood discharges and water surface elevations that the compensatory storage is hydraulically
equivalent. There shall be no reduction in floodway surface area as a result of a floodway modification, unless such modification is necessary to
reduce flooding at existing structure.
3. Preservation Of Floodway Velocities So As Not To Increase Stream Erosion Or Flood Heights: For all appropriate uses, except bridges or culverts or
on stream structures, the proposed work will not result in an increase in the average channel or designated floodway velocities or stage for all flood
events up to and including the 100-year frequency event. In the case of bridges or culverts or on stream structures built for the purpose of backing up
water in the stream during normal or flood flows, velocities may be increased at the structure site if scour, erosion and sedimentation will be avoided
by the use of riprap or other design measures.
4. Construction Of New Bridges Or Culvert Crossings And Roadway Approaches: The proposed structure shall not result in an increase of upstream
flood stages greater than 0.1 foot when compared to the existing conditions for all flood events up to and including the 100-year frequency event; or
the upstream flood stage increases will be contained within the channel banks (or within existing vertical extensions of the channel banks) such as
within the design protection grade of existing levees or floodwalls or within recorded flood easements. If the proposed construction will increase
upstream flood stages greater than 0.1 foot, the developer must contact IDNR/OWR to obtain a permit for a dam or waiver.
a. The engineering analysis of upstream flood stages must be calculated using the flood study flows, and corresponding flood elevations for tailwater
conditions for the flood study specified. Culverts must be analyzed using the U.S. DOT, FHWA hydraulic chart for the selection of highway culverts.
Bridges must be analyzed using the U.S. DOT/federal highway administration hydraulics of bridge waterways calculation procedures.
b. Lost floodway storage must be compensated for in accordance with this chapter.
c. Velocity increases must be mitigated per this section 10-8-7.
d. If the crossing is proposed over a public water that is used for recreational or commercial navigation, an IDNR/OWR permit must be received.
e. The hydraulic analysis for the backwater caused by the bridge showing the existing condition and proposed regulatory profile must be submitted to
IDNR/OWR for concurrence that a CLOMR is not required by this section.
f. All excavations for the construction of the crossing shall be designed per this section.
5. Reconstruction Or Modification Of Existing Bridges, Culverts, And Approval Roads:
a. The bridge or culvert and roadway approach reconstruction or modification shall be constructed with no more than 0.1 foot increase in backwater
over the existing flood profile for all flood frequencies up to and including the 100-year event, if the existing structure is not a source of flood
damage.
b. If the existing bridge or culvert and roadway approach is a source of flood damage to buildings or structures in the upstream floodplain, the
applicant's engineer shall evaluate the feasibility of redesigning the structure to reduce the existing backwater, taking into consideration the effects
on flood stages on upstream and downstream properties.
c. The determination as to whether or not the existing crossing is a source of flood damage and should be redesigned must be prepared in
accordance with 17 Illinois administrative code part 3708 (floodway construction in northeastern Illinois) and submitted to IDNR/OWR for review
and concurrence before a permit is issued.
6. On Stream Structures Built For The Purpose Of Backing Up Water: Any increase in upstream flood stages greater than 0.0 feet when compared to
the existing conditions, for all flood events up to and including the 100-year frequency event shall be contained within the channel banks (or within
existing vertical extensions of the channel banks) such as within the design protection grade of existing levees or floodwalls or within recorded flood
easements. A permit or letter indicating a permit is not required must be obtained from IDNR/OWR for any structure built for the purpose of backing
up water in the stream during normal or flood flow. All dams and impoundment structures as defined in section 10-8-2 of this chapter shall meet the
permitting requirements of 17 Illinois administrative code part 3702 (construction and maintenance of dams). If the proposed activity involves a
modification of the channel or floodway to accommodate an impoundment, it shall be demonstrated that:
a. The impoundment is determined to be in the public interest by providing flood control, public recreation, or regional stormwater detention;
b. The impoundment will not prevent the migration of indigenous fish species, which require access to upstream areas as part of their life cycle, such
as for spawning;
c. The impoundment will not cause or contribute to degraded water quality or habitat conditions. Impoundment design should include gradual bank
slopes, appropriate bank stabilization measures, and a presedimentation basin;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 387/498
d. A nonpoint source control plan has been implemented in the upstream watershed to control the effects of sediment runoff as well as minimize the
input of nutrients, oil and grease, metals, and other pollutants. If there is more than one municipality in the upstream watershed, the municipality in
which the impoundment is constructed should coordinate with upstream municipalities to ensure comprehensive watershed control;
e. The project otherwise complies with the requirements of this section 10-8-7.
7. Floodproofing Of Existing Habitable, Residential And Commercial Structures: If construction is required beyond the outside dimensions of the
existing building, the outside perimeter of the floodproofing construction shall be placed no further than ten feet (10') from the outside of the building.
Compensation of lost storage and conveyance will not be required for floodproofing activities.
8. Excavation In Floodway: When excavation is proposed in the design of bridges and culvert openings, including the modifications to and replacement
of existing bridge and culvert structures, or to compensate for lost conveyance or other appropriate uses, transition sections shall be provided for the
excavation. The following expansion and contraction ratios shall be used unless an applicant's engineer can prove to IDNR/OWR through
engineering calculations or model tests that more abrupt transitions may be used with the same efficiency:
a. When water is flowing from a narrow section to a wider section, the water should be assumed to expand no faster than at a rate of one foot (1')
horizontal for every four feet (4') of the flooded stream's length;
b. When water is flowing from a wide section to a narrow section, the water should be assumed to contract no faster than at a rate of one foot (1')
horizontal for every one foot (1') of the flooded stream's length;
c. When expanding or contracting flows in a vertical direction, a minimum of one foot (1') vertical transition for every ten feet (10') of stream length
shall be used; and
d. Erosion/scour protection shall be provided inland upstream and downstream of the transition sections.
9. Channel Modification: If the proposed activity involves a channel modification, it shall be demonstrated that:
a. There are no practicable alternatives to the activity which would accomplish its purpose with less impact to the natural conditions of the body of
water affected. Possible alternatives include levees, bank stabilization, floodproofing of existing structures, removal of structures from the
floodplain, clearing the channel, high flow channel, or the establishment of a stream side buffer strip or green belt. Channel modification is
acceptable if the purpose is to restore natural conditions and improve water quality and fish and wildlife habitat;
b. Water quality, habitat, and other natural functions would be significantly improved by the modification and no significant habitat area may be
destroyed, or the impacts are offset by the replacement of an equivalent degree of natural resource values;
c. The activity has been planned and designed and will be constructed in a way which will minimize its adverse impacts on the natural conditions of
the body of water affected, consistent with the following criteria:
(1) The physical characteristics of the modified channel shall match as closely as possible those of the existing channel in length, cross section,
slope and sinuosity. If the existing channel has been previously modified, restoration of more natural physical conditions should be incorporated
into channel modification design, where practical.
(2) Hydraulically effective transitions shall be provided at both the upstream and downstream ends of the project, designed such that they will
prevent erosion.
(3) One sided construction of a channel shall be used when feasible. Removal of streamside (riparian) vegetation should be limited to one side of
the channel, where possible, to preserve the shading and stabilization effects of the vegetation.
(4) Clearing of stabilizing vegetation shall be limited to that which is essential for construction of the channel.
(5) Channel banks shall be constructed with a side slope no steeper than three to one (3:1) horizontal to vertical, wherever practicable. Native
vegetation and gradual side slopes are the preferred methods for bank stabilization. Where high velocities or sharp bends necessitate the use of
alternative stabilization measures, soil bioengineering techniques, natural rock or riprap are preferred approaches. Artificial materials such as
concrete, gabions, or construction rubble should be avoided unless there are no practicable alternatives.
(6) All disturbed areas associated with the modification shall be seeded or otherwise stabilized as soon as possible upon completion of
construction. Erosion blanket or an equivalent material shall be required to stabilize disturbed channel banks prior to establishment of the
vegetative cover.
(7) If the existing channel contains considerable bottom diversity such as deep pools, riffles, and other similar features, such features shall be
provided in the new channel. Spawning and nesting areas and flow characteristics compatible with fish habitat shall also be established, where
appropriate.
(8) A sediment basin shall be installed at the downstream end of the modification to reduce sedimentation and degradation of downstream water
quality.
(9) New or relocated channels should be built in the dry and all items of construction, including vegetation, should be completed prior to diversion
of water into the new channel.
(10) There shall be no increases in stage or velocity as the channel enters or leaves the project site for any frequency flood unless necessitated by
a public flood control project or unless such an increase is justified as part of a habitat improvement or erosion control project.
(11) Unless the modification is for a public flood control project, there shall be no reduction in the volume of floodwater storage outside the
floodway as a result of the modification; and
d. The project otherwise complies with the requirements of this section 10-8-7.
10. Seeding And Stabilization Plan: For all activities located in a floodway, a seeding and stabilization plan shall be submitted by the applicant.
11. Soil Erosion And Sedimentation Measures: For all activities in the floodway, including grading, filling, and excavation, in which there is potential for
erosion of exposed soil, soil erosion and sedimentation control measures shall be employed consistent with the following criteria:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 388/498
a. The construction area shall be minimized to preserve the maximum vegetation possible. Construction shall be scheduled to minimize the time soil
is exposed and unprotected. In no case shall the existing natural vegetation be destroyed, removed, or disturbed more than fifteen (15) days prior
to the initiation of improvements.
b. Temporary and/or permanent soil stabilization shall be applied to denuded areas as soon as possible. As a minimum, soil stabilization shall be
provided within fifteen (15) days after final grade is reached on any portion of the site, and within fifteen (15) days to denuded areas which may not
be at final grade but will remain undisturbed for longer than sixty (60) days.
c. Sedimentation control measures shall be installed before any significant grading or filling is initiated on the site to prevent the movement of eroded
sediments off site or into the channel. Potential sediment control devices include filter fences, straw bale fences, check dams, diversion ditches,
and sediment traps and basins.
d. A vegetated buffer strip of at least twenty five feet (25') in width shall be preserved and/or reestablished, where possible, along existing channels.
Construction vehicle use of channels shall be minimized. Temporary stream crossings shall be constructed, where necessary, to minimize erosion.
Necessary construction in or along channels shall be restabilized immediately.
e. Soil erosion and sedimentation control measures shall be designed and implemented consistent with "Procedures And Standards For Urban Soil
Erosion And Sedimentation Control In Illinois" (1988) also known as the "Green Book" and "The Illinois Urban Manual" (NRCS, 1995).
12. Public Flood Control Projects: For public flood control projects, the permitting requirements of this section will be considered met if the applicant
can demonstrate to IDNR/OWR through hydraulic and hydrologic calculations that the proposed project will not singularly or cumulatively result in
increased flood heights outside the project right of way or easements for all flood events up to and including the 100-year frequency event.
13. General Criteria For Analysis Of Flood Elevations:
a. The flood profiles, flows and floodway data in the designated floodway study, referenced in section 10-8-5 of this chapter, must be used for
analysis of the base conditions. If the study data appears to be in error or conditions have changed, IDNR/OWR shall be contacted for approval
and concurrence on the appropriate base conditions data to use.
b. If the 100-year designated floodway elevation at the site of the proposed construction is affected by backwater from a downstream receiving
stream with a larger drainage area, the proposed construction shall be shown to meet the requirements of this section for the 100-year frequency
flood elevations of the designated floodway conditions and conditions with the receiving stream at normal water elevations.
c. If the applicant learns from IDNR/OWR, local governments, or a private owner that a downstream restrictive bridge or culvert is scheduled to be
removed, reconstructed, modified, or a regional flood control project is scheduled to be built, removed, constructed or modified within the next five
(5) years, the proposed construction shall be analyzed and shown to meet the requirements of this section for both the existing conditions and the
expected flood profile conditions when the bridge, culvert or flood control project is built.
14. Conditional Letter Of Map Revision: If the appropriate use would result in a change in the designated floodway location or the 100-year frequency
flood elevation, the applicant shall submit to IDNR/OWR and FEMA all information, calculations and documents necessary to be issued a conditional
designated floodway map revision and receive from IDNR/OWR a conditional concurrence of the designated floodway change before a permit is
issued. The final designated floodway map will not be changed by FEMA until as built plans or record drawings of initial filling, grading, dredging, or
excavating activities are submitted and accepted by FEMA and IDNR/OWR. In the case of nongovernment projects, the municipality in incorporated
areas and the county in unincorporated areas shall concur with the proposed conditional designated floodway map revision before IDNR/OWR
approval can be given. No filling, grading, dredging or excavating shall take place until a conditional approval is issued. After initial filling, grading,
dredging or excavating, no activities shall take place until a final letter of map revision (LOMR) is issued by FEMA with concurrence from
IDNR/OWR.
15. Professional Engineer's Supervision: All engineering analyses shall be performed by or under the supervision of a registered professional engineer.
16. Construction In Floodway Criteria: For all activities in the floodway involving construction within twenty five feet (25') of the channel, the following
criteria shall be met:
a. A natural vegetation buffer strip shall be preserved within at least twenty five feet (25') of the ordinary high water mark of the channel.
b. Where it is impossible to protect this buffer strip during the construction of an appropriate use, a vegetated buffer strip shall be established upon
completion of construction.
17. Proceed With Construction: After receipt of conditional approval of the designated floodway change and issuance of a permit and a conditional
letter of map revision, construction as necessary to change the floodway designation may proceed but no buildings or structures or other
construction that is not an appropriate use may be placed in that area until the designated floodway map is changed and a final letter of map revision
is received. The designated floodway map will be revised upon acceptance and concurrence by IDNR/OWR and FEMA of the "as built" plans.
D. Development Activities In Delegated Communities Requiring State Review: For those projects listed below located in a designated floodway, the
following criteria shall be submitted to IDNR/OWR for their review and concurrence and/or permit prior to the issuance of a permit by a community or
county delegated state permitting authority in the floodway:
1. An engineer's analysis of the flood profile due to a proposed bridge pursuant to this section.
2. An engineer's determination that an existing bridge or culvert crossing is not a source of flood damage and the analysis indicating the proposed flood
profile, pursuant to this section.
3. Alternative transition sections and hydraulically equivalent storage pursuant to this section.
4. The construction of any IDNR/OWR projects, dams (as defined in section 10-8-2 of this chapter) and all other state, federal, or local units of
government projects, including projects of the municipality or county.
5. An engineer's determination that a proposed bridge affected by backwater from a downstream receiving stream may be built with a smaller opening.
6. Projects which revise or establish the floodway and/or flood profiles.
7. Projects in public bodies of water.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 389/498
E. Other Permits: In addition to the other requirements of this chapter, a development permit for a site located in a floodway shall not be issued unless the
applicant first obtains a permit or written documentation that a permit is not required from IDNR/OWR, issued pursuant to 615 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/5 et seq. No permit from IDNR/OWR shall be required if IDNR/OWR has delegated this responsibility to the village.
F. Permits For Dams: Any work involving the construction, modification or removal of a "dam" as defined in section 10-8-2 of this chapter per 17 Illinois
administrative code part 3702 (rules for construction of dams) shall obtain an IDNR/OWR permit prior to the start of construction of a dam. If the village
engineer finds a dam that does not have an IDNR/OWR permit, the village engineer shall immediately notify the IDNR/OWR Bartlett office. If the village
engineer finds a dam which is believed to be in unsafe condition, the village engineer shall immediately notify the owner of the dam, the IDNR/OWR
Bartlett office, and the Illinois emergency management agency (IEMA).
G. Activities That Do Not Require A Registered Professional Engineer's Review: The following activities may be permitted without a registered professional
engineer's review. Such activities shall still meet the other requirements of this chapter, including the mitigation requirements.
1. Underground and overhead utilities that:
a. Do not result in any increase in existing ground elevations, or
b. Do not require the placement of aboveground structures in the floodway, or
c. In the case of underground stream crossings, the top of the pipe or encasement is buried a minimum of three feet (3') below the existing
streambed, and
d. Overhead utility lines shall be constructed above the estimated 100-year frequency flood elevation or attached above the low chord of an existing
bridge (with the permission of the bridge owner). No supporting towers shall be placed in the watercourse and shall be designed so as to not catch
debris.
e. Disturbance of streamside vegetation shall be kept to a minimum during construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation. All disturbed floodway
areas, including the stream banks shall be restored to their original contours and seeded or otherwise stabilized upon completion of construction.
f. A utility crossing carrying material which may cause water pollution as defined by the environmental protection act 415 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5
(1992 state bar edition) shall be provided with shutoff valves on each side of the body of water to be crossed.
g. All Illinois commerce commission, national electric safety codes, and federal requirements for clearance must be met.
2. Storm and sanitary sewer outfalls that:
a. Do not extend riverward or lakeward of the existing adjacent natural bank slope; and
b. Do not result in an increase in ground elevation; and
c. Are designed so as not to cause stream erosion at the outfall location.
3. Construction of sidewalks, athletic fields (excluding fences), properly anchored playground equipment and patios at grade.
4. Construction of shoreline and streambank protection that:
a. Does not exceed one thousand feet (1,000') in length.
b. Materials are not placed higher than the existing top of bank.
c. Materials are placed so as not to reduce the cross sectional area of the stream channel or bank of the lake.
d. Stabilization utilizing native vegetation and gradual side slopes are the preferred mitigation methods for existing erosion problems. Where high
channel velocities, sharp bends or wave action necessitate the use of alternative stabilization measures, soil bioengineering techniques, natural
rock or riprap are preferred materials. Artificial materials such as concrete, construction rubble, and gabions should be avoided unless there are no
practicable alternatives.
5. Temporary stream crossings in which:
a. The approach rods will be one-half foot (1/2') or less above natural grade.
b. The crossing will allow stream flow to pass without backing up the water above the stream bank vegetation line or above any drainage tile or
outfall invert.
c. The top of the roadway fill in the channel will be at least two feet (2') below the top of the lowest bank. Any fill in the channel shall be nonerosive
material, such as riprap or gravel.
d. All disturbed stream banks will be seeded or otherwise stabilized as soon as possible upon installation and again upon removal of construction.
e. The access road and temporary crossings will be removed within one year after authorization. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010)
10-8-8: OCCUPATION AND USE OF SFHA WHERE FLOODWAYS NOT IDENTIFIED:
In SFHA or floodplains (including AE, AH, AO and unnumbered A zones), where no floodways have been identified and no base flood or 100-year
frequency flood elevations have been established by FEMA, and draining more than a square mile, no development shall be permitted unless the
cumulative effect of the proposals, when combined with all other existing and anticipated uses and structures, shall not significantly impede or increase the
flow and passage of the floodwaters nor significantly increase the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 390/498
10-8-8-1: DEVELOPMENT PERMIT:
No person, firm, corporation, or governmental body, not exempted by state law, shall commence any development in an SFHA or floodplain without first
obtaining a development permit from the village engineer.
Application for a development permit shall be made on a form provided by the village engineer. The application shall be accompanied by drawings of the
site, drawn to scale showing property line dimensions; and existing grade elevations and all changes in grade resulting from excavation or filling, sealed by
a licensed engineer, architect or surveyor; the location and dimensions of all buildings and additions to buildings; and the elevations of the lowest floor
(including basement) of all proposed buildings subject to the requirements of section 10-8-9 of this chapter.
The application for a development permit shall also include the following information:
A. A detailed description of the proposed activity, its purpose, and intended use.
B. Site location (including legal description) of the property, drawn to scale, on the designated floodway maps, indicating whether it is proposed to be in an
incorporated or unincorporated area.
C. Anticipated dates of initiation and completion of activity.
D. Plans of the proposed activity shall be provided which include, as a minimum:
1. A vicinity map showing the site of the activity, name of the waterway, boundary lines, names of roads in the vicinity of the site, graphic or numerical
scale, and north arrow;
2. A plan view of the project and engineering study each showing existing and proposed conditions including principal dimensions of the structure or
work, elevations in mean sea level (1929 adjustment) datum or NGVD, adjacent property lines and ownership, drainage and flood control
easements, distance between proposed activity and navigation channel (when the proposed construction is near a commercially navigable body of
water), floodplain limit, location and orientation of cross sections, north arrow, and a graphical or numerical scale;
3. Cross section views of the project perpendicular to the flow of floodwater and engineering study each showing existing and proposed conditions
including principal dimensions of the work as shown in plan view, existing and proposed elevations, normal water elevation, 10-year frequency flood
elevation, 100-year frequency flood elevation, and graphical or numerical scales (horizontal and vertical); and
4. A soil erosion and sedimentation control plan for disturbed areas. This plan shall include a description of the sequence of grading activities and the
temporary sediment and erosion control measures to be implemented to mitigate their effects. This plan shall also include a description of final
stabilization and revegetation measures, and the identification of a responsible party to ensure postconstruction maintenance.
E. Engineering calculations and supporting data shall be submitted showing that the proposed work will meet the criteria of section 10-8-8-2 of this
chapter.
F. Any and all other federal, state, and local permits or approvals that may be required for this type of development.
G. Based on the best available existing data according to the Illinois state water survey's floodplain information repository, the village engineer shall
compare the elevation of the site to the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation. Should no elevation information exist for the site, the
developer's engineer shall calculate the elevation according to subsection 10-8-5D of this chapter. Any development located on land that can be shown
to have been higher than the base flood elevation of the current flood insurance rate map identification is not in the SFHA and, therefore, not subject to
the requirements of this chapter. The village engineer shall maintain documentation of the existing ground elevation at the development site and
certification that this ground elevation existed prior to the date of the site's first flood insurance rate map identification.
H. The village engineer shall be responsible for obtaining from the applicant copies of all other federal, state, and local permits, approvals or permit not
required letters that may be required for this type of activity. The village engineer shall not issue the development permit unless all required federal,
state, and local permits have been obtained. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010)
10-8-8-2: PREVENTING INCREASED DAMAGES:
No development in the SFHA, where a floodway has not been determined shall create a damaging or potentially damaging increase in flood heights or
velocity or threat to public health, safety and welfare or impair the natural hydrologic and hydraulic functions of the floodway or channel, or impair existing
water quality or aquatic habitat. Construction impacts shall be minimized by appropriate mitigation methods as called for in this chapter.
A. Applicable Standards: Within all riverine SFHAs where the floodway has not been determined, the following standards shall apply:
1. The developer shall have a registered professional engineer state in writing and show through supporting plans, calculations, and data that the
project meets the engineering requirements of section 10-8-7-2 of this chapter for the entire floodplain as calculated under the provisions of
subsection 10-8-5D of this chapter. As an alternative, the developer should have an engineering study performed to determine a floodway and
submit that engineering study to IDNR/OWR for acceptance as a designated floodway. Upon acceptance of the floodway by IDNR/OWR, the
developer shall then demonstrate that the project meets the requirements of section 10-8-7 of this chapter for the designated floodway. The floodway
shall be defined according to the definition in section 10-8-2 of this chapter.
2. A development permit shall not be issued unless the applicant first obtains a permit from IDNR/OWR or written documentation that a permit is not
required from IDNR/OWR.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 391/498
3. No permit from IDNR/OWR shall be required if IDNR/OWR has delegated permit responsibility to the village per 17 Illinois administrative code, 3708
for designated floodways.
4. Any work involving the construction, modification or removal of a "dam" as defined in section 10-8-2 of this chapter per 17 Illinois administrative code
part 3702 (rules for construction of dams) shall obtain an IDNR/OWR permit prior to the start of construction of a dam. If the village engineer finds a
dam that does not have an IDNR/OWR permit, the village engineer shall immediately notify the IDNR/OWR Bartlett office. If the village engineer finds
a dam which is believed to be in an unsafe condition, the village engineer shall immediately notify the owner of the dam, the IDNR/OWR Bartlett
office, and the Illinois emergency management agency (IEMA).
5. The following activities may be permitted without a registered professional engineer's review or calculation of a base flood elevation and designated
floodway. Such activities shall still meet the other requirements of this chapter:
a. Underground and overhead utilities that:
(1) Do not result in any increase in existing ground elevations.
(2) Do not require the placement of aboveground structures in the floodway.
(3) In the case of underground stream crossings, the top of the pipe or encasement is buried a minimum of three feet (3') below the existing
streambed.
(4) Overhead utility lines shall be constructed above the estimated 100-year frequency flood elevation or attached above the low chord of an
existing bridge (with the permission of the bridge owner). No supporting towers shall be placed in the watercourse and shall be designed so as
to not catch debris.
(5) Disturbance of streamside vegetation shall be kept to a minimum during construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation.
(6) A utility crossing carrying material which may cause water pollution as defined by the environmental protection act 415 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5 (1992 state bar edition) shall be provided with shutoff valves on each side of the body of water to be crossed.
(7) All Illinois commerce commission, national electric safety codes, and federal requirements for clearance must be met.
b. Storm and sanitary sewer outfalls that:
(1) Do not extend riverward or lakeward of the existing adjacent natural bank slope, and
(2) Do not result in an increase in ground elevation, and
(3) Are designed so as not to cause stream bank erosion at the outfall location.
c. Construction of shoreline and streambed protection that:
(1) Does not exceed one thousand feet (1,000') in length or two (2) cubic yards per linear foot of streambed.
(2) Materials are not placed higher than the existing top of bank.
(3) Materials are placed so as not to reduce the cross sectional area of the stream channel by more than ten percent (10%).
(4) Stabilization utilizing native vegetation and gradual side slopes are the preferred mitigation methods for existing erosion problems. Where high
channel velocities, sharp bends or wave action necessitate the use of alternative stabilization measures, soil bioengineering techniques, natural
rock or riprap are preferred materials. Artificial materials such as concrete, construction rubble, and gabions should be avoided unless there are
no practicable alternatives.
d. Temporary stream crossings in which:
(1) The approach roads will be one-half foot (1/2') or less above natural grade.
(2) The crossings will allow stream flow to pass without backing up the water above the stream bank vegetation line or above any drainage tile or
outfall invert.
(3) The top of the roadway fill in the channel will be at least two feet (2') below the top of the lowest bank. Any fill in the channel shall be
nonerosive material, such as riprap or gravel.
(4) All disturbed stream banks will be seeded or otherwise stabilized as soon as possible upon installation and again upon removal of construction.
(5) The access road and temporary crossings will be removed within one year after authorization.
e. The construction of light poles, signposts and similar structures.
f. The construction of sidewalks, driveways, athletic fields (excluding fences), patios and similar surfaces which are built at grade.
g. The construction of properly anchored, unwalled, open structures such as playground equipment, pavilions, and carports built at or below existing
grade that would not obstruct the flow of floodwaters.
h. The placement of properly anchored buildings not exceeding seventy (70) square feet in size, nor ten feet (10') in any one dimension (e.g., animal
shelters and toolsheds).
i. The construction of additions to existing buildings which do not increase the first floor area by more than twenty percent (20%), which are located
on the upstream or downstream side of the existing building, and which do extend beyond the sides of the existing building that are parallel to the
flow of floodwaters.
j. Minor maintenance dredging of a stream channel where:
(1) The affected length of a stream is less than one thousand feet (1,000'),
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 392/498
(2) The work is confined to reestablishing flows in natural stream channels, or
(3) The cross sectional area of the dredged channel conforms to that of the natural channel upstream.
6. The flood carrying capacity within any altered or relocated watercourse shall be maintained.
B. Compensatory Storage: Whenever any portion of a floodplain is authorized for use, the volume of space which will be occupied by the authorized fill or
structure below the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation shall be compensated for and balanced by a hydraulically equivalent volume of
excavation taken from below the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation. The excavation volume shall be at least equal to 1.5 times the
volume of storage lost due to the fill or structure. In the case of streams and watercourses, such excavation shall be made opposite or adjacent to the
areas so filled or occupied. All floodplain storage lost below the existing 10-year flood elevation shall be replaced below the proposed 10-year flood
elevation. All floodplain storage lost above the existing 10-year flood elevation shall be replaced above the proposed 10-year flood elevation. All such
excavations shall be constructed to drain freely and openly to the watercourse. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010)
10-8-9: PERMITTING REQUIREMENTS APPLICABLE TO ALL FLOODPLAIN AREAS:
In addition to the requirements found in sections 10-8-6, 10-8-7, and 10-8-8 of this chapter for development in flood fringes, designated floodways, and
SFHA or floodplains where no floodways have been identified (zones A, AO, AH, AE, A1-A30, A99, VO, V1-30, VE, V, M, E, or D), the following
requirements shall be met. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010)
10-8-9-1: PUBLIC HEALTH STANDARDS:
A. No developments in the SFHA shall include locating or storing chemicals, explosives, buoyant materials, animal wastes, fertilizers, flammable liquids,
pollutants, or other hazardous or toxic materials below the flood protection elevation (FPE).
B. Public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas and electric shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage.
C. Public sanitary sewer systems and water supply systems shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the
systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters.
D. New and replacement water supply systems, wells, sanitary sewer lines and on site waste disposal systems may be permitted providing all manholes or
other aboveground openings located below the FPE are watertight. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010)
10-8-9-2: CARRYING CAPACITY AND NOTIFICATION:
For all projects involving channel modification, fill, or stream maintenance (including levees), the flood carrying capacity of the watercourse shall be
maintained. In addition, the village shall notify adjacent communities in writing thirty (30) days prior to the issuance of a permit for the alteration or
relocation of the watercourse. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010)
10-8-9-3: PROTECTING BUILDINGS:
A. All buildings located within a 100-year floodplain also known as an SFHA, and all buildings located outside the 100-year floodplain but within the 500-
year floodplain, shall be protected from flood damage below the flood protection elevation. This building protection criteria applies to the following
situations:
1. Construction or placement of a new building valued at more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or which is more than seventy (70) square feet;
2. "Substantial improvement" to an existing building as defined in section 10-8-2 of this chapter, including an increase to the first floor area by more
than twenty percent (20%). This alteration shall be figured cumulatively beginning with any alteration which has taken place subsequent to April 1,
1990;
3. "Substantial damage" to an existing building as defined in section 10-8-2 of this chapter. This alteration shall be figured cumulatively beginning with
any alteration which has taken place subsequent to April 1, 1990;
4. "Repetitive loss" to an existing building as defined in section 10-8-2 of this chapter;
5. Installing a manufactured home on a new site or a new manufactured home on an existing site. This building protection requirement does not apply
to returning a mobile home to the same site it lawfully occupied before it was removed to avoid flood damage; and
6. Installing a travel trailer on a site for more than one hundred eighty (180) days per year.
B. A residential or nonresidential building, when allowed, may be constructed on permanent land fill in accordance with the following:
1. The lowest floor (including basement) shall be at or above the flood protection elevation.
2. The fill shall be placed in layers no greater than six inches (6") deep before compaction and should extend at least ten feet (10') beyond the
foundation of the building before sloping below the flood protection elevation. The top of the fill shall be above the flood protection elevation.
However, the ten foot (10') minimum may be waived if a structural engineer certifies an alternative method to protect the building from damages due
to hydrostatic pressures. The fill shall be protected against erosion and scour. The fill shall not adversely affect the flow or surface drainage from or
onto neighboring properties.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 393/498
C. A residential or nonresidential building may be elevated in accordance with the following:
1. The building or improvements shall be elevated on crawl space, stilts, piles, walls, or other foundation that is permanently open to floodwaters and
not subject to damage by hydrostatic pressures of the base flood or 100-year frequency flood. Designs must either be certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect or the permanent openings, one on each wall, shall be no more than one foot (1') above existing grade, and
consists of a minimum of two (2) openings. The openings must have a total net area of not less than one square inch for every one square foot of
enclosed area subject to flooding below the base flood elevation.
2. The foundation and supporting members shall be anchored and aligned in relation to flood flows and adjoining structures so as to minimize exposure
to known hydrodynamic forces such as current, waves, ice and floating debris.
3. All areas below the flood protection elevation shall be constructed of materials resistant to flood damage. The lowest floor (including basement) and
all electrical, heating, ventilating, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and utility meters shall be located at or above the flood protection
elevation. Water and sewer pipes, electrical and telephone lines, submersible pumps, and other waterproofed service facilities may be located below
the flood protection elevation.
4. The areas below the flood protection elevation may only be used for the parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement and not later modified or occupied as habitable space.
5. Manufactured homes, and travel trailers to be installed on a site for more than one hundred eighty (180) days, shall be elevated to or above the flood
protection elevation; and, shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement by being tied down in accordance with the rules and
regulations for the Illinois mobile home tie down act issued pursuant to 77 Illinois administrative code part 870. In addition, all manufactured homes
shall meet the following elevation requirements. In the case of manufactured homes placed or substantially improved: a) outside of a manufactured
home park or subdivision, b) in a new manufactured home park or subdivision, c) in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or
subdivision, or d) in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred substantial damage from a
flood, the top of the lowest floor shall be elevated to or above the flood protection elevation. In the case of manufactured homes placed or
substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, the manufactured home shall be elevated so that either the top of the
lowest floor is above the base flood elevation or the chassis is at least thirty six inches (36") in height above grade and supported by reinforced piers
or other foundations of equivalent strength, whichever is less.
6. Recreational vehicles or travel trailers shall be required to meet the elevation and anchoring requirements of subsection C5 of this section unless
they are on site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days; and, they are fully licensed, ready for highway use, and used only for
recreation, camping, travel or seasonal use rather than as a permanent dwelling. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels
or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utility and service devices, and has no permanently attached additions.
D. Only a nonresidential building may be structurally dry floodproofed (in lieu of elevation) provided that a registered professional engineer or architect
shall certify that the building has been structurally dry floodproofed below the flood protection elevation, the structure and attendant utility facilities are
watertight and capable of resisting the effects of the base flood or 100-year frequency flood. The building design shall take into account flood velocities,
duration, rate of rise, hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces, the effects of buoyancy, and impacts from debris or ice. Floodproofing measures shall be
operable without human intervention and without an outside source of electricity (levees, berms, floodwalls and similar works are not considered
floodproofing for the purpose of this subsection).
E. A building may be constructed with a crawl space located below the flood protection elevation provided that the following conditions are met:
1. The building must be designed and adequately anchored to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement of the structure resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy; and
2. Any enclosed area below the flood protection elevation shall have openings that equalize hydrostatic pressures by allowing for the automatic entry
and exit of floodwaters. A minimum of one opening on each wall having a total net area of not less than one square inch per one square foot of
enclosed area. The openings shall be no more than one foot (1') above grade; and
3. The interior grade of the crawl space below the flood protection elevation must not be more than two feet (2') below the lowest adjacent exterior
grade; and
4. The interior height of the crawl space measured from the interior grade of the crawl to the top of the foundation wall must not exceed four feet (4') at
any point; and
5. An adequate drainage system must be installed to remove floodwaters from the interior area of the crawl space within a reasonable period of time
after a flood event; and
6. Portions of the building below the flood protection elevation must be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage; and
7. Utility systems within the crawl space must be elevated above the flood protection elevation. Critical facilities shall be protected to the 500-year flood
elevation. In addition, all ingress and egress from any critical facility must be protected to the 500-year flood elevation.
F. Toolsheds, detached garages, and other minor accessory structures on an existing single-family platted lot, may be constructed with the lowest floor
below the flood protection elevation in accordance with the following:
1. The building is not used for human habitation.
2. All areas below the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation shall be constructed with waterproof material. Structures located in a
designated floodway shall be constructed and placed on a building site so as not to block the flow of floodwaters and shall also meet the appropriate
use criteria of section 10-8-7 of this chapter. In addition, all other requirements of sections 10-8-6, 10-8-7 and 10-8-8 of this chapter must be met.
3. The structure shall be anchored to prevent flotation.
4. Service facilities such as electrical and heating equipment shall be elevated or floodproofed to the flood protection elevation.
5. The building shall be valued at less than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) and be less than five hundred (500) square feet in floor size.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 394/498
6. The building shall be used only for the storage of vehicles or tools and may not contain other rooms, workshops, greenhouses or similar uses.
7. The building shall meet the permanent opening criteria of this section.
G. Existing buildings located within a designated floodway shall also meet the more restrictive appropriate use standards included in section 10-8-7 of this
chapter. Nonconforming structures located in a designated floodway may remain in use and may only be enlarged, replaced or structurally altered in
accordance with section 10-8-8-2 of this chapter. A nonconforming structure damaged by flood, fire, wind or other natural or manmade disaster may be
restored unless the damage exceeds fifty percent (50%) of its market value before it was damaged, in which case it shall conform to this chapter. (Ord.
2010-27, 12-2-2010)
10-8-10: OTHER DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS:
The board of trustees shall take into account flood hazards, to the extent that they are known in all official actions related to land management, use and
development.
A. New subdivisions, manufactured home parks, annexation agreements, and planned unit developments (PUDs) within the SFHA shall be reviewed to
assure that the proposed developments are consistent with sections 10-8-6, 10-8-7, 10-8-8 and 10-8-9 of this chapter and the need to minimize flood
damage. Plats or plans for new subdivisions, mobile home parks and planned unit developments (PUDs) shall include a signed statement by a
registered professional engineer that the plat or plans account for changes in the drainage of surface waters in accordance with the plat act3.
B. Proposals for new subdivisions, manufactured home parks, travel trailer parks, planned unit developments (PUDs) and additions to manufactured home
parks and additions to subdivisions shall include base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation data and floodway delineations. Where this
information is not available from an existing study filed with the Illinois state water survey, the applicant's engineer shall be responsible for calculating
the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation per subsection 10-8-5D of this chapter and the floodway delineation per the definition in section
10-8-2 of this chapter. The applicant's engineer shall submit the data to IDNR/OWR for review and approval as best available regulatory data and then
send it to the state water survey.
C. Streets, blocks, lots, parks and other public grounds shall be located and laid out in such a manner as to preserve and utilize natural streams and
channels. Wherever possible, the floodplains shall be included within parks or other public grounds.
D. The board of trustees shall not approve any planned unit development (PUD) or plat of subdivision located outside the corporate limits unless such
agreement or plat is in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
E. All other activities defined as development shall be designed so as not to alter flood flows or increase potential flood damages. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-
2010)
10-8-11: VARIANCES:
No variances shall be granted to any development located in a "designated floodway" as defined in section 10-8-2 of this chapter. Whenever the standards
of this chapter place undue hardship on a specific development proposal, the applicant may apply to the village engineer for a variance. The village
engineer shall review the applicant's request for a variance and shall submit its recommendation to the president and board of trustees.
A. No variance shall be granted unless the applicant demonstrates that all of the following conditions are met:
1. The development activity cannot be located outside the SFHA;
2. An exceptional hardship would result if the variance were not granted;
3. The relief requested is the minimum necessary;
4. There will be no additional threat to public health, safety, beneficial stream uses and functions, especially aquatic habitat, or creation of a nuisance;
5. There will be no additional public expense for flood protection, lost environmental stream uses and functions, rescue or relief operations, policing, or
repairs to stream beds and banks, roads, utilities, or other public facilities;
6. The provisions of sections 10-8-6-2 and 10-8-8-2 of this chapter shall still be met;
7. The activity is not in a designated floodway;
8. The applicant's circumstances are unique and do not represent a general problem; and
9. The granting of the variance will not alter the essential character of the area involved including existing stream uses.
B. The village engineer shall notify an applicant in writing that a variance from the requirements of section 10-8-9 of this chapter that would lessen the
degree of protection to a building will:
1. Result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as twenty five dollars ($25.00) per one hundred dollars ($100.00) of
insurance coverage;
2. Increase the risks to life and property; and
3. Require that the applicant proceed with knowledge of these risks and that he will acknowledge in writing that he assumes the risk and liability.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 395/498
C. Variances requested in connection with restoration of a historic site or "historic structure" as defined in section 10-8-2 of this chapter, may be granted
using criteria more permissive than the requirements of subsections A and B of this section, subject to the conditions that the repair or rehabilitation is
the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure; and, the repair or rehabilitation will not result in the structure
being removed as a certified historic structure. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010)
10-8-12: DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY:
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on available information derived
from engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger floods may occur or flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter
does not imply that development, either inside or outside of the SFHA, will be free from flooding or damage. This chapter does not create liability on the
part of the village or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damage that results from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision made
lawfully thereunder. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010)
10-8-13: PENALTY:
Failure to comply with the requirements of a permit or conditions of a variance resolution shall be deemed to be a violation of this chapter. Upon due
investigation, the village engineer may determine that a violation of the minimum standards of this chapter exist. The village engineer shall notify the owner
in writing of such violation.
A. If such owner fails after ten (10) days' notice to correct the violation:
1. The village may make application to the circuit court for an injunction requiring conformance with this chapter or make such other order as the court
deems necessary to secure compliance with this chapter.
2. Any person who violates this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) or more than one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) for each offense.
3. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
B. The village engineer shall inform the owner that any such violation is considered a wilful act to increase flood damages and, therefore, may cause
coverage by a standard flood insurance policy to be suspended.
1. The village engineer is authorized to issue an order requiring the suspension of the subject development. The stop work order shall be in writing,
shall indicate the reason for the issuance, and shall order the action, if necessary, to resolve the circumstances requiring the stop work order. The
stop work order constitutes a suspension of the permit.
2. No site development permit shall be permanently suspended or revoked until a hearing is held by the village manager. Written notice of such hearing
shall be served on the permittee and shall state: a) the grounds for complaint or reasons for suspension or revocation; and b) the time and place of
the hearing. At such hearing, the permittee shall be given an opportunity to present evidence on his/her behalf. At the conclusion of the hearing, the
village manager shall determine whether the permit shall be suspended or revoked.
C. Nothing herein shall prevent the village from taking such other lawful action to prevent or remedy any violations. All costs connected therewith shall
accrue to the person or persons responsible. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010)
10-8-14: ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS:
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. Where this chapter and other
ordinances, easements, covenants, or deed restrictions conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. This chapter is
intended to repeal the original ordinance or resolution which was adopted to meet the national flood insurance program regulations, but is not intended to
repeal the resolution which the village passed in order to establish initial eligibility for the program. (Ord. 2010-27, 12-2-2010)
Title 11
ZONING
Chapter 1
TITLE, PURPOSE AND INTENT
11-1-1: TITLE:
This title shall be known and may be cited and referred to as the VILLAGE OF STREAMWOOD ZONING ORDINANCE. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-
1-2010)
11-1-2: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
A. Purpose: This title is adopted to the end that:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 396/498
1. Adequate natural light, pure air, privacy, convenient access to property, and safety from fire, explosion, noxious fumes, panic and other dangers may
be secured;
2. Overcrowding of land may be prevented;
3. Undue concentration of population may be avoided;
4. Taxable value of land and structures throughout the village may be conserved;
5. Congestion in the public streets and highways may be lessened or avoided;
6. Hazards to persons and damage to property resulting from the accumulation of runoff of storm or flood waters may be lessened or avoided;
7. Sites, areas and structures of historical, architectural and aesthetic importance may be preserved and enhanced;
8. A rational pattern of relationships between various uses of land may be promoted;
9. Public health, safety, comfort, morals, and general welfare may otherwise be promoted and maintained;
10. The optimum use of the land and other natural resources of the village may be promoted; and
11. Other goals and objectives of the comprehensive plan may be advanced.
B. Intent: To achieve these ends, this title sets forth regulations and standards to:
1. Determine and regulate the intensity of land use and the area of permanent open space;
2. Classify, regulate and restrict the intensity of land use and location of buildings, structures and land intended for business, residential, and other
specified uses and provide for special uses;
3. Divide the village into zoning districts of such character, number, shape and area as are best suited to effect the foregoing purposes;
4. Protect such districts from encroachments by incompatible uses and structures;
5. Fix zoning standards within each district to which uses and structures therein shall comply;
6. Regulate and limit the height and bulk of structures hereafter erected;
7. Establish, regulate, and limit setback lines along all public ways and property lines;
8. Regulate additions to, and alterations or remodeling of, existing structures so as to comply with the restrictions and limitations lawfully imposed in
this title;
9. Provide for the gradual elimination of structures and uses which are presently incompatible with the character of the districts in which they are
located;
10. Define and limit the powers and duties of the municipal officers and bodies as provided in this title; and
11. Prescribe penalties for the violation of the provisions of this title or any amendment hereto. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-1-3: INTERPRETATION:
In their application, the provisions of this title shall be held to the minimum requirements for the promotion of the purposes of this title, and the provisions
shall be interpreted in accordance with the following:
A. Overlapping Or Conflicting Laws: Where the conditions imposed by any provision of this title are either more restrictive or less restrictive than
comparable standards imposed by other provisions of this title or by any other law, ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation of any duly constituted
public agency having jurisdiction, the regulations which are more restrictive or which impose higher standards or requirements shall govern.
B. Existing Agreements: This title is not intended to abrogate any easement, covenant, or other private agreement; provided, that where the regulations of
this title are more restrictive or impose higher standards or requirements than such easement, covenant, or other private agreement, the requirements
of this title shall govern.
C. Permit Or License: Nothing contained in this title shall be deemed to be a consent, license, or permit to use any property or to locate, construct, or
maintain any building, structure, or facility or to carry on any trade, industry, occupation, or activity. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-1-4: SEVERABILITY:
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the president and the board of trustees of the village that the several provisions of this title are severable in
accordance with the following:
A. Title Application: If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge any provision of this title to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect any other
provision of this title not specifically included in such judgment.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 397/498
B. Property Application: If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge invalid the application of any provision of this title to a particular lot or parcel of
real estate or structure or use, such judgment shall not affect the application of the provision to any other lot or parcel of real estate or structure or use
not specifically included in the judgment. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
Chapter 2
DEFINITIONS
11-2-1: CONSTRUCTION OF TITLE AND RULES:
A. Construction: In the construction of this title, the rules and definitions contained in this chapter shall be observed and applied except when the context
clearly indicates otherwise.
B. Rules:
1. Words used in the present tense shall include the future tense.
2. Words used in the singular shall include the plural, and the plural the singular.
3. The words "shall" and "will" are mandatory and not discretionary.
4. The word "may" is permissive.
5. The word "lot" shall mean a zoning lot, unless otherwise defined herein.
6. The word "structure" shall include the word "building".
7. The phrase "used for" shall include the phrases "intended for", "designed for", "occupied for", "maintained for", and "arranged for".
8. The word "person" shall include the words "individual", "corporation", "governmental agency", "trust", "estate", "partnership", "association",
"ventures", "joint ventures", or any other legal entity.
9. The masculine gender includes the feminine and the neuter.
10. All measured distances, expressed in feet, shall be to the nearest foot; if a fraction is one-half foot (1/2') or less, the full number next below shall be
used. If a fraction is more than one-half foot (1/2'), the next full number above shall be used.
11. All measurements shall include the metric equivalent.
12. Unless so otherwise specified, all distances shall be measured horizontally.
13. Whenever a word or term defined hereinafter appears in the text of this title, its meaning shall be constructed as set forth in the definition thereof;
and any word appearing in parentheses, between a word and its definition herein, shall be construed in the same sense as that word. Words herein
not defined shall be interpreted in accordance with definitions contained in "Webster's Third New International Dictionary Of The English Language,
Unabridged"; second edition; published by Merriam-Webster Inc., Springfield. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-2-2: DEFINITIONS OF WORDS AND TERMS:
ABUTTING: Lying immediately next to, sharing a common wall or lot line or separated only by a street or alley.
ACCESSORY BUILDING, STRUCTURE OR USE: A. An "accessory building", "accessory structure", and/or "accessory use" is one which:
1. Is subordinate to and serves a principal building or use;
2. Is subordinate in area, extent or purpose to the principal building or principal use served;
3. Is located on the same lot as the principal building or principal use served, with the single exception of such off street parking areas as may be
permitted to locate elsewhere than the same lot as the principal building or principal use; and
4. Shall include, but not be limited to, a children's playhouse, drop off box, garage, garden house, greenhouse, posts affixed to the ground except
where provided herein, portable toilet facility, temporary or permanent swimming pool, sign, except where provided herein, shed, shipping or
storage container, temporary tent or vending machine.
B. An "attached" accessory building or structure is one which is permanently affixed to or abutting the principal building. All others shall be termed
"detached" accessory buildings or structures.
ADJACENT: To lie near, close to or in the vicinity of.
ADULT BOOKSTORE: An establishment having ten percent (10%) or more of its stock in trade, books, magazines and other periodicals, photographs,
films, motion pictures, computer software, audiotapes, videotapes, laser disks or other electronic or magnetic media which are distinguished or
characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas", or an
establishment with a segment or section devoted to the sale or display of such material.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 398/498
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT CABARET: A public or private establishment which is licensed to serve food, and/or alcoholic beverages on the premises,
which features live entertainment distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities"
or "specified anatomical areas", for observation by patrons therein including, but not limited to, topless dancers, go-go dancers, exotic dancers, strippers,
male or female impersonators or similar entertainers.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT THEATER: A public or private establishment which features live entertainment distinguished or characterized by an emphasis
on matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas", for observation by patrons therein including, but
not limited to, topless dancers, go-go dancers, exotic dancers, strippers, male or female impersonators or similar entertainers.
ADULT MINI-MOTION PICTURE THEATER: An enclosed building with a capacity for less than fifty (50) persons used for presenting motion picture films,
slides, videocassettes, cable television, computer generated displays, or any other such visual media distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on
matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas", for observation by patrons therein.
ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER: An enclosed building with a capacity of fifty (50) or more persons used for presenting motion picture films, slides,
videocassettes, cable television, computer generated displays, or any other such visual media, distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter
depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas", for observation by patrons therein.
ADULT REGULATED USE: Any use of land, a building or a structure which contains any one or more of the following:
A. Adult bookstore;
B. Adult entertainment cabaret;
C. Adult entertainment theater;
D. Adult mini-motion picture theater;
E. Adult motion picture theater; and/or
F. Establishments serving alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises which also provide live entertainment for observation by patrons
thereon.
ADULT USES: Those uses which are distinguished or characterized by their principal emphasis on matters depicting, describing or relating to nudity,
sexual conduct, sexual excitement or sadomasochistic abuse or an establishment with a segment or section devoted to the sale or display of such material
or entertainment. These uses include, but are not limited to, adult only bookstores, adult only motion picture theaters, adult only amusement arcades or
game areas, massage parlors and saunas.
ADVERTISING STRUCTURE, OTHER: Any marquee, fixed canopy, fixed or retractable awning, which includes as a part thereof, any "sign" as herein
defined.
ALLEY: A public right of way which affords a secondary means of access to abutting properties. An alley shall not be considered a street.
ALTERATION: Any change in size, shape, occupancy or use of a building or lot.
AREA, GROSS: The total area of all property to be included in an application for a planned unit development, excluding any property currently controlled
as a public right of way.
AUTOMOBILE LAUNDRY, AUTOMATIC: A structure in which motor vehicles are washed as they are mechanically moved along a track or similar
production line method.
AUTOMOBILE LAUNDRY, SELF-SERVE: A building or section thereof containing facilities for washing more than two (2) motor vehicles, using mechanical
devices and providing space, water and equipment for the hand washing of motor vehicles by the customer.
AUTOMOBILE MINIMARKET: An automobile service station which offers or includes as an accessory use, the retail sale of merchandise or services not
related to the maintenance, service or repair of motor vehicles.
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION: Any building, land area, or other premises, or portion thereof, used or intended to be used for the retail dispensing or
sale of vehicular fuel, and may include any operations specified under the definition of Automotive Maintenance Or Repair Facility.
AUTOMOBILE WRECKING YARD: Any area of land where two (2) or more vehicles, not in running condition, or the parts thereof, are stored in the open
and are not being restored to operation; or any land, building, or structures used for the wrecking or storing of such automobiles, or the parts thereof.
AUTOMOTIVE MAINTENANCE OR REPAIR FACILITY: Any building or portion thereof, used for the repair of a motor vehicle, painting of motor vehicles,
used for the repair or replacement of engines, transmissions, differentials, drive trains, or any parts thereof, in addition to the replacement of parts, service,
and incidental repairs to motor vehicles.
AWNING: A rooflike cover, temporary in nature, which projects from the wall of a building.
BASEMENT: A story having part, but not more than one-half (1/2), of its height below grade.
BEDROOM: Any room (other than a living room, dining room, kitchen, bath, utility room or any storage area) which can be utilized as a sleeping area
under the provisions of this title and the building code.
BERM, BERMING: A hill or contour of land that acts as a visual barrier between a lot and adjacent properties, alleys or streets.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 399/498
BLOCK: A tract of land bounded by streets, or a combination of streets and public parks, golf course, cemeteries, railroad rights of way, or shorelines of
waterways. A block may be located, in part, beyond the boundaries of the village of Streamwood.
BOARD OF TRUSTEES: The board of trustees of the village of Streamwood, Cook County, Illinois.
BOAT: Any unit that is used for water travel or pleasure including the trailer for towing it.
BUFFERING: Any means of protecting abutting properties from the visual or auditory effects of a different or more intense use. "Buffering" may include,
but is not limited to, berming, fencing, landscaping, providing greater setbacks or providing open spaces.
BUILDING: Any structure built for the enclosure, shelter, support, or protection of person, animals or property of any kind and which is permanently affixed
to the ground. The term "building" shall not include fences.
BUILDING CODE: The building codes of the village of Streamwood as specified in title 9 of this code.
BUILDING, COMPLETELY ENCLOSED: Any building separated on all sides from the adjacent open space, or from other buildings, by a permanent roof
and by exterior walls or party walls pierced only by windows and normal entrance or exit doors.
BUILDING, DETACHED: A building completely surrounded by open space.
BUILDING HEIGHT: The vertical distance measured from the established finished grade of the lot to the highest point of the underside of the ceiling
beams, in the case of a flat roof; and, to the mean level of the underside of rafters between the eaves and the ridge of a gable, hip, mansard, or gambrel
roof. Chimneys, spires, towers, elevator penthouses, tanks, and similar projections other than signs shall not be included in calculating the height.
BUILDING, NONCONFORMING: Any legally established building which does not comply with all the regulations concerning yards, height, lot coverage
and off street parking and loading of the district in which such building is located.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL: A nonaccessory building in which the principal use is conducted.
BUILDING WALL: When used for calculating allowable wall signage, the linear footage of a tenanted space multiplied by the building height, which is the
vertical distance measured from the finished grade to the underside of the ceiling beams (see figure 1 of this definition).
FIGURE 1
BULK: A composition term used to indicate the size and setbacks of buildings and their location with respect to one another and including the following:
A. Size and height of buildings;
B. Locations of exterior walls at all levels, in relation to lot lines, streets or other buildings;
C. Floor area ratios;
D. All open spaces allocated to buildings; and
E. Amount of lot area provided per dwelling unit.
CAR WASH: See definitions of Automobile Laundry.
CARGO TRUCK: A truck whose design characteristics include a storage area in the form of an open, walled, or fenced bed, or of an enclosed, boxlike
storage compartment, designed for the carrying of equipment or materials; the term is intended to include vehicles commonly referred to as flatbed trucks,
stake trucks, box trucks, and straight trucks, but is not intended to include pickup trucks or vans.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 400/498
CARPORT: An open sided, roofed automobile shelter.
CELLAR: A story having more than one-half (1/2) of its height below grade.
CIGAR AND TOBACCO STORES: A retail store where more than ten percent (10%) of the retail space is devoted to tobacco sales.
CLINIC: A building, the principal use of which is for offices of health professionals which contain facilities for examination and treatment of patients but not
for their lodging.
CLUB OR LODGE, PRIVATE: A nonprofit association of persons who are bona fide members paying dues which owns, hires, or leases a building or
portion thereof, the use of such premises being restricted to members and their guests.
COMMERCIAL COMMUNICATION TOWER: A structure, typically higher than its diameter and in relation to its surrounds, of a skeletal framework
specifically used for the commercial transmission and/or reception of signals, including, but not limited to, electrical waves, including adjunct antennas
placed upon other structures (i.e., signs and poles).
COMMERCIAL TRAILER: A portable structure supported by wheels, jacks, skids or blocks without a permanent foundation which is towed or hauled by
another vehicle and used for carrying materials, goods or objects in furtherance of any commercial or industrial purpose, or used as a temporary office.
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE: Any vehicle operated for the transportation of persons or property in the furtherance of any commercial or industrial enterprise,
for hire and not for hire; the following motor vehicles that, by virtue of their design, type, or characteristics, are not customary and incidental to the use or
occupancy of residential properties, shall be considered prohibited commercial vehicles: dump trucks, cargo trucks, step vans, tow trucks, car haulers,
semitrailer tractors, tank trucks, boom trucks, tractors, firetrucks, taxis, farm implements (except when used in an agricultural use authorized under this
code), and hearses. In addition, a vehicle will be considered to be a commercial vehicle if the same allows for property and/or equipment to be stored
and/or transported in a manner which is not completely enclosed within such vehicle.
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR: The person appointed by the board of trustees as the director of the community development department, or
in his absence, his authorized representative.
COMMUNITY RESIDENCES: A single dwelling unit occupied on a relatively permanent basis in a family like environment by a group of unrelated persons
with disabilities, plus paid professional support staff provided by a sponsoring agency, either living with the residents on a twenty four (24) hour basis, or
present whenever residents with disabilities are present at the dwelling unit; and complies with the zoning regulations for the district in which the site is
located.
COMPUTER SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT: A business whose primary function is to provide patrons with the on site use of personal computer stations for
internet access, word processing, printing, desktop publishing, computer games, or other functions typically associated with the use of computers.
CONVALESCENT HOME: See definition of Nursing Home.
CURB LEVEL: The level of the established curb in front of a structure measured at the center of such front. Where no such curb elevation has been
established, the elevation of the crown of the access roadway fronting the center of the lot shall be considered the curb level.
DAYCARE CENTER: Any childcare facility receiving more than eight (8) children for daytime care during part of a day where tuition, fees or other forms of
compensation for the care of children is charged. The terms "daycare center", "centers", "day nurseries", "nursery schools", "kindergartens", "play groups"
and "centers or workshops for mentally or physically handicapped" are included with or without stated educational purposes.
DEDICATION: The designation of land to some public use, made by the owner, and accepted for such use by the municipality.
DENSITY: The average number of persons, families or dwelling units per unit of area.
DISABILITY: A physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one or more of a person's major life activities, impairs their ability to live
independently, or a record of having such an impairment, or being regarded as having such an impairment, but such term does not include current use of,
nor addiction to, a controlled substance.
DROP OFF BOX: A stand alone structure for the collection of materials, items or funds.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY: A building containing two (2) or more dwelling units, primarily used for one or more permitted residential uses or
occupied by more than one family.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY: A building designed exclusively for human habitation containing one dwelling unit and used by one family.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED: A dwelling which is joined to another dwelling on one or more sides by a vertical party wall or walls, and was
originally constructed for said purpose.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY: A building designed exclusively for human habitation containing two (2) dwelling units.
DWELLING UNIT: One or more rooms, including at least one complete permanently installed bathroom and not more than one complete kitchen, which
are arranged, designed or used as living quarters for not more than one family.
EASEMENT: A recorded agreement whereby a property owner grants the use of air, land or mineral right for a specific purpose.
ENERGY COLLECTING DEVICE: A tool to collect, store and dispense electrical energy from a nonutility source including, but not limited to, solar and
wind generators.
FAMILY: One person, or two (2) or more persons related by blood, marriage or legal adoption (including foster children), or a group of not more than five
(5) persons not all so related, together with domestic servants, maintaining a common household in the same dwelling unit.
FENCE: A barrier at grade, used as a boundary or means of protection or confinement. The term "fence" shall include, but is not limited to, walls, railings
and similar items.
FENCE, SCREENING: A fence which conceals activities conducted behind it from view from adjoining properties, alleys or streets.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 401/498
FLOOR AREA, FOR THE PURPOSE OF DETERMINING OFF STREET PARKING AND OFF STREET LOADING REQUIREMENTS: The sum of the
gross horizontal areas of the several floors of the building, or portion thereof, devoted to a use requiring off street parking or loading. This area shall
include accessory storage areas located within a selling or working space, such as counters, racks, or closets, and any basement floor area devoted to
retailing activities, to the production or processing of goods, or to business or professional offices. However, floor area, for the purpose of determining off
street parking spaces, shall not include floor area devoted primarily to storage purposes (except as otherwise noted herein); nor floor area devoted to off
street parking or loading facilities, including ramps, aisles, and maneuvering space; nor basement floor area other than area devoted to merchandising
activities, to the production or processing of goods, or to business or professional offices.
FLOOR AREA, FOR THE PURPOSE OF DETERMINING THE FLOOR AREA RATIO, CONVERSIONS OF EXISTING STRUCTURES, AND MAXIMUM
SIZE OF BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENTS: The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors measured in square feet, including the basement
floor, but not including the cellar floor, of the building; measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the centerline of walls separating two
(2) buildings. The floor area of a building shall also include elevator shafts and stairwells at each floor; floor space used for mechanical equipment except
equipment, open or enclosed, located on the roof; penthouse; attic space having headroom of seven feet six inches (7'6") or more; interior balconies and
mezzanines; enclosed porches; and floor area devoted to accessory uses; provided, that any space devoted to off street parking or loading shall not be
included in floor area.
FLOOR AREA, FOR THE PURPOSE OF DETERMINING THE FLOOR AREA RATIO, CONVERSIONS OF EXISTING STRUCTURES, AND MAXIMUM
SIZE OF RESIDENTIAL UNITS: The sum of the gross horizontal areas of all floors measured in square feet, including the basement floor, but not including
the cellar floor, of the building; measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls. The floor area shall also include attic space having headroom of
seven feet six inches (7'6") or more; enclosed porches or patios; provided, that sheds and any space devoted to required off street parking shall not be
included in floor area.
FLOOR AREA RATIO (FAR): The numerical value obtained through dividing the gross floor area of a building or buildings by the lot area on which such
building or buildings are located.
FOOD STORES: Stores which sell food and other items commonly sold in connection therewith. The term "food store" shall include, but is not limited to,
stores commonly referred to as dairy stores, delicatessens, fruit and vegetable markets, butcher shops, health food stores, nut shops, fish markets and
supermarkets. This term shall not include services for the consumption of food on the premises.
GARAGES: An accessory structure intended for storing motor vehicles, which include a driveway from the street to the structure.
GRADE: Average level of the finished surface of the ground adjacent to the exterior wall of a structure.
HALFWAY HOUSE: A temporary residential living arrangement for persons who are receiving therapy and counseling from support staff who are present
at all times when residents are present, to help them recuperate from the effects of drugs or alcohol addiction.
HEIGHT: The vertical distance from grade or its equivalent to the highest point of any structure, other than a building, such as a fence or shed.
HOLDING ZONE: A zone established in this zoning title on a temporary basis awaiting applications for rezoning to desired uses predicated upon
recommendations in the village comprehensive plan. The village of Streamwood has designated the R-2 single-family residence district as a "holding
zone".
HOME OCCUPATION: Any use conducted within a dwelling unit and its permitted accessory building which is clearly incidental and secondary to the use
of such buildings as a dwelling and which complies with all regulations of this title, and particularly those of chapter 4 of this title. Garage sales and home
sales shall not be considered home occupations.
HOSPICE: A temporary residential living arrangement for persons with a disease that requires full time support, therapy and/or treatment.
HOTEL: A building containing lodging rooms, a general kitchen and dining room, a common entrance lobby, halls and stairway; and where lodging rooms
do not have a doorway opening directly to the outdoors, except for emergencies; and where more than fifty percent (50%) of the lodging rooms are for
rent, with or without meals, to transient guests for a continuous period of less than thirty (30) days.
KENNEL: Any premises wherein any person engages in the business of boarding, breeding, buying, letting for hire, training for a fee, or selling dogs or
cats.
KITCHEN: An area used or designated specifically for the preparation and storage of food, which shall include, but not be limited to, a sink, refrigerator,
stove and/or oven.
LANDSCAPED SCREENING: A dense nondeciduous planting of a thickness sufficient to form a visual barrier between the properties involved.
LIMOUSINE: A motor vehicle for hire, generally with an extended chassis or longer vehicle body.
LIVE ENTERTAINMENT: The performance of any dance, show, theatrical performance, play, magical act, musical song or athletic event by one or more
entertainers for observation by guests, customers or members of the business establishment.
LOADING BERTH: That area used by trucks or other vehicles for receipt or distribution of materials or merchandise.
LOT: A single tract of land within a block under unified ownership or control.
LOT AREA: The area of a horizontal plane bounded by the front, side and rear lot lines of a lot.
LOT, BUILDABLE AREA: The space remaining on a zoning lot after the minimum open space requirements of this code have been complied with.
LOT, CORNER: A lot situated at the intersection of two (2) streets, the interior angle formed by such intersection not exceeding one hundred thirty five
degrees (135°).
LOT COVERAGE: That portion or percentage of a lot permitted to be covered by structures or any impervious surface, excepting required minimum off
street parking.
LOT DEPTH: The mean horizontal distance between the front lot line and the rear lot line of a lot measured within the lot boundaries.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 402/498
LOT LINE: That property boundary line of a lot.
LOT LINE, FRONT: That lot line which abuts a street. On a corner lot, the front lot line shall be the lot line having the shorter length abutting a street.
LOT LINE, REAR: That lot line which is most distant from and parallel to or most nearly parallel to the front lot line. In an irregularly shaped lot, the rear lot
line shall be a line at least ten feet (10') in length within the lot, parallel to and at the maximum distance from the front yard line.
LOT LINE, SIDE: Any lot line which is not a front yard line or a rear yard line.
LOT OF RECORD: A lot which is part of a subdivision, the plat of which has been approved by the village of Streamwood and recorded in the office of the
recorder of deeds of Cook County, Illinois.
LOT, REVERSE CORNER: A corner lot where the street side lot line is substantially a continuation of the front lot line of the first lot to its rear.
LOT, THROUGH: A lot having opposite lot lines along two (2) more or less parallel streets.
LOT WIDTH: The width of a lot as measured at the building setback line from side lot line to side lot line.
LOT, ZONING: A single tract of land located within a single block and undivided by a public street or right of way, which at the time of filing of an
application for a building or use permit is noted by its owner as a tract to be used, developed or built upon under unified ownership or control.
MENU BOARD: Any sign erected along a drive-through window traffic lane directing attention to a bill of fare.
MIXED USE DEVELOPMENT: A tract of land or building or structure developed for two (2) or more different uses such as, but not limited to, residential,
office, manufacturing, retail, public or entertainment uses.
MOTOR FREIGHT TERMINAL: A building or area in which freight brought by motor truck is received, assembled or stored and dispatched for routing by
motor truck which may include motor truck storage.
MOTOR VEHICLE OR VEHICLE: Any motorized, self-propelled vehicle of a type that may be used to convey persons or materials or to perform a task,
other than home maintenance equipment (such as riding lawn mowers or snowblowers) and mobile construction equipment not licensable for public street
use.
MUNICIPAL CODE: The municipal code of the village of Streamwood.
NONCONFORMING BUILDING OR STRUCTURE: Any building or structure and the use thereof or the use of land that does not conform with the
regulations of this title or any amendment thereto governing use in the district in which it is located, but conformed with all of the codes, ordinances and
other legal requirements applicable at the time such building or structure was erected, enlarged or altered and the use thereof or the use of land was
established.
NURSING HOME: An institution for the care of children or aged or infirm persons or a place of rest for those suffering bodily disorders. A nursing home
may include rehabilitation housing for released mental or alcoholic patients where medical treatment is not provided and no longer deemed necessary, but
shall not include hospitals or clinics devoted primarily to the diagnosis and treatment of disease and injury.
OPEN SALES LOT: Land used or occupied for the purpose of buying, selling or renting merchandise out of doors.
OPEN SPACE: That part of a lot not devoted to buildings, structures, parking or loading areas, driveways or any principal or accessory use.
OPEN SPACE, USABLE: An area of land or water or a combination of land and water which may include complementary structures and improvements
within the site, excluding space devoted to parking, designed and intended for common use and enjoyment.
ORDINANCE: The Streamwood zoning ordinance (this title).
PASSENGER SHELTER: A structure designed to protect from the weather those awaiting public transportation.
PATIO: A level, unenclosed surfaced area located at the finished grade which is usually directly adjacent or attached to a building.
PAVING BRICKS: A concrete or fireclayed material with a minimum two inch (2") thickness which is able to withstand weight imposed by proposed load.
PAWNBROKERS: Every person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of receiving possession of personal property other than a motor vehicle in
pledge or as security for money or other thing advanced to the pawner or pledger.
PAYDAY LOAN FACILITIES: An establishment which engages in the business of offering payday loans, which is a loan transaction where a postdated
check or other check that the parties agree will be held for a period of time prior to presentment for payment or deposit is accepted as collateral for the
loan.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT: A unique development of a tract of land, under unified ownership or control, in accordance with the provisions of this
title.
PLANNING AND ZONING BOARD: The planning and zoning board of the village of Streamwood as established in accordance with title 2, chapter 1 of this
code is the planning and zoning board referred to in this zoning title.
POD: Any portable container, with or without wheels, used for temporary storage of household items or construction equipment.
PORCH: A roofed over, but otherwise unenclosed structure, projecting out from the wall or walls of a main structure. The enclosure of such a porch to a
height of not more than three feet (3') with a railing, and that railing remaining fifty percent (50%) open to the weather, shall not be deemed enclosed. All
porches shall have a continuous trenched foundation around the perimeter.
PREMISES: A lot, together with all improvements thereon.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 403/498
PROPERTY LINES: See definition of Lot Line.
RAIN GARDEN: A shallow depression in a yard that is planted with native wetland or wet prairie wildflowers and grasses and that collects rainwater runoff
from downspouts or sump pumps.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: Any unit designed primarily for living or sleeping purposes, equipped with wheels or placed upon a wheeled device for the
purpose of transporting from place to place. This term shall include, but not be limited to, camping trailers, campers, tent trailers, motor coaches, tent
campers, and shall include also those wheeled devices upon which they are placed. For the purposes of this definition, boats, snowmobiles and those
wheeled devices upon which they are placed, utility trailers used for noncommercial purposes, and racing car trailers are included, and shall be counted
separately as a recreational vehicle herein.
RESEARCH LABORATORY: A building or group of buildings in which are located facilities for scientific research, investigation, testing, or experimentation,
but not facilities for the manufacture or sale of products, except as incidental to the main purpose of the laboratory.
RESIDENTIALLY ZONED LOT: A parcel of land, whether platted or not, that is zoned R-0, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4 or R-5, under this code.
RESTAURANT, CARRYOUT: Any business establishment where food is prepared for sale for consumption off the premises of the business establishment,
which provides no seating accommodations for patrons either within or outside the structure and which posts signs regarding the prohibition of consuming
food upon the premises both inside and outside of business establishment.
RESTAURANT, SIT DOWN: Any establishment, the primary purpose of which is to offer food for sale and served for consumption at tables in
nondisposable containers on the premises within the structure.
RIGHT OF WAY, PUBLIC: An accessway dedicated to public uses.
RIGHT OF WAY, RAILROAD: A strip of land with tracks and appurtenant track operational facilities.
SENIOR HOUSING (ASSISTED AND SUPPORTIVE LIVING RESIDENCES): Multi-family or single-family residential dwelling units designed for persons
aged fifty five (55) years and older, which generally includes twenty four (24) hour protective oversight and assistance for individuals with functional
limitations, where such assistance may include help with activities of daily living; administration of medicine; first aid and medical care for minor ailments;
and round the clock protective oversight.
SENIOR HOUSING (INDEPENDENT LIVING RESIDENCES): Multi-family or single-family residential dwelling units designed for persons aged fifty five
(55) years and older, which may or may not offer meal service to residents and may offer a limited array of supportive care services and/or service
coordination.
SETBACK: The minimum horizontal distance between a lot line and the nearest side of a structure to such lot line.
SHED: A single storied structure built for storage of materials and equipment excluding automobiles.
SIGN: Every name, identification, description, announcement, declaration, demonstration, display, flag, illustration or insignia, and the structure displaying
or supporting any of the same, affixed directly or indirectly to or upon any building or outdoor structure, erected or maintained upon land, which directs
attention to an object, product, place, activity, person, institution, organization or business. The term "sign" shall not include any nonflashing, nonrotating,
nonmoving, nonanimated device which is entirely within any enclosed building, whether or not said sign or device can be observed from the outside of the
building.
SIGN, ADVERTISING: A sign which directs attention to a profession, business, activity, commodity, service or entertainment other than one conducted,
sold or offered upon the premises where such sign is located, or within the building to which such sign is affixed.
SIGN AREA: The entire face of a sign, including the advertising surface and any framing, trim or molding, but not including the supporting structure.
SIGN, BUSINESS: A sign which directs attention to a profession or business conducted, or to a commodity, service, activity or entertainment sold or
offered upon the premises where such sign is located or in the building to which such sign is affixed.
SIGN, CONSTRUCTION: Any sign identifying individuals or companies involved in design, construction, wrecking, financing or development when placed
upon the premises where work is under construction, but only for the duration of construction or wrecking.
SIGN FACE: The surface of the sign upon, against or through which the message of the sign is displayed.
SIGN, FLASHING: Any illuminated sign on which the artificial light or lights are not maintained stationary or constant in intensity and color at all times
when such sign is illuminated. For the purpose of this title, any moving illuminated sign shall be considered a flashing sign.
SIGN, GROUND: A sign which is supported by upright braces or some object on the ground, with not more than two feet (2') of clear space between the
bottom of the face of the sign and the grade beneath the sign face.
SIGN, ILLUMINATED: Any sign which has characters, letters, figures, designs or outline illuminated by electric lights, luminous tubes, or any other means
of artificial illumination.
SIGN, INSTRUCTIONAL: Any sign which notifies or instructs the public as to limitations or regulations relating to designated uses of certain parcels of
property or public or private streets or rights of way, and including warning signs, exit signs, traffic signs and directional signs for parking or parking
restrictions.
SIGN, MONUMENT: A sign placed at the major entrance to a large commercial shopping center.
SIGN, MOVING: Any sign which revolves, rotates, swings, undulates, or otherwise attracts attention by moving parts, whether operated by mechanical
equipment or by natural sources, but not including flags or banners.
SIGN, POLITICAL: A temporary sign announcing the support or opposition of a candidate, issue, party or referendum.
SIGN, PROJECTING: Any sign which is attached to a building or other structure and extends beyond the line of said building or structure or beyond the
surface of that portion of the building or structure to which it is attached by more than twelve inches (12").
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 404/498
SIGN, RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT: A sign placed at the major entrances to a subdivision or a planned unit development identifying that subdivision or
planned unit development.
SIGN, ROOF: Any sign erected, constructed, and maintained upon or over the roof or top of the wall, wall tower or turret of any building with the principal
support on the roof structure.
SIGN, TEMPORARY: Any sign, banner, pennant, valance or advertising display that by intent is not permanent, constructed of cloth, canvas, lightweight
fabric, cardboard, wallboard or other lightweight materials with or without frames, intended to be displayed for a short period of time only.
SIGN, WALL: Any sign attached to and supported by the exterior surface of the wall of a building or structure in a place substantially parallel to that of
supporting wall.
SIGN, WINDOW: A temporary or permanent sign which is visible to persons in the public right of way and which is placed within or on the inside of a glass
window or on the inside of a building and within one foot (1') of a window or one that can be seen from the outside of a building.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREA: Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttock and female breast below a point
immediately above the top of the areola or human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely or opaquely covered.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES: Human genitals, in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal, acts of human masturbation, oral copulation, sexual
intercourse or sodomy, actual or simulated, and/or fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic regions, buttock, anus or female breast.
STORY: That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above, or if there is no floor above, the space
between the floor and the ceiling next above.
STREET: A public or private right of way or easement which affords a primary means of access to abutting properties. An alley shall not be considered a
street.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATION: Any change other than incidental repairs which would prolong the life of the supporting members of a building, such as the
addition or alteration of bearing walls, columns, beams, girders or foundations.
STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected which requires location on the ground or is attached to something having location on the ground. The term
"structure" shall include buildings, swimming pools, decks and gazebos, but shall not include fences.
SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE: The subdivision ordinance of the village of Streamwood (title 10 of this code).
TAVERN (COCKTAIL LOUNGE): An establishment where liquors are sold to be consumed on the premises.
TOXIC MATERIAL: A substance (liquid, solid, or gaseous) which by reason of an inherent deleterious property, when emitted in any amount, is injurious to
living organisms of plants, animals, and human beings.
TRAILER: A portable structure supported by wheels, jacks, skids or blocks without a permanent foundation, which is towed or hauled by another vehicle
and used for carrying materials, goods or objects, or used for temporary occupancy or temporary offices.
TRAILER BED: That portion of a trailer designed to make contact with and bear the weight of the load to be carried.
TYPE I VEHICLE: A motor vehicle that is not greater than seven feet six inches (7'6") in height, not greater than twenty two feet (22') in length, with a
weight of not over eight thousand (8,000) pounds and that is not a prohibited "commercial vehicle" or a "recreational vehicle" as defined herein.
TYPE II VEHICLE: A. A motor vehicle that would, without roof attachments, qualify as a type I vehicle, but which does not exceed eight feet (8') in height
with roof attachments, or
B. A motor vehicle that would, without a snowplow blade attachment, qualify as a type I vehicle, or
C. A motor vehicle with both of the circumstances described in subsections A and B of this definition, or
D. Limousines that do not exceed the type III vehicle size thresholds.
TYPE III VEHICLE: A motor vehicle that is:
A. Either greater than seven feet six inches (7'6") in height or greater than twenty two feet (22') in length, or more than eight thousand (8,000) pounds
and that is not a type II vehicle, or a "recreational vehicle" as defined herein, or
B. Either less than seven feet six inches (7'6") in height or less than twenty two feet (22') in length, or less than eight thousand (8,000) pounds and
allows for property to be stored and/or transported in a manner that is not safe or completely enclosed.
UNIT SIZE: The sum of the gross floor area, excluding any basement or attached garage.
USE: The purpose or activity for which the land or the buildings thereon is designed, arranged or intended or for which it is occupied or maintained.
USE, ACCESSORY: See definition of Accessory Building, Structure Or Use.
USE, INCOMPATIBLE: A use which is adverse to other uses in a district.
USE, NONCONFORMING: Any established use of land or a structure which is not a permitted or special use in the district in which such use is located.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 405/498
USE, PERMITTED: A use which may be lawfully established in a particular district, provided that it conforms with all requirements and regulations of such
district.
USE, PRINCIPAL: The main use, either permitted or special, of land or buildings as distinguished from a subordinate or accessory use.
USE, SPECIAL: As listed in each district, a use subject to special provisions and which, because of unique characteristics, cannot be properly classified as
a permitted use.
VARIATION: An exception to any dimensional or quantitative requirements of this title.
VEHICLE STACKING AREA: An area of pavement designed to allow for the queuing of vehicles at drive-throughs, or other similar facilities, assuming a
twenty two foot (22') front bumper to front bumper spacing ratio between vehicles. The vehicle stacking area shall be calculated to include the vehicle
stationed at the service window as the first vehicle in the queue, and include each vehicle which queues behind the first vehicle.
VEHICLE WEIGHT: Shall be determined by the lowest license plate weight classification that could be placed on a vehicle, not by the actual license plate
on the vehicle.
VENDING MACHINE: A machine for dispensing merchandise, designed to be operated by the consumer.
WHOLESALE ESTABLISHMENT: A business establishment engaged in selling to retailers or distributors rather than to consumers.
YARD: An open space on a lot extending along a lot line and to a depth or width specified in the yard requirements of the zoning district in which such lot is
located.
YARD, CORNER SIDE: A side yard which adjoins a public street.
YARD, FRONT: A yard bounded by the front lot line and the side lot lines to a depth specified as the front yard requirement in each district.
YARD, REAR: A yard bounded by the rear lot line and side lot lines to a depth specified as the rear yard requirements in each district.
YARD, SIDE: A yard extending along a side lot line from the front yard to the rear yard to a width specified as the side yard requirements in each district.
YARDS, OVERLAPPING: That area created by two (2) intersecting required yards (see figure 2 of this definition).
FIGURE 2
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 406/498
(Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010; amd. Ord. 2015-9, 5-7-2015)
Chapter 3
ZONING DISTRICTS
11-3-1: ZONING DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED:
For the purpose and provisions of this title, the village is hereby organized into the following zoning district classifications:
R-0 Single-family residence district
R-1 Single-family residence district
R-2 Single-family residence district
R-3 Single-family residence district
R-4 Residential transition district
R-5 General residence district
C-1 Limited commercial and office district
C-2 Neighborhood commercial district
C-3 Highway commercial district
I-1 Office, research and restricted industrial district
I-2 General industrial district
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 407/498
(Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-3-2: ZONING MAPS:
The boundaries of the zoning districts designated above are established as on the maps entitled "zoning map, village of Streamwood", as amended, which
are made a part hereof, and shall have the same force and effect as if the zoning maps, together with all notations, references and other information
shown thereon were fully set forth and described herein. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-3-3: DISTRICT BOUNDARIES:
When uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of the various districts as shown on the official zoning map, the following rules shall apply:
A. All land within the corporate limits is zoned and is subject to this title.
B. District boundary lines are either the centerlines of railroads, highways, streets, alleys, or easements, or the boundary line of sections, quarter sections,
divisions of sections, tracts or lots or such lines extended or as otherwise indicated.
C. In areas not subdivided into lots and blocks, wherever a district is indicated as a strip adjacent to and paralleling a street or highway, the depth of such
strips shall be measured at right angles from the centerline of the street or highway and the length of the frontage shall be in accordance with the
dimensions shown on the map from the section, quarter section or division lines, or centerlines of street, highway or railroad rights of way unless
otherwise indicated.
D. Where a lot held in single ownership of record on the effective date of this title is divided by a district boundary line, the entire lot shall be construed to
be within either district at owner's discretion, provided that this shall not apply if it increases the less restricted frontage of the lot by more than twenty
five feet (25'). (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-3-4: ZONING OF ANNEXED LAND:
Any territory which is not within the corporate limits of the village, but is contiguous to the corporate limits of the village, may be annexed to the village
subject to the provisions and procedure set forth in the Illinois Compiled Statutes.
Such lands hereafter annexed to the village shall be automatically zoned in R-1 single-family residence district until such time as the land is rezoned, and
shall be subject to all the requirements of this title. Any rezoning of newly annexed land subject to an annexation agreement shall be entered into by the
corporate authorities pursuant to the following procedures: (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
A. The Streamwood planning and zoning board shall hold a public hearing. The notification and publication requirements shall be identical to those
required by this title for a map amendment. The planning and zoning board shall, within fifteen (15) days of the close of public hearing, communicate to
the village board whether said agreement is consistent with the village master plan and whether said agreement advances the goals, objectives,
policies and interest of the village.
B. Following receipt of the communication from the planning and zoning board, the village board shall enter into the annexation agreement only by the
positive vote of two-thirds (2/3) of the president and village board present and/or actively participating in the proceedings. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff.
1-1-2010; amd. Ord. 2015-9, 5-7-2015)
Chapter 4
GENERAL REGULATIONS
11-4-1: CONTROL OVER USE:
A. Establishment Of New Uses: The use of a structure or lot established after the effective date hereof shall be for a use which is herein specified as a
permitted, special, or accessory use under the district regulations applicable to the district in which such structure or lot is located.
B. Existing Building Permits: Where a building permit for a structure has been issued in accordance with law prior to the effective date hereof, and where
construction has commenced within six (6) months of such effective date and is completed within two (2) years of such effective date, the structure may
be completed in accordance with the approved plans; and further, may upon completion be occupied under a certificate of occupancy for the use
originally designated subject thereafter to the provisions of nonconformities.
C. Existing Uses:
1. Where the use of a structure or lot existing at the time of the adoption of this title is rendered nonconforming under the provisions of this title, the
provisions of nonconformities shall apply to such use.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 408/498
2. Where a structure and the use thereof of a lot lawfully exists on the effective date hereof, and is classified by this title as a special use in the district
in which it is located, such use shall be considered a lawful special use. A special use permit issued in accordance with procedures herein set forth
shall be required for any expansion or change of such existing legal structure or special use.
D. Existing Unlawful Use: Any unlawful use existing at the time of the adoption of this title which is also in conflict with the requirements of this title shall
remain unlawful hereunder.
E. Number Of Buildings And Uses On Zoning Lot:
1. Buildings: Not more than one principal detached building shall be located on any zoning lot, except in the case of planned unit developments.
2. Uses: Not more than one principal use shall be permitted on a zoning lot unless otherwise provided for in this title.
F. Open Use: Where a lot is to be utilized for a permitted use without structures, the required yards for such lot shall be provided and maintained as set
forth in this title.
G. Uses Not Specifically Permitted In Districts: When a use is not specifically listed as a permitted, special, or temporary use, such use is hereby expressly
prohibited unless by application and authorization as provided for in this title. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-4-2: CONTROL OVER BULK:
A. New Building Or Structure: Each new building or structure shall conform with the bulk regulations established herein for the district in which such
building or structure is located.
B. Existing Building Or Structure: No existing building or structure shall be enlarged, reconstructed, structurally altered, converted or relocated in such a
manner as to conflict or further conflict with the bulk regulations of this title for the district in which such building or structure is located.
C. Previously Approved Lots Of Record: All previously approved lots of record may be improved subject to the requirements of this title.
D. Building Height: No building shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed or structurally altered to exceed the maximum building height of the
zoning district in which it is located except for:
BUILDING APPURTENANCES AND
ATTACHED ACCESSORY STRUCTURES
Group
A
Chimneys, bell towers, ornamental towers, spires, scenery lofts, steeples, fire towers, and water towers may exceed the maximum
building height of the district in which it is located by not more than 25 feet.
Group
B
Amateur and citizens band antennas may be erected to a height not to exceed 60 feet in residential districts. Energy collecting devices
may not exceed the height of the existing structure by more than 1 foot; except that wind turbines may exceed the height by no more
than 6 feet, and be limited to 2 such devices on any zoning lot.
Group
C
Cooling towers, elevator bulkheads, flagpoles, mechanical appurtenances, parapet wall, radio and television receiving antennas,
recreational facilities, roof gardens and skylights may exceed the maximum building height by not more than 5 feet except as provided
for in group B.
(Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-4-3: CONTROL OVER YARDS, OPEN SPACE AND LOT AREA:
A. Continued Conformity With Yard Regulations: The maintenance of yards, other open spaces and minimum lot area legally required for a building within
a zoning district shall be a continuing obligation upon the owner of such building or property. Furthermore, no legally required yard, other open space,
or minimum lot area allocated to any building shall, by virtue of change of ownership or for any other reason, be used to satisfy yard, other space or
minimum lot area requirements for any other building.
B. Division Of Zoning Lot: No zoning lot shall be hereafter divided into two (2) or more zoning lots unless all zoning lots resulting from such division shall
conform with all the applicable bulk regulations of the zoning district in which the property is located. If a lot is built upon under one building permit, then
divided, it can only be so divided if each newly created lot, or portion of the original lot, is platted as a lot of record and conforms to the subdivision
regulations of the village (title 10 of this code).
C. Location Of Required Yards And Open Space: All yards and other open spaces allocated to a structure or use shall be located on the same zoning lot
as such structure or use, except as otherwise provided in this title.
D. Determination Of Yards In Particular Cases:
1. Established Setbacks: Where lots comprising forty percent (40%) or more of the frontage on a block are developed with buildings having front yards
of greater depth than required herein, new buildings shall not be erected closer to the street than the average front yard so established by the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 409/498
existing buildings.
2. Corner Lots: On corner lots, the front yard shall be deemed to be the side with the shortest street dimension of the lot.
3. Through Lot:
a. On through lots the front lot line shall be determined by the community development director. However, when a front lot line has been established
along the same street right of way line, the right of way line shall be the front lot line on all remaining through lots in that block.
b. On through lots, all front yard requirements shall apply to the required rear yard unless such rear yard is properly screened by a screening fence
or landscaped screening at least five feet (5') in height.
4. Setbacks Along Streets And Thoroughfares:
a. Existing Structures: Minimum setbacks for existing structures on lots abutting a street or thoroughfare shall be the distance required for a front
yard, or corner side yard, in the district in which such lots are located, measured from the existing right of way line of the street or thoroughfare.
b. New Structures: Minimum setbacks for new structures on lots abutting a street or thoroughfare shall be the distance required for a front yard, or
corner side yard, in the districts in which such lots are located, measured from the existing right of way line as designated on the official map of the
village, or as duly established by other ordinances and recorded or established setbacks of the village, or as established by the community
development director, or as established by county or state highway authorities, whichever has the greatest right of way requirements.
5. Setbacks Along Arterial Roads: Zoning lot setbacks, in all residential zoning districts located along principal arterial roads, shall be twice the distance
of the required yard.
E. Permitted Obstructions In Required Yards: Required yards shall be unobstructed from the ground level to the sky except for the following permitted
obstructions when located in the required yard specified and in conformance with the sight line regulations of the village:
1. In all yards:
a. Awnings and canopies, projecting four feet (4') or less into the yard;
b. Steps or ramps not over four feet (4') wide, by four feet (4') in depth, which are necessary for access to a permitted building or for access to a
zoning lot from a street; unless existing ramps or stairs exceed four feet (4') in width, then a maximum of six feet (6') in width may be allowed (see
diagram 1 of this section). Roofed over decks and porches may extend to a depth of no more than six feet (6'), provided that the front yard setback
is a minimum of nineteen feet (19') (see diagrams 2 and 3 of this section). The maximum height of the porch floor, above grade, shall be four feet
(4'). All porches shall match the architectural elevation of the principal structure, and be approved by the community development director.
Exception: approved accessible ramps and platforms;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 410/498
c. Chimneys, projecting twenty four inches (24") or less into the yard, except that in side yards a minimum building separation distance of twelve feet
(12') must be maintained;
d. Flagpoles;
e. Window unit air conditioners, projecting not more than eighteen inches (18") into the yard;
f. Fences and walls, subject to the applicable restrictions;
g. Signs, subject to the applicable restriction of chapter 10 of this title;
h. Ornamental light standards;
i. Trees, shrubbery and other planting; and
j. Temporary uses and structures subject to chapter 12 of this title.
2. In front yards:
a. One-story bay windows, projecting three feet (3') or less into the yard;
b. Overhanging eaves and gutters, projecting three feet (3') or less into the yard.
3. In side yards:
a. Overhanging eaves and gutters, projecting eighteen inches (18") or less into the yard;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 411/498
b. Parking of recreational vehicles, subject to the applicable restrictions of section 11-4-5-3 of this chapter.
4. In rear yards:
a. One-story bay windows, projecting three feet (3') or less into the yard;
b. Overhanging eaves and gutters, projecting three feet (3') or less into the yard;
c. Permitted accessory structures, subject to the applicable restrictions of section 11-4-4 of this chapter;
d. Attached heating and cooling compressor units projecting not more than four feet (4') into the yard;
e. Open terraces and decks with railings which are a minimum of fifty percent (50%) open, not over four feet (4') above the average level of the
adjoining ground, but not including a permanently roofed over terrace or porch.
F. Exclusion Of Drainage District Easements: Where a lot is subject to an easement to a drainage district for maintenance or improvement of a ditch or
waterway for surface water drainage, the area subject to such easement shall not be considered in meeting the requirements of this title for minimum
lot area, maximum lot coverage, and minimum yards.
G. Exclusive Of Easements For Private Road Right Of Way: Where a lot is subject to an easement for a private road right of way, the area subject to such
easement shall not be considered in meeting the requirements of this title for minimum lot area, maximum lot coverage and minimum yards. (Ord.
2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-4-4: CONTROL OVER ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES:
A. Standards: Accessory uses are permitted in any zoning district in connection with any use which is permitted within such district. An accessory use is a
building, structure, or use, which:
1. Is customarily incidental and subordinate to and serves a principal use;
2. Is subordinate in area, extent, and purpose to the principal building or principal use served;
3. Contributes to the comfort, convenience, or necessity of occupants in the principal building or principal use served; and
4. Is located on the same zoning lot as the principal building or principal use served.
B. Time Of Establishment: An accessory use shall not be established on any lot prior to the establishment of the principal use to which it is accessory.
C. Attached Accessory Structures: An attached accessory structure shall comply with all district regulations applicable to the principal structure. Attached
accessory structures shall be a minimum of five feet (5') from any lot lines or any detached structures. The maximum height of any deck floor shall not
exceed twelve feet (12'). A satellite dish, over three feet (3') in diameter, may not be mounted on a roof in any residential district. Satellite dish
installations must meet the requirements for a detached accessory structure.
D. Detached Accessory Structures:
1. Restrictions:
a. Shall not be located in the required front, side, corner side or overlapping corner side/rear yards;
b. Shall not occupy more than thirty percent (30%) of the required rear yards;
c. Shall be at least ten feet (10') from the principal structure; except where an accessory building or structure and a principal building are of fire
resistive type construction, and approved by the director of community development, an accessory building or structure may be located nearer
than ten feet (10') but in no instance shall be closer than three feet (3') from the principal structure;
d. Shall not exceed the height of the principal building or structure, provided however, that in no case shall such accessory structure or building
exceed seventeen feet (17') in height, other than an accessory antenna, which shall not exceed sixty feet (60') in height, or an exterior shed, which
shall not exceed twelve feet (12') in height. Measurements shall be made from the grade immediately adjacent to the accessory structure;
e. Shall be located a minimum of five feet (5') from any lot lines and/or any other structure and shall not be located on any easement;
f. Shall not be located in required rear yard in the C and I districts. If any property line in a C or I district abuts a residential district, an accessory
structure shall not be located within twenty five feet (25') of said property line.
2. Appurtenant Equipment: All heating, ventilation and air conditioning equipment, energy collecting devices, satellite dishes and other mechanical
equipment (except isolated, nonobtrusive stacks and vents) shall be limited to one of any such device per zoning lot.
3. Garages: No more than one garage shall be permitted per zoning lot nor shall any detached garages exceed six hundred (600) square feet. If an
attached garage is converted to living area, a detached garage must be provided in conformance with subsection 11-9-3-5A of this title and any
driveway access toward the former attached garage shall be removed.
4. Sheds: No more than one shed shall be permitted per zoning lot nor shall any detached shed exceed one hundred seventy five (175) square feet.
5. Swimming Pools: No more than one swimming pool, excluding hot tubs or spas, shall be permitted per zoning lot.
6. Vending Machines: Sales or display of merchandise sold or offered for sale through vending machines provided such machines do not occupy an
aggregate ground area of more than sixteen (16) square feet. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 412/498
11-4-5: CONTROL OVER SPECIFIC USES:
11-4-5-1: HOME OCCUPATIONS:
There are permitted in all residential districts, home occupations which are businesses or occupations of a type which will be compatible with the character
of the residential districts and which will comply with the following standards, as well as with all other regulations of the village:
A. The home occupation shall be incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling, for dwelling purposes, and shall not occupy more than twenty
percent (20%) of the total floor area of the residence. The area of all accessory structures used in the performance of the home occupation shall be
included in the total floor area calculations;
B. There shall be no signs, display, or activity that will indicate from the exterior that the building is being used in part, for any purpose other than that of a
dwelling;
C. The home occupation and all related activity, including storage, shall be conducted completely within the dwelling unit or permitted accessory
structures;
D. There shall be no commodities sold or services rendered that require receipt or delivery of merchandise, goods, or equipment by other than a
passenger motor vehicle or by parcel or letter carrier mail services;
E. There shall be no special structural alterations, or construction features, to the dwelling or permitted accessory structures, nor the installation of special
equipment attached to walls, floors, or ceilings;
F. The home occupation and any related activity shall not create any traffic hazards or nuisances in the public streets and all vehicle parking generated by
such operations shall be located on the property; and shall conform to the requirements of commercial vehicle parking in the residential zoning district,
in which the home is located, and chapter 9 of this title;
G. There shall be no perceptible noise, odor, smoke, electrical interference or vibration emanating from the structure in which the home occupation is
located; and
H. No more than two (2) employees shall be permitted.
I. Home occupations which are not permitted include, but are not limited to, the following:
Ambulance service.
Animal grooming, care, kenneling or treatment.
Beauty parlors.
Boarding houses.
Dance schools in excess of two (2) pupils at any given time.
Firearms sales - wholesale, retail or office use.
Food product preparation or distribution.
Food product sales - retail or wholesale.
Healthcare facilities.
Hotels.
Laboratories.
Landscape contractors.
Limousine service.
Motels.
Motor vehicle repair and maintenance.
Palm, psychic or tarot readings; any fortune telling services.
Restaurants, catering establishments of all types.
Taxicab service.
Use of toxic materials - as defined in BOCA and NFPA.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 413/498
Vocational schools.
Exception: Landscape contractor's office, when proof is presented and approved indicating that storage of materials and equipment is off site.
J. Garage sales and home sales shall not be considered home occupations, but shall be regulated as temporary uses. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-
2010)
11-4-5-2: AIR RIGHTS:
The development of air rights above land utilized for expressways, highways, railroads, streets, and drainage channels shall be in accordance with chapter
8, "Planned Unit Developments", of this title. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-4-5-3: RECREATIONAL VEHICLES, BOATS AND SNOWMOBILES:
A. Standards:
1. Parked or stored recreational vehicles or boats shall not be used for living, sleeping, or housekeeping purposes. Exceptions to this standard may
only be granted pursuant to the conditions set forth in subsection B2 of this section.
2. No recreational vehicle shall be connected to gas, water or sanitary sewer service. Temporary electrical hookup may be permitted.
3. Recreational vehicles shall not be used as accessory structures in any district.
4. Recreational vehicles shall not have their wheels removed or be affixed to the ground so as to prevent ready removal of the vehicle.
5. Recreational vehicles shall not be parked or stored in such a way as to create a dangerous or unsafe condition.
6. No major repair shall be performed on any recreational vehicle except within a garage or an accessory, fully enclosed structure.
B. Parking And Storage Restrictions:
1. No more than one recreational vehicle, as permitted herein, conforming to the size restriction may be parked or stored in the open on a lot in a
residential district on an approved surface in front of a house in the required front yard, the interior side or rear yard. On corner lots, the vehicle shall
also be located behind the required setback line for any side yard facing a street, and at least three feet (3') from the sidewalk or an easement
dedicated to pedestrian or bicycle movement; or if no sidewalk, two feet (2') from the property line. The recreational vehicle shall not block or extend
over the public sidewalk.
a. The recreational vehicle shall be operational and moved from its location a minimum of one time during the recreational vehicle season. If the
village believes that the vehicle has not been operational during the season the owner may be requested to demonstrate that the vehicle is
operational or provide written proof in a form acceptable to the village that the vehicle is operational.
2. Residents who have visitors from out of town shall obtain a special permit from the Streamwood community development department allowing them
to temporarily park a recreational vehicle, boat or trailer on the approved surface of a residential lot for a temporary occupancy period of one week.
Such permit shall be displayed in the window of the recreational vehicle. Hookup and use of cooking and sanitary facilities is not permitted.
Temporary electrical hookup may be permitted. No permit shall be issued under this section more than three (3) times per year for any individual
zoning lot. Said permits shall be separated by at least five (5) days from the expiration of one permit to the issuance of the next permit.
C. Size Restrictions:
1. In all residential districts, the maximum size of any recreational vehicle shall not exceed thirteen feet zero inches (13'0") in height or exceed thirty five
feet (35') in length, open trailers not stored within a structure shall be a maximum of sixteen feet (16') long and have no ancillary racks.
2. Any recreational vehicle which is greater than eight feet (8') in height shall be parked or stored only behind the front of the principal structure and
shall be five feet (5') from the rear lot line, and three feet (3') from the side lot line. On corner lots, the vehicle shall also be located behind the
required setback line for any yard facing a street.
D. Administration:
1. Permit Required: A permit shall be obtained from the community development director for:
a. New required surface for access and/or parking of a recreational vehicle or vehicles anywhere on the property.
b. Recreational vehicle used for out of town visitors.
2. Application And Fees: Applications for recreational vehicle parking required by subsection D1 of this section shall be submitted to the community
development director and shall be accompanied by payment of the required fees, established by the village board and such scaled drawings and
other information as the director may require. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-4-5-4: TENTS:
Except as otherwise provided herein, under temporary uses, tents shall not be erected, used, or maintained on a lot, except such tents as are customarily
used for recreational purposes. Such recreational tents shall be located on the same lot as a dwelling and shall not be allowed within the required front or
side yard. All uses of tents, other than recreational, shall be regulated as temporary uses. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 414/498
11-4-5-5: STORAGE RESTRICTIONS:
A. Refuse: The open storage of refuse, scrap, or building debris is prohibited in all zoning districts. All such material shall be kept in enclosed containers
while awaiting removal and stored as follows:
1. In residential districts: All containers shall be in conformance with this code's restrictions on refuse removal and shall be kept to the rear or side of
the principal structure or within a garage or accessory structure, except at those times designated for removal.
2. In nonresidential districts:
a. Location: All containers shall be in conformance with this code's restrictions pertaining to refuse removal. Such containers shall be stored in a neat
and orderly fashion and properly secured so as not to interfere with or be hazardous to pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
b. Screening: All refuse containers shall be fully enclosed by a screening fence or densely landscaped screening of a height sufficient to screen such
containers from view from adjoining properties and public or private ways.
B. Building Materials: The storage of building materials and equipment shall be allowed only on a lot where a building permit has been lawfully issued by
the community development director. Such materials and equipment shall be stored in a neat and orderly fashion, and shall be removed as soon as
they are no longer required for the permitted construction.
C. Disabled Motor Vehicles:
1. In Residential Districts: Disabled or damaged motor vehicles may be stored in the open within a required front yard in a residential district for a
period not to exceed seven (7) days. Major repairs shall not be made on such vehicles except within a garage or accessory structure.
2. In Nonresidential Districts: Disabled or damaged motor vehicles awaiting or under repair may be stored in the open in a nonresidential district only
on a lot where such storage and repair is customary in the operation of a lawfully established principal use. Such vehicles shall be removed or placed
within an enclosed structure within thirty (30) days. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-4-5-6: FENCES:
This section is intended to regulate the construction, placement and maintenance of fences and screenings as required or allowed in this title. Fences or
screenings will be allowed as permitted or special uses which are not detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare of the village, and in addition, do not
diminish the right of citizens to sufficient air and light and safety of travel and access throughout the village. Fences or screenings will be required that are
deemed necessary to ensure the rightful enjoyment of all properties, to protect property values, to ensure the safety of the public rights of way and to
protect the public from dangerous or potentially dangerous uses.
A. General Regulations:
1. Fences In Right Of Way: No fence shall be erected or maintained in any public right of way except those fences erected for the purpose of ensuring
the public safety by a public body having proper authority.
2. Barbed Wire And Electrically Charged Fences: The use of barbed wire or electrically charged fences is prohibited on all land used for residential
purposes. The use of barbed wire or electrically charged fences may be approved as a special use on land used for other than residential purposes,
but then only above a height of seven feet (7').
3. Maintenance Of Fences And Screening: Any fences or landscaped screening used to satisfy the requirements of this section or required as a
condition of approval for a special use permit shall be continually maintained for the duration of the use involved.
4. Line Of Sight Obstruction: In no event shall any wall, fence, or other structure or planting be placed or maintained in a location relative to a public or
private street, alley, driveway or other means of ingress or egress such that the sight of oncoming vehicular or pedestrian traffic is impaired for users
of such means of ingress and egress in accordance with regulations contained in this code.
5. Minimum Distance Between Fences: Where a lawful existing fence exists on a common lot line there shall be a minimum of three feet (3') between
adjoining solid or open fences.
6. Construction Side In: The construction side of the fence must face in toward the permit holder's lot.
B. Fence Permit Required: Anyone wishing to erect a fence within the village shall obtain a building permit from the community development department.
C. Height Regulations:
1. Front Yard Fences: No fence shall be erected or maintained in a front yard of any lot adjoining a public street in any district.
2. Side Yard And Rear Yard Fences: No fence shall be erected or maintained in a side yard or a rear yard in any district to a height greater than six feet
(6'), except that fences seven feet (7') in height may be erected in areas zoned industrial or as provided for as a modification in chapter 13 of this
title. However, fences erected by a public body within the right of way, on Routes 59, 19 and 20, and Schaumburg and Barrington Roads may be
erected to a height not to exceed ten feet (10') and may be a minimum of six inches (6") from any existing parallel fencing.
3. Corner Side Yard Fences: No fence shall be erected or maintained in a corner side yard, except that corner side yard and overlapping corner
side/rear yard fences may be six feet (6') if said fencing is located a minimum of fifteen feet (15') from the property line along the public right of way.
4. Double Frontage Lots: On double frontage lots where the rear yard abuts a public street, fences shall be permitted along the rear property line on
private property, no closer than one foot (1') from the public right of way.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 415/498
5. Triple Frontage Lots: On triple frontage lots where the rear yard abuts a public street, fences shall be permitted along the rear property line on
private property, no closer than one foot (1') from the public right of way.
D. Termination Of Nonconforming Fences: It is reasonable that a time limit be placed upon the continuance of existing nonconforming fences. An
amortization program permits the owner to plan during a period when he is allowed to continue the nonconforming fences while at the same time
assuring that the district in which the nonconforming fences exist will eventually benefit from a substantial uniformity of permanent fences.
Nonconforming fences shall be removed under the following conditions:
1. By Abandonment: Abandonment or cessation for a period of ninety (90) days or the change of the principal use to which the nonconforming fence is
accessory shall terminate immediately the right to maintain such fence.
2. By Violation Of This Section: Any violation of the provisions of this section shall terminate immediately the right to maintain a nonconforming fence.
3. By Destruction, Damage Or Obsolescence: The right to maintain any nonconforming fence shall terminate and shall cease to exist whenever the
fence:
a. Is damaged or destroyed, from any cause whatsoever, to the extent that its repair or replacement cost exceeds fifty percent (50%) of replacement
cost as of the date it became nonconforming; or
b. Becomes obsolete or substandard under any applicable ordinance of the village; or
c. Becomes a hazard or a danger.
4. By Amortization: The right to maintain a nonconforming front yard fence shall remain with the owner of record of the property as of September 30,
2005. Any sale or lease of said property shall require the removal of any nonconforming front yard fence. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-4-5-7: COMMERCIAL VEHICLES AND TRAILERS:
A. Findings And Purpose:
1. The village board finds that the presence in residential neighborhoods of excessively large motor vehicles and certain motor vehicles that, by virtue
of their design, type, or characteristics, are not customary and incidental to the use or occupancy of residential property, has a detrimental and
blighting impact upon the residential quality and character of such neighborhoods and that more than one such vehicle upon a lot compounds the
blighting impact. The village board finds that these vehicles intrude upon the aesthetics and visual peace and quiet of a residential neighborhood,
that they can impair the free flow of traffic on residential streets and by their size are detrimental to residential traffic safety, that they often create
excessive noise for such surroundings, that their presence tends to encourage and effectuate the expansion of uses that are inconsistent with or
inappropriate to residential areas, and that their presence therefore is likely to have a negative impact upon residential property values. For similar
reasons, the village board finds that the parking and storage of large trailers also has a detrimental and blighting impact upon residential areas.
2. The purpose of this section, therefore, is to prohibit or restrict (with some exceptions), in residential districts, the parking or storage of vehicles and
trailers that, by virtue of their excessive size, or by virtue of their design, type, or characteristics, are incompatible with such districts, and to thereby
reduce the blighting and negative impacts of such vehicles and trailers in those districts.
B. Vehicle Parking And Storage Limitations And Requirements:
1. Certain Vehicles Prohibited And Permitted:
a. Type III vehicles shall not be parked or stored on a residentially zoned lot or in the public right of way or street immediately abutting any
residentially zoned lot, except as provided under subsection B5 of this section, and subject to any other applicable provisions of this section and of
this code.
b. Type I and II vehicles shall be permitted to be parked or stored on a residentially zoned lot or in the public right of way or street immediately
abutting any residentially zoned lot, subject to the provisions of this section and any other applicable provisions of this code. However, a vehicle
that is a type II vehicle by reason of the attachment of a snowplow blade may be parked or stored with blade attached only between November 1
and April 30.
2. Measurement: For purposes of the measurement of vehicle dimensions under this section, the "height" of a vehicle shall be the vertical distance
between the lowest part of the tires of the measured vehicle to the top of the highest part of the vehicle, and the "length" of a vehicle shall be the
horizontal distance between the front edge of the vehicle to the rear edge of the vehicle. For purposes of these measurements, accessories,
attachments, and materials fixed upon such vehicle shall be considered part of the vehicle (with the exception of aerial antennas and movable
equipment stored in racks).
3. Limitations On Numbers Of Vehicles In Residential Districts (R-0, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, And R-5):
a. Number Of Vehicles: The number of vehicles that may be parked or stored in residential districts shall be limited to the following:
(1) Type I vehicles are not numerically restricted. Type II vehicles that are parked or stored within a building, are not numerically restricted. No
more than one type II vehicle shall be permitted to be parked in the open on an approved surface. However, all vehicles must be lawfully parked
as defined elsewhere in this code;
Exception: type II vehicles that exceed eight feet (8') in height, but do not exceed nine feet (9') in height, which are lawfully parked behind the
front of the principal structure.
(2) Type III vehicles are not permitted, except as provided under subsection B5 of this section.
b. Counting Of Vehicles: Vehicles temporarily parked at a residence for visitation or business service reasons, "recreational vehicles" (as defined in
section 11-2-2 of this title), and motorcycles that are housed in a garage, shall not be counted for purposes of these numerical limitations. Nothing
in this section shall be interpreted as permitting the storage of vehicles if such storage is not otherwise permitted by this code.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 416/498
4. Ownership: No type II vehicle shall be parked or stored at a premises unless that vehicle is owned or leased or regularly used by a person physically
residing at that premises.
5. Exceptions: The parking and storage limitations and requirements of this subsection B are subject to the following exceptions and limitations:
a. Vehicles otherwise restricted by this section may be temporarily parked on or in front of a residentially zoned lot while being loaded or unloaded or
while rendering a service at that location.
b. Vehicles otherwise restricted by this section may be parked on a residentially zoned lot when the lawful principal use of the lot under this zoning
code is other than residential and the vehicle is directly related to that lawful use.
c. Vehicles designed or used for the purpose of accommodating the needs of disabled occupants of the site and exceeding the height limitations of
this section shall not be prohibited under this section, provided that the vehicle displays a handicapped license plate or handicapped parking
sticker issued by the state.
d. "Recreational vehicles", as defined in section 11-2-2 of this title, shall not be subject to the regulations of this section unless otherwise provided
herein.
C. Commercial Trailers Prohibited; Exceptions: Commercial trailers shall not be parked or stored on a residentially zoned lot or in the public right of way or
street immediately abutting said lot, subject to the following exceptions and limitations:
1. Trailers otherwise restricted by this section which are recreational vehicles within the meaning of section 11-2-2 of this title may be parked or stored
on a site if properly parked or stored in accordance with said section.
2. Trailers otherwise restricted by this section may be temporarily parked at a site while being loaded or unloaded or used in connection with the
rendering of a service at the site.
3. Trailers otherwise restricted by this section may be parked or stored on a site when housed within a garage.
4. Trailers or PODs otherwise restricted by this section may be temporarily parked at a site while being loaded or unloaded or used in connection with
moving or for a valid construction project for a maximum period of thirty (30) days. If the use of the storage facility extends past the thirty (30) days, a
building permit must be obtained from the community development department.
5. Type III vehicles may be parked or stored in a garage with the door through which such vehicle entered remaining closed while such type III vehicle
is parked therein.
D. Lawful Use: Trailers otherwise restricted by this section may be parked on a residentially zoned lot when the lawful principal use of the lot under this
zoning code is other than residential and the vehicle is directly related to that lawful use. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-4-6: ADULT REGULATED USES:
11-4-6-1: ADULT REGULATED USE LOCATIONS:
A. Adult regulated uses are prohibited within the area circumscribed by a circle which has a radius consisting of the following distances from the following
specified uses or zones:
1. Within, or within five hundred feet (500') of, any residential district.
2. Within, or within seven hundred fifty feet (750') of, any public or private school.
3. Within, or within seven hundred fifty feet (750') of, any church or other religious facility or institution.
4. Within, or within seven hundred fifty feet (750') of, any mental health center.
5. Within, or within seven hundred fifty feet (750') of, any public library, public park or recreation area.
6. Within, or within one thousand feet (1,000') of, any other adult regulated use.
B. The distances provided in this section shall be measured by following a straight line, without regard to intervening buildings, from the nearest point of
the property parcel upon which the proposed use is to be located, to the nearest point of the parcel of property, right of way, or the land use district
boundary line from which the proposed land use is to be separated.
C. An adult regulated use which is established in conformity with the locational restrictions of this section shall not be made nonconforming if, subsequent
to the establishment of the adult regulated use, a residential zone, public or private school, church, religious facility, mental health center, public library,
public park, recreation area or school route is created or established within the distance limitations for an adult regulated use specified in this section.
However, if any adult regulated use is terminated or discontinued for a period of thirty (30) days or more subsequent to the location of a use imposing a
distance limitation on the adult regulated use, then the adult regulated use shall become a nonconforming use. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-
2010)
11-4-6-2: WAIVER OF LOCATIONAL REQUIREMENTS:
A. Eligible Establishments: Establishments serving alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises which provide live entertainment may apply for a
waiver of the locational requirements applicable to an adult regulated use, provided the use meets the criteria set forth in subsection K of this section,
and further provided that the establishment is not within one thousand feet (1,000') of any other adult regulated use or an establishment which is the
holder of a waiver under this section.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 417/498
B. Approval Procedures: An applicant for a waiver shall comply with the requirements of this section in order to be granted a waiver of the locational
requirements for an establishment serving alcoholic beverages on the premises which provides live entertainment.
C. Fees: All applications shall be accompanied by a filing fee of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). An applicant shall also pay a five hundred dollar
($500.00) cash deposit to be applied against any additional costs necessary for the processing of the application, such as consulting engineering
services, consulting planning services, legal services, or court reporter services. Any costs incurred in excess of the five hundred dollar ($500.00) cash
deposit shall be invoiced by the village to the applicant who shall be responsible for payment of the invoice upon its receipt. No application shall be
processed until the applicant has first exhibited a receipt of the village clerk showing payment of the filing fee and cash deposit.
D. Contents Of Application: An application for a waiver of the adult use locational requirements for any property shall be filed with the community
development director and shall contain the following:
1. The name, address, and phone number of the applicant.
2. A complete disclosure of interests as provided under requirements for all applications in the administration section herein.
3. The zoning district classifications of the property.
4. Descriptions of the existing use of the property and of the general category of adult use.
5. The zoning district classifications of the property and all other properties within two hundred fifty feet (250') thereof. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-
1-2010)
6. Architectural renderings or sketches illustrating the appearance of the proposed use, as required by the planning and zoning board. (Ord. 2009-34,
12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010; amd. Ord. 2015-9, 5-7-2015)
7. A site plan showing the locations of all structures, parking and loading areas, open spaces, landscaping, yards, refuse and service areas, utilities,
signs and traffic accesses and circulationways.
8. A narrative statement evaluating:
a. The environmental and economic effects that noise, glare, odor, vibration, traffic generation or other characteristics of the proposed use will have
on nearby properties;
b. The general compatibility of the proposed use with nearby properties;
c. The compatibility of the proposed use with the village comprehensive development plan;
d. The compatibility of the proposed use with the locational regulations set forth in this title.
9. An affirmative statement that the entertainment to be presented is not distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing
or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" as defined in this zoning title.
10. An accurately scaled plot plan indicating the structure in which the adult regulated use is to be conducted and identifying and locating all land uses
and property lines within a radius of one thousand feet (1,000') of the structure.
11. Financial statements, or if the business has no financial history, financial projections of the business for which the waiver is sought, prepared in
accordance with generally accepted accounting procedures and by a certified public accountant, certified to be true and accurate and showing that
the applicant complies or is projected to comply with the criteria set forth in subsection K1f of this section. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
12. Any other information the planning and zoning board reasonably may require in determining if the proposed use meets the requirements herein.
(Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010; amd. Ord. 2015-9, 5-7-2015)
13. A listing of which locational requirement(s) the applicant seeks to have waived. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
E. Staff Review: The community development director may, together with the other departments and officials of the village, prepare a written review of the
application, provided such review is completed and forwarded to the planning and zoning board within fourteen (14) days of receipt of the application.
F. Public Hearing: The community development director shall transmit the application to the planning and zoning board and shall set a date for a public
hearing before the planning and zoning board not more than thirty (30) days nor less than fifteen (15) days after receipt of a complete and accurate
application in compliance with the standards for public hearings set forth in subsection 11-13-8E of this title.
G. Planning And Zoning Board Action: The planning and zoning board shall hold a public hearing on the application. Within fourteen (14) days after the
close thereof, the commission shall submit to the village board findings of fact relating to the waiver criteria herein, a recommendation for action and
any conditions or restrictions relating to the recommendation. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010; amd. Ord. 2015-9, 5-7-2015)
H. Village Board Action:
1. The village board shall not act upon any waiver application until either it has received a report thereupon from the community development director
or fourteen (14) days have elapsed from the date the application was received by the community development director. The village board shall act
upon a waiver application at its next regularly scheduled meeting in which a quorum is present held not sooner than forty eight (48) hours after: a)
the receipt of the staff report, or b) the expiration of the fourteen (14) day period from the date the application was received by the community
development director. The village board shall not approve the permit application unless it finds that the proposed use meets applicable waiver criteria
herein.
2. The board must base its approval of a waiver only upon criteria set forth herein for waivers. The approval or denial of a waiver by the village board
shall be considered final action subject to judicial review.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 418/498
I. Revocation Of Waiver:
1. A waiver may be revoked by the village board:
a. If the applicant or any person making a representation on behalf of the applicant makes a misrepresentation of any fact in the application or in any
testimony before any board or commission of the village;
b. If any criteria on which the waiver is approved is not complied with;
c. If after the criteria is initially complied with, compliance with such criteria is not maintained at any time;
d. If the eligible adult use is not established, or a required building permit not obtained and started within one year of the date the permit is issued;
e. If the eligible adult use shall cease for more than thirty (30) days;
f. If prior to the issuance of any required building permit, the waiver applicant transfers his interest in the property to another party;
g. If it determines that the waiver holder or the owner, operator or manager of the establishment serving alcoholic beverages has:
(1) Violated any provisions of the liquor control act;
(2) Violated any ordinance of the village contained in title 3, chapter 4 or title 4, chapters 3 and 4 of this code; or
(3) Been convicted of a felony under any federal or state law.
2. However, no waiver shall be revoked except after a public hearing by the village board after a three (3) day written notice to the holder of the waiver
affording the holder an opportunity to appear and respond to the basis for revocation contained in the notice. The three (3) day notice provision shall
commence on the day following delivery of the notice by certified mail or personal service.
J. Expansion Or Alteration: Any expansion, enlargement or structural alteration of an eligible adult use shall require a reapplication and an additional
waiver.
K. Waiver Criteria:
1. Criteria For Issuance: In evaluating the suitability of a proposed waiver of the locational requirements for an establishment serving alcoholic
beverages for consumption on the premises which provides live entertainment, the village board shall examine the following criteria of the proposed
use and its individual structures of components and shall issue the waiver, provided the proposed use meets the criteria listed in either subsections
K1a and K1c through K1m or subsections K1b and K1c through K1m of this section:
a. The land, building or structure on or in which the live entertainment is to be performed is owned by a bona fide religious, fraternal, charitable, or
educational organization which is exempt from taxation under section 501 of the internal revenue code, located within a public park or recreation
area and/or is being presented by or under the sponsorship of the village or another governmental entity; or
b. The land, building or structure on or in which the live entertainment is to be performed is located within the C-2, C-3, I-1 or I-2 zoning districts.
c. The use of land, building or structure on or in which the live entertainment is to be performed, except for the performance of the live entertainment,
otherwise complies with the applicable regulations of this title, as amended.
d. No entertainment presented or to be presented is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
e. Not less than fifty percent (50%) of the square footage of the business establishment is devoted to the preparation and service of food.
f. The gross revenue from the sale of alcoholic beverages shall not exceed sixty five percent (65%) of the gross revenue from all sales, including
food, on an annual basis.
g. No loudspeakers or sound equipment shall be used for the amplification of sound to a level discernible by the public beyond the walls of the
building in which the permitted entertainment is conducted, or if in a park or recreation area, beyond the property line of the site.
h. No residential structure or any other nonconforming structure shall be converted for use for live entertainment after enactment of the provisions of
this section.
i. If the maximum audience expected exceeds twenty five (25) people, an on site security program, including required interior and exterior lighting
plans, shall be prepared and implemented. The security program shall include the following:
(1) The presence of an on site manager during all business hours;
(2) All off street parking areas and building entries serving the entertainment use shall be illuminated during all hours of operation with a lighting
system designed to provide a minimum maintained horizontal illumination of greater than one foot-candle of light on the parking surface and/or
walkway. In the event the entertainment use shares its parking with other businesses, this requirement shall only apply within a radius of one
hundred feet (100') from any entrance into the entertainment use;
(3) All interior portions of the entertainment use shall be illuminated during all hours of operation with a lighting system designed to provide a
minimum maintained horizontal illumination of not less than two (2) foot-candles of light at the floor.
j. All exterior areas of the business, including building, landscaping and parking areas, shall be maintained in a clean and orderly manner.
k. Adequate parking shall be provided for the use in conformance with section 11-9-3 of this title. If any off street parking is proposed to be used to
meet the required number of parking spaces, a signed parking agreement with the owners must be submitted and approved.
l. Buildings and structures shall not be painted or surfaced with colors or textures or any design that would simulate a sign or advertising message
except as permitted by chapter 10 of this title.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 419/498
m. The applicant or the owner, operator or manager of the establishment serving alcoholic beverages has not:
(1) Violated any provisions of the liquor control act;
(2) Violated any ordinance of the village contained in title 3, chapter 4 or title 4, chapters 3 and 4 of this code; or
(3) Been convicted of a felony under any federal or state law.
2. Denial Of Application For Waiver: The village board may deny the application for waiver for any of the following reasons:
a. The application does not meet the standards set forth in this section;
b. An applicant has failed to provide information required on the application for the issuance of the waiver or has falsely answered a question or
request for information on the application form;
c. The premises to be used for the permitted entertainment has not been approved as being in compliance with health, fire and building codes by the
department or agency responsible under law for investigating said compliance;
d. The proposed location is in violation of, or is not in compliance with, any of the provisions of this title including, but not limited to, the requirements
under this section;
e. An applicant or an applicant's spouse is overdue on his/her payment to the village of taxes, fees, fines, or penalties assessed against him/her or
imposed upon him/her in relation to an entertainment use; or
f. The required application fees have not been paid.
L. Expiration: The waiver shall, by its own terms, expire one year after its issuance.
M. Renewal:
1. An unrevoked waiver issued pursuant to this section may be renewed upon written application to the community development director made at least
thirty (30) calendar days before the expiration date of a current valid waiver and payment of the then current nonrefundable application fee. A waiver
shall remain valid pending the community development director's consideration and the village board's decision if the holder of waiver has timely filed
the application for renewal with proper fee payment. For good cause, the community development director may extend the time for filing a renewal
application for up to ninety (90) days and may extend the prior waiver pending decision on the renewal application.
2. The application for renewal shall supply current information with respect to each category of information required in the initial application. Within
thirty (30) days from the date the renewal application for a waiver is date stamped and received at the community development department, the
community development director shall determine if it is complete, and if incomplete, shall notify the applicant in writing of its specific deficiencies. If a
written determination is not provided to the applicant within thirty (30) days after it is submitted to the community development department, the
application shall be deemed complete.
3. The community development director shall make its written review on an application for the renewal of a waiver within thirty (30) days from the date
the application is deemed to be complete. The community development director may recommend to extend the waiver without change to the original
conditions of approval, with amended or deleted conditions, or deny the extension.
4. All department or agency inspections, including, but not limited to, health, fire, and building inspections, which are required for the community
development director to consider the renewal of a waiver, shall be completed within the time limits for community development director action
provided in this section.
5. The village board shall not act upon a waiver renewal application until either it has received a report thereupon from the community development
director or thirty (30) days have elapsed from the date the application is deemed complete. The village board shall act upon a waiver renewal
application at its next regularly scheduled meeting in which a quorum is present held not less than fourteen (14) days after: a) receipt of the
community development director's report, or b) the expiration of the thirty (30) day period from the date the application is deemed complete. The
village board shall not approve the permit renewal application unless it finds that the proposed use meets applicable waiver criteria herein.
6. The board must base its approval of a renewal of a waiver only upon criteria set forth herein for the waivers. The approval or denial of a renewal of a
waiver by the village board shall be considered final action subject to judicial review. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-4-7: CONTROL OVER DEVELOPMENT IN FLOODPLAIN:
All new and existing uses and structures shall be subject to the provisions of this code related to development in the floodplain (title 10, chapter 8 of this
code). (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-4-8: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
Any use in any district shall be subject to and adhere to the performance standards which govern noise, smoke, particulate matter, toxic or noxious
matters, odors, fire and explosive hazards, vibration, glare or heat which are contained in the following village codes and ordinances as well as other
applicable ordinances, codes and standards:
Streamwood village code.
Streamwood building code, title 9 of this code.
Streamwood fire prevention code, title 6, chapter 2 of this code.
Streamwood subdivision code, title 10 of this code.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 420/498
No use already established on the effective date hereof shall be altered or modified so as to conflict with such standards. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-
1-2010)
11-4-9: EXEMPTED USES:
There are no exempted uses under this title. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-4-10: SCREENING AND LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS:
11-4-10-1: PURPOSE:
Provisions requiring screening and landscaping for commercial and industrial uses (C and I districts) containing more than seven (7) parking spaces as set
forth herein are intended and established to promote the safety, appearance, environment and preserve real estate values in the community. (Ord. 2009-
34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-4-10-2: LANDSCAPING PLANS:
A. Requirements For Landscaping Plans: A professionally prepared landscaping plan shall be required and approved by the community development
director, or his designee, as part of the zoning analysis prior to the issuance of any building permit.
B. Contents Of Landscaping Plan: In addition to the requirements contained elsewhere in this code, all landscaping plans shall contain the following
information:
1. Date, scale, north arrow and title block;
2. Size, quantity, species, and location of plant material utilized (including common and botanical name);
3. Land elevations at one foot (1') contour intervals for areas to be bermed, sloped or terraced;
4. Elevations or sections of any fences, retaining walls, or other site improvements; and
5. Survey of existing trees to ensure that, when replacing, converting or modifying an existing building, significant trees are maintained as defined in
section 10-6-9 of this code. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-4-10-3: SELECTION, INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE OF PLANT MATERIAL:
A. Plant material utilized in conformance with these requirements shall be consistent with the standard nomenclature as set forth by the American joint
committee on horticultural nomenclature and the American Nursery And Landscape Association.
B. All landscape work and material shall be in accordance with the specifications found in the latest edition of "Standard Specifications For Road And
Bridge Construction" of the Illinois department of transportation.
C. Unless such responsibility is apportioned differently by agreement of the owner and its tenants, the owner shall be responsible for the maintenance of
all landscaping which shall be maintained in good condition so as to present a healthy, neat and orderly appearance and shall be kept free from refuse
and debris. All landscaping within parking areas shall be trimmed to keep plants from obstructing the clear vision of traffic throughout the parking lot.
Failure to maintain landscaping in good condition or to replace dead plant material required by this section within thirty (30) days after the date
specified by the community development director, or his designee, shall constitute a violation of this zoning title and the owner may be penalized in
accordance with the provisions of this code. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-4-10-4: REQUIRED LANDSCAPE BUFFERS:
Existing natural landforms that could separate parking from abutting properties, divide pedestrians from vehicular traffic or otherwise enhance the safety or
aesthetics of a site may be incorporated within required landscaping and shall be considered as positive attributes in connection with requests from
variances from this section.
A. Parking Lot Setbacks: A ten foot (10') parking lot setback is required where a parking lot of four (4) parking spaces or more abuts a public right of way.
The setback shall be landscaped according to the following:
1. Nonresidential Landscaped Buffers: Where nonresidential properties are across the right of way from property zoned or planned for residential use,
landscaping the ten foot (10') setback shall consist of a minimum of three foot (3') high barrier using berms, if feasible, and shrubs or trees (with a
minimum diameter of 2 inches) distributed across one hundred percent (100%) of the entire frontage of the site (excluding driveways) in a design
satisfactory to the community development director, or his designee. The three foot (3') height shall be measured from the crown of the road or the
edge of the right of way, whichever is less.
2. Nonresidential Across From Nonresidential: Where nonresidential properties are across the right of way from property zoned for nonresidential use,
landscaping of the ten foot (10') setback shall consist of three foot (3') high barrier, using berms, if feasible, and shrubs or trees (with a minimum
diameter of 2 inches) distributed across fifty percent (50%) of the entire frontage of the site (excluding driveways) in a design satisfactory to the
community development director, or his designee. The three feet (3') shall be measured from the crown of the road or the edge of the right of way,
whichever is less.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 421/498
B. Parking Areas And Abutting Properties: Specific landscaping buffer requirements to separate parking areas from abutting properties are as follows:
1. Nonresidential Abutting Residential: Along with entire portion of the property line, where nonresidential properties abut property zoned or planned for
residential use, a landscaping buffer of at least ten feet (10') in width shall be provided on said nonresidential property. The ground cover of the
landscaped buffer shall consist of at least fifty percent (50%) live landscaping. In addition, a six foot (6') high fence, in a design approved by the
community development director, or his designee, shall be provided along the perimeter of that portion of the "vehicular use area" (as hereinafter
defined) abutting residential property, provided that if the vehicular use area extends beyond the residential property's building line (as hypothetically
extended) along a right of way abutting both residential and nonresidential property, then the fence shall be extended only so far as such building line
and a three foot (3') barrier of solid shrubs or berms shall be installed along their perimeter of that portion of the vehicular use area which is beyond
such building line. The fence shall be installed prior to issuance of an occupancy permit.
2. Nonresidential Abutting Nonresidential: Where nonresidential property abuts a nonresidential property, a landscaped area or areas shall have a
minimum width of ten feet (10') and an aggregate minimum depth equal to twenty percent (20%) of the building setback distance. The ground cover
of the landscaped areas shall consist of at least fifty percent (50%) live landscaping. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-4-10-5: INTERIOR LANDSCAPING:
For developments with more than twenty (20) parking spaces, interior landscaping in an amount of not less than five percent (5%) of vehicular use area
shall be provided.
Interior landscaped areas must be a minimum of one hundred sixty five (165) square feet each effectively distributed throughout the vehicular use area in
a design satisfactory to the community development director, or his designee. The ground cover of interior landscaped areas must contain at least fifty
percent (50%) live landscaping. At least one tree with a minimum diameter of two inches (2") or alternatively a shrub cluster, as approved by the
community development director or his designee, shall be provided for each one hundred sixty five (165) square feet of interior landscaping area.
Ornamental decoration, such as sculpture, rock formation, or gazebos may constitute landscaping for the balance, subject to the design review of the
community development director, or his designee.
The primary planting materials used in parking lots shall be shade trees. Evergreens, ornamental trees, native vegetation or other planting materials may
be used to supplement the shade tree plantings. Additionally, the use of larger landscape islands is preferable. Fewer large landscape islands will sustain
healthy trees better than more numerous small islands. By placing landscape islands opposite each other, tree canopies will extend overhead and bridge
together.
A. Performance Standards:
1. Landscape improvements shall be provided to enhance architectural features and to add visual interest adjacent to large expanses of building walls.
2. Landscape improvements shall be provided as a buffer between pedestrian and vehicular activity at primary building entrances and along building
facades.
3. Sufficient clearance shall be provided to accommodate landscape improvements provided to adjacent buildings.
B. Minimum Requirements:
1. Landscape improvements shall be provided along building facades visible from adjacent properties and right of way areas. Additional landscaping
may be required by the village board.
2. The scale of landscaped improvements provided shall be of a similar scale as proposed and surrounding structures, or capable of achieving a similar
scale, where possible.
3. Landscape improvements shall be provided to screen views of mechanical equipment, bicycle parking areas and loading docks from adjacent
properties and right of way areas.
4. Interior landscaping shall include shade trees and permeable walking paths that provide pedestrian access and serve stormwater management
purposes.
5. Evergreens shall be used to break up visual expanse of parking lot with green landscaping throughout the year.
6. Where feasible, drainage facilities and stormwater retention facilities shall be designed as landscaping features.
7. Where outlots exist within a unified shopping center area, each building shall provide and conform to these required landscape planning regulations.
8. Sidewalks along retail storefronts shall be wide enough to accommodate pedestrian amenities including required landscaping, trees and small open
spaces with seating areas. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-4-10-6: ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS:
A. Screening Of Dumpster Areas: All refuse containers shall be fully enclosed by a screening fence or densely landscaped screening of a height sufficient
to screen such containers from view from adjoining properties and public or private ways as required by the community development director.
B. Parkway Plantings: All parkway areas shall be planted with trees at a minimum spacing distance of forty feet (40') from center to center. The type of tree
and planting specifications shall be identical to the standards of title 10 of this code, as may be amended from time to time.
C. Vehicular Use Area: For the purpose of this section, "vehicular use area" shall be the area of the portion of the lot paved for use as parking lots and
driveways.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 422/498
D. Incomplete External Improvements: If landscaping, sidewalks, parking lots and other external improvements are not completed at the time of issuance
of an occupancy permit, a letter of credit in an amount equal to the uncompleted work, as determined by the community development director shall be
supplied to the village. The owner and the community development director will determine the completion date; however, that date shall not exceed one
year after the date of occupancy of any building.
E. Irrigation: All landscaped areas will require an automatic underground irrigation system. The system shall provide head to head coverage for all
landscaped areas except in areas that contain drought resistant plantings. The system shall also be designed in such a manner as to minimize
overspray onto pedestrian pathways, walkways, parking spaces and building entrances.
Exception: single-family and multi-family residential developments. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-4-10-7: ENFORCEMENT:
It shall be the responsibility of the community development director, or his designee, to enforce this section 11-4-10. However, the community development
director, at his sole discretion, may utilize the services of a consulting landscape architect to review any plans and/or specifications for conformance to this
title. The village shall be reimbursed by the property owner for any such expense incurred by the village. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-4-11: ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN STANDARDS:
11-4-11-1: PURPOSE:
Architectural design standards will ensure that development and redevelopment criteria within the village are consistently implemented, provide
compatibility to adjacent uses, and offer a viable aesthetic to the community. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-4-11-2: ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN STANDARDS IN RESIDENTIAL AREAS:
The architecture of developments within residential areas should conform to the following general design standards:
A. Use quality brick as the primary construction material on the front elevation of all structures; other materials, such as wood, stucco, and/or decorative
glass block, shall only be used as accents.
B. Use neutral colors for both the primary structure and roof to soften the architecture, with bold colors used only as subtle accents.
C. Create visual relief through use of windows, height changes, facade relief, porches and other design features.
D. Be of a design that fits within the context of the established neighborhood. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-4-11-3: ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN STANDARDS IN NONRESIDENTIAL AREAS:
The architecture of developments within nonresidential areas should conform to the following general design standards:
A. Use quality brick as the primary construction material, except that other approved masonry may be used in industrial areas; other appropriate materials,
such as wood, stucco, EIFS, decorative split faced block or other materials, shall only be used as accents.
B. Use neutral colors for both the primary structure and roof to soften the architecture, with bold colors used only as subtle accents.
C. Create visual relief through use of glass, height changes, facade relief and other design features.
D. Screening of roof mounted mechanical equipment with materials that match or complement the primary structure, when visible from the right of way.
E. Be of contemporary design that fits within the context of the established streetscape.
F. Promote two- and three-story buildings to anchor the street and offer visual relief from the typical single-story facade.
G. Corrugated metal or preengineering metals installed with exposed fasteners are prohibited on any building exterior wall, except that:
1. In commercial areas, architectural grade metal and metal products may be used on the exterior of buildings and structures, and for rooftop
screening, if incorporated into an overall architectural scheme for such building(s) or structure(s) on a zoning lot.
2. In industrial areas, metals may be used on additions to existing buildings where similar materials are extant.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 423/498
H. All buildings on a lot shall be of similar, compatible design and materials. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-4-11-4: NONRESIDENTIAL ARCHITECTURAL IMPROVEMENT REQUIREMENTS:
In order to promote the health, safety, enjoyment, and general welfare of the public and conserve or enhance the taxable value of land and buildings
throughout the village, any proposal to modify existing nonresidential properties, shall conform to the following:
A. Where more than fifteen (15) years have elapsed since it was initially developed, or wholly and substantially redeveloped, and such building or property
is not in compliance with current village code requirements, including, but not limited to, parking, dumpster enclosures, signage, landscaping and
architectural compliance, a site plan shall be developed, in conformance with section 11-4-11-5 of this chapter, to update the site and building to meet
current village code requirements to the extent feasible in consideration of the existing improvements present on the site.
B. Site improvements required of any portion of a multi-tenant property under common ownership (such as a shopping center), shall be proportionate to
the size of the developed or redeveloped tenant space relative to the whole ownership and such improvements may be deferred until such time as a
grouping of improvements may be constructed, subject to and in accordance with approval by the village and shall be implemented through the
construction of site improvements within eighteen (18) months of the plan approval, or as otherwise approved by the village board, the community
development director, or his designee. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-4-11-5: ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN PLAN REVIEWS:
At time of filing a petition for the planning and zoning board, or at the time of applying for a building permit, the developer shall provide the community
development department with four (4) copies of the following: (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010; amd. Ord. 2015-9, 5-7-2015)
A. Existing and proposed elevations of all building facades;
B. A statement or sample of all color, kind and texture of materials to be used;
C. Landscaping plans for commercial and industrial districts, in conformance with section 11-4-10 of this chapter;
D. Landscape plans for residential districts, which detail any plants to be moved or relocated, as well as a listing of all proposed new plant materials and
locations;
E. Detailed site plan including building locations, driveways, site data, and where applicable, parking lot layout. Plan shall indicate capacity and manner of
linkage to existing pedestrian or bicycle facilities, and provision of any new facilities to ensure adequate access and safety;
F. Any required stormwater control facilities, and/or site grading plan;
G. Location map with roads, parking, existing buildings and other significant features within two hundred fifty feet (250') of the proposed building site; and
H. Specifications and renderings of signage, where applicable. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
Chapter 5
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
ARTICLE 1. R-0 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT
11-5.1-1: PURPOSE AND POLICY:
The R-0 district is designed to provide for a very low density environment. To preserve and protect this district, limited nonresidential uses consistent with
the purpose of this district may be allowed either as accessory or special uses. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-5.1-2: DESCRIPTION:
The R-0 single-family residence district will be located in the far west quadrant of the village. This area includes existing large lot subdivisions. (Ord. 2009-
34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-5.1-3: PERMITTED USES:
The following uses are permitted in the R-0 single-family residence district:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 424/498
Residential uses:
Community residences.
Single-family detached dwellings. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-5.1-4: SPECIAL USES:
The following uses may be permitted in the R-0 single-family residence district when authorized by the village board pursuant to the procedures in this title:
Daycare.
Planned unit developments.
Public, quasi-public and governmental uses:
Elementary schools, public.
Forest preserves, conservation areas.
Junior high and high schools, public.
Parks and playgrounds.
Recreational uses:
Country clubs including golf courses and other recreational facilities but not including restaurants open to the public.
Golf courses, standard or par 3 but not including miniature golf or driving ranges.
Horse stables on lots of not less than ten (10) acres.
Religious institutions:
Places of worship.
Religious retreats on an area of not less than twenty five (25) acres. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-5.1-5: TEMPORARY USES:
In the R-0 single-family residence district, the following uses may be permitted as temporary uses:
Contractor's office and equipment sheds.
House and garage sales.
Real estate sales offices and model units. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-5.1-6: ACCESSORY USES:
In the R-0 single-family residence district, accessory uses and structures as regulated by section 11-4-4 of this title may include the following:
Air conditioners.
Antennas.
Dog runs.
Fallout shelters.
Fences as otherwise regulated by this title.
Garages and carports.
Greenhouses for personal not commercial uses.
Home occupations as regulated by this title.
Piers and boat docks.
Satellite dishes as detached accessory uses only.
Swimming pools for the exclusive use of the residents and their guests and subject to the fencing requirements of the village.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 425/498
Toolsheds and similar storage facilities.
Water retention and detention areas. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-5.1-7: BULK REGULATIONS:
In the R-0 single-family residence district, all uses and structures shall conform to the following bulk regulations:
A. Minimum Lot Area:
1. Every single-family detached dwelling unit shall be provided with a lot area of not less than forty thousand (40,000) square feet.
2. For special uses, a minimum lot area of greater than forty thousand (40,000) square feet may be required.
B. Minimum Lot Width:
1. Every lot used for a single-family detached dwelling unit shall be provided a minimum lot width of one hundred fifty feet (150').
2. For special uses lot widths of greater than one hundred fifty feet (150') may be required.
C. Minimum Yards: The following minimum yards shall be continuously provided and maintained:
1. Front Yards: A front yard of not less than fifty feet (50').
2. Interior Side Yards: A side yard on each side of the principal building shall be required each of which shall be not less than twenty feet (20').
3. Corner Side Yard: A side yard along the street side of a lot of not less than fifty feet (50') shall be continuously provided and maintained.
4. Reverse Corner Side Yard: A side yard along the street of a lot of not less than fifty feet (50') shall be continuously provided and maintained.
5. Rear Yard: A rear yard of not less than fifty feet (50') shall be continuously provided and maintained.
D. Maximum Lot Coverage: The total ground area occupied by the principal structure and all accessory structures shall not exceed thirty five percent
(35%).
E. Maximum Building Heights: No building or structure shall exceed forty feet (40') in height.
F. Minimum Unit Size: A minimum unit size of two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet must be provided.
G. Maximum Floor Area Ratio: The total FAR for units undergoing replacement, modification or conversion shall be forty percent (40%) of the total lot area,
except that if the conversion occurs on a lot of less than seven thousand eight hundred (7,800) square feet or where an approved planned unit
development exists, the FAR shall be forty five percent (45%) of the total lot area.
H. Regulation Beyond Minimums:
1. For special uses yards in excess of the otherwise noted minimums may be required.
2. No accessory uses shall be placed, erected or structurally altered so as to be placed closer than twenty feet (20') from principal structure and ten
feet (10') from any lot line. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-5.1-8: DISTRICT STANDARDS:
All of the property located in the R-0 residential district is subject to the general standards and regulations of this title. Property located in this district is also
subject to the following:
A. Access To Nonresidential Districts: Property used for residential purposes in the R-0 district shall not be used as a driveway or other vehicular access to
any land which is located in a commercial or industrial district.
B. Commercial Vehicle Parking: Parking or storing of not more than one commercial vehicle other than to load or unload deliveries or to render a service
outside of a garage shall be permitted. Said commercial vehicle shall not be more than a four (4) wheeled vehicle and have a maximum net weight of
one ton. Individual equipment or material of a commercial nature that may be trailed by or attached to any motorized vehicle shall not be permitted to
be separately stored in the open, in addition said equipment or material that produces noxious odors, sounds, or is a safety or health hazard shall not
be permitted attached or unattached to any motorized vehicle.
C. Parking And Loading Facilities: Off street parking and loading shall be provided in accordance with chapter 9 of this title.
D. Signs: Signs shall conform to the applicable requirements of chapter 10 of this title. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 426/498
ARTICLE 2. R-1 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT
11-5.2-1: PURPOSE AND POLICY:
The R-1 single-family residence district is designed to provide for relatively large lots within otherwise developed areas of the community. This district is
intended to provide a greater option of lifestyles and housing choices than has been otherwise available. To protect the character of this district
nonresidential uses consistent with the purpose of this district may be allowed either as accessory uses or as special uses. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff.
1-1-2010)
11-5.2-2: DESCRIPTION:
The R-1 single-family residence district will be located in the western section of the village. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-5.2-3: PERMITTED USES:
Residential uses:
Community residences.
Single-family detached dwelling. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-5.2-4: SPECIAL USES:
The following special uses may be permitted in the R-1 single-family residence district when authorized by the village board in accordance with the
procedures as set forth in this title:
Educational uses:
Colleges, universities and junior colleges.
Elementary schools.
High schools.
Junior high schools.
Nursery schools and camps, not as home occupations.
Planned unit developments.
Public and quasi-public uses:
Cemeteries.
Field houses and gymnasiums.
Forest preserves.
Government uses and buildings.
Libraries.
Parks and playgrounds.
Recreational uses:
Community center buildings, clubhouses, recreational buildings, swimming pools, handball, racquetball and tennis facilities owned and operated by
the residents of a residential development.
Country clubs, including golf courses, tennis courts, swimming pools and other similar recreational facilities.
Golf courses, regulation or par 3 but not including miniature golf or driving ranges.
Recreational clubs including tennis, handball, racquetball, and swimming owned and operated by and for the membership, but not including gun
clubs or shooting ranges.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 427/498
Religious:
Places of worship.
Residences for religious personnel.
Similar and compatible uses as authorized by the village board of trustees. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-5.2-5: TEMPORARY USES:
In the R-1 single-family residence district, the following uses may be permitted as temporary uses:
Those permitted in the R-0 district. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-5.2-6: ACCESSORY USES:
In the R-1 single-family residence district, accessory uses and structures as regulated by section 11-4-4 of this title may include the following:
Those permitted in the R-0 district. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-5.2-7: BULK REGULATIONS:
In the R-1 district, all uses and structures shall conform to the following bulk regulations:
A. Minimum Lot Area:
1. Every single-family detached dwelling unit shall be provided with a lot area of not less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet.
2. For special uses, a minimum lot area of greater than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet may be required.
B. Minimum Lot Width:
1. Every lot utilized for a single-family detached dwelling unit shall be provided a minimum lot width of one hundred feet (100').
2. For special uses, minimum lot width of greater than one hundred feet (100') may be required.
C. Minimum Yards: The following minimum yards shall be continuously provided and maintained:
1. Front Yard: A front yard of not less than thirty five feet (35').
2. Interior Side Yards: A side yard on either side of the principal structure of not less than fifteen feet (15').
3. Corner Side Yard: A corner side yard of not less than thirty five feet (35').
4. Reversed Corner Side Yard: A reversed corner side yard of not less than thirty five feet (35').
5. Rear Yard: A rear yard of not less than forty feet (40').
D. Maximum Lot Coverage: The total ground occupied by the principal structure and all accessory structures shall not exceed thirty five percent (35%).
E. Maximum Building Height: No building or structure shall exceed forty feet (40') in height.
F. Minimum Unit Size: A minimum unit size of two thousand (2,000) square feet must be provided.
G. Maximum Floor Area Ratio: The total FAR for units undergoing replacement, modification or conversion shall be forty percent (40%) of the total lot area,
except that if the conversion occurs on a lot of less than seven thousand eight hundred (7,800) square feet or where an approved planned unit
development exists, the FAR shall be forty five percent (45%) of the total lot area.
H. Regulations Beyond Minimums:
1. For special uses, yards in excess of the otherwise noted minimums may be required.
2. No accessory uses shall be placed, erected or structurally altered so as to be placed less than twenty feet (20') from principal structure and closer
than ten feet (10') from an interior side or rear yard. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-5.2-8: DISTRICT STANDARDS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 428/498
All of the property located in the R-1 residential district is subject to the general standards and regulations of this title. Property located in this district is also
subject to the following:
A. Access To Nonresidential Districts: Property used for residential purposes in the R-1 district shall not be used as a driveway or other vehicular access to
any land which is located in a commercial or industrial district.
B. Commercial Vehicle Parking: Parking or storing of not more than one commercial vehicle other than to load or unload deliveries or to render a service
outside of a garage shall be permitted. Said commercial vehicle shall not be more than a four (4) wheeled vehicle and have a maximum net weight of
one ton. Individual equipment or material of a commercial nature that may be trailed by or attached to any motorized vehicle shall not be permitted to
be separately stored in the open, in addition said equipment or material that produces noxious odors, sounds, or is a safety or health hazard shall not
be permitted attached or unattached to any motorized vehicle.
C. Parking And Loading Facilities: Off street parking and loading shall be provided in accordance with chapter 9 of this title.
D. Signs: Signs shall conform to the applicable requirements of chapter 10 of this title. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
ARTICLE 3. R-2 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT
11-5.3-1: PURPOSE AND POLICY:
The purpose of the R-2 single-family residence district is to provide for the opportunity for upscale housing developments on smaller lots than permitted
within the R-0 and R-1 residence districts. Nonresidential uses may be permitted as accessory or special uses if deemed consistent with the development
plans of the district. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-5.3-2: PERMITTED USES:
The following uses are permitted in the R-2 single-family residence district:
Residential uses:
Community residences.
Single-family detached dwellings. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-5.3-3: SPECIAL USES:
The following uses may be permitted in the R-2 single-family residence district when authorized in accordance with the procedures for special uses as set
forth in this title:
Educational uses:
Elementary, junior high and high schools.
Nursery schools, day schools and camps when conducted on property other than property being used for residential purposes.
Planned unit developments.
Public and quasi-public uses:
Cemeteries.
Essential services such as commercial communication towers, electrical substations, telephone exchanges and gas regulator stations, provided that
they are adequately screened.
Forest preserves, conservation areas and parks.
Governmental buildings and uses.
Libraries.
Museums.
Recreational and social facilities:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 429/498
Community center buildings, clubhouses, recreational buildings, swimming pools, handball and tennis facilities owned and operated by the
membership of a residential development.
Country clubs, including golf courses, tennis courts, swimming pools and other recreational facilities.
Golf courses, standard or par 3, but not including miniature courses or driving ranges.
Recreational clubs including tennis, handball and swimming owned and operated by the membership but not including gun clubs and shooting
ranges.
Religious uses:
Places of worship.
Residences for religious personnel. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-5.3-4: TEMPORARY USES:
Temporary uses, buildings or structures may be allowed subject to the issuance of temporary use permits in accordance with the provisions of chapter 12,
"Temporary Uses And Structures", of this title. In the R-2 single-family district, only the following uses may be permitted as temporary uses:
Contractor's office and equipment sheds.
House and garage sales.
Real estate sales office and model units. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-5.3-5: ACCESSORY USES:
In the R-2 single-family residence district, accessory uses and structures as regulated by section 11-4-4 of this title may include the following:
Those permitted in the R-0 district.
Dog runs. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-5.3-6: BULK REGULATIONS:
In the R-2 single-family district, uses and structures shall conform to the following bulk regulations:
A. Minimum Lot Area:
1. For every single-family detached dwelling, there shall be provided a lot having an area of not less than nine thousand six hundred (9,600) square
feet.
2. For special uses, minimum lot areas greater than nine thousand six hundred (9,600) square feet may be required as a condition for authorization.
B. Minimum Lot Width:
1. For every lot used for a single-family detached dwelling, there shall be provided a minimum lot width of seventy five feet (75').
2. For special uses, minimum lot widths greater than seventy five feet (75') may be required as a condition for authorization.
C. Minimum Yards: The following minimum yards shall be provided and maintained:
1. Front Yards: A front yard of not less than thirty feet (30').
2. Interior Side Yards: A side yard on either side of the principal building of not less than ten feet (10').
3. Corner Side Yard: A side yard along the street side of not less than thirty feet (30').
4. Reversed Corner Side Yard: A side yard along the street side of not less than twenty five feet (25'); however, accessory structures shall not encroach
into an area equal in depth to the required front yard of the adjacent lot to the rear.
5. Rear Yards: A rear yard of thirty feet (30').
D. Maximum Lot Coverage: The total ground area occupied by any principal building, together with all accessory buildings, shall not exceed thirty five
percent (35%) of the total area of the lot.
E. Maximum Building Height: No building or structure shall be erected or structurally altered to exceed a height of thirty five feet (35').
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 430/498
F. Minimum Unit Size: A minimum unit size of one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet must be provided.
G. Maximum Floor Area Ratio: The total FAR for units undergoing replacement, modification or conversion shall be forty percent (40%) of the total lot area,
except that if the conversion occurs on a lot of less than seven thousand eight hundred (7,800) square feet or where an approved planned unit
development exists, the FAR shall be forty five percent (45%) of the total lot area. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-5.3-7: DISTRICT STANDARDS:
All of the property located in the R-2 residential district is subject to the general standards and regulations of this title. Property located in this district is also
subject to the following:
A. Access To Nonresidential Districts: Property used for residential purposes in the R-2 district shall not be used as a driveway or other vehicular access to
any land which is located in a commercial or industrial district.
B. Commercial Vehicle Parking: Parking or storing of not more than one commercial vehicle other than to load or unload deliveries or to render a service
outside of a garage shall be permitted. Said commercial vehicle shall not be more than a four (4) wheeled vehicle and have a maximum net weight of
one ton. Individual equipment or material of a commercial nature that may be trailed by or attached to any motorized vehicle shall not be permitted to
be separately stored in the open, in addition said equipment or material that produces noxious odors, sounds, or is a safety or health hazard shall not
be permitted attached or unattached to any motorized vehicle.
C. Parking And Loading Facilities: Off street parking and loading shall be provided in accordance with chapter 9 of this title.
D. Signs: Signs shall conform to the applicable requirements of chapter 10 of this title. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
ARTICLE 4. R-3 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT
11-5.4-1: PURPOSE AND POLICY:
The purpose of the R-3 single-family residence district is to provide for a district which allows for an affordable single-family home in a well planned
environment. This district is designed to accommodate the older sections of Streamwood. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-5.4-2: PERMITTED USES:
The following uses are permitted in the R-3 single-family residence district:
Residential uses:
Community residences.
Single-family detached dwellings. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-5.4-3: SPECIAL USES:
The following uses may be permitted in the R-3 single-family residence district when authorized in accordance with the procedures for special uses as set
forth in this title:
Educational uses:
Elementary, junior high and high schools.
Nursery schools, day schools and camps when conducted on property other than property being used for residential purposes.
Planned unit developments.
Public and quasi-public uses:
Cemeteries.
Essential services such as commercial communication towers, electrical substations, telephone exchanges and gas regulator stations, provided that
they are adequately screened.
Forest preserves, conservation areas and parks.
Governmental buildings and uses.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 431/498
Libraries.
Museums.
Recreational and social facilities:
Community center buildings, clubhouses, recreational buildings, swimming pools, handball and tennis facilities owned and operated by the
membership of a residential development.
Country clubs, including golf courses, tennis courts, swimming pools and other recreational facilities.
Golf courses, standard or par 3, but not including miniature course or driving ranges.
Recreational clubs including tennis, handball and swimming owned and operated by the membership but not including gun clubs and shooting
ranges.
Religious uses:
Places of worship.
Residences for religious personnel. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-5.4-4: TEMPORARY USES:
Temporary uses, buildings or structures may be allowed subject to the issuance of temporary use permits in accordance with the provisions of chapter 12,
"Temporary Uses And Structures", of this title. In the R-3 single-family district, only the following uses may be permitted as temporary uses:
Contractor's office and equipment sheds.
House and garage sales.
Real estate sales office and model units. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-5.4-5: ACCESSORY USES:
In the R-3 single-family district, accessory uses and structures as regulated by section 11-4-4 of this title may include the following as well as uses and
structures similar to the following:
Those permitted in the R-2 single-family residential district. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-5.4-6: BULK REGULATIONS:
In the R-3 single-family district, uses and structures shall conform to the following bulk regulations:
A. Minimum Lot Area:
1. For every single-family detached dwelling, there shall be provided a lot having an area of not less than seven thousand eight hundred (7,800) square
feet.
2. For special uses, minimum lot areas greater than seven thousand eight hundred (7,800) square feet may be required as a condition for
authorization.
B. Minimum Lot Width:
1. For every lot used for a single-family detached dwelling, there shall be provided a minimum lot width of sixty feet (60').
2. For special uses, minimum lot widths greater than sixty feet (60') may be required as a condition for authorization.
C. Minimum Yards: The following minimum yards shall be provided and maintained:
1. Front Yards: A front yard of not less than twenty five feet (25').
2. Interior Side Yards: A side yard on either side of the principal building of not less than eight feet (8').
3. Corner Side Yard: A side yard along the street side of not less than twenty five feet (25').
4. Reversed Corner Side Yard: A side yard along the street side of not less than twenty five feet (25'); however, accessory structures shall not encroach
into an area equal in depth to the required front yard of the adjacent lot to the rear.
5. Rear Yards: A rear yard of thirty feet (30').
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 432/498
6. Exceptions:
a. For lots platted prior to 1991, a lot area of six thousand (6,000) square feet and rear yard of twenty five feet (25') will be permitted.
b. For additions to a single-family detached dwelling on a lot platted prior to 1991, the minimum setback along one legal nonconforming side may be
extended in a horizontal or vertical manner.
D. Maximum Lot Coverage: The total ground area occupied by any principal building, together with all accessory buildings, shall not exceed thirty five
percent (35%) of the total area of the lot.
E. Maximum Building Height: No building or structure shall be erected or structurally altered to exceed a height of thirty five feet (35').
F. Minimum Unit Size: A minimum unit size of one thousand three hundred (1,300) square feet must be provided.
G. Maximum Floor Area Ratio: The total FAR for units undergoing replacement, modification or conversion shall be forty percent (40%) of the total lot area,
except that if the conversion occurs on a lot of less than seven thousand eight hundred (7,800) square feet or where an approved planned unit
development exists, the FAR shall be forty five percent (45%) of the total lot area. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-5.4-7: DISTRICT STANDARDS:
All of the property located in the R-3 residential district is subject to the general standards and regulations of this title. Property located in this district is also
subject to the following:
A. Access To Nonresidential Districts: Property used for residential purposes in the R-3 district shall not be used as a driveway or other vehicular access to
any land which is located in a commercial or industrial district.
B. Commercial Vehicle Parking: Parking or storing of not more than one commercial vehicle other than to load or unload deliveries or to render a service
outside of a garage shall be permitted. Said commercial vehicle shall not be more than a four (4) wheeled vehicle and have a maximum net weight of
one ton. Individual equipment or material of a commercial nature that may be trailed by or attached to any motorized vehicle shall not be permitted to
be separately stored in the open, in addition said equipment or material that produces noxious odors, sounds, or is a safety or health hazard shall not
be permitted attached or unattached to any motorized vehicle.
C. Parking And Loading Facilities: Off street parking and loading shall be provided in accordance with chapter 9 of this title.
D. Signs: Signs shall conform to the applicable requirements of chapter 10 of this title. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
ARTICLE 5. R-4 RESIDENTIAL TRANSITION DISTRICT
11-5.5-1: PURPOSE AND POLICY:
The purpose of the R-4 residential transition district is to protect the quality and ambiance of single-family neighborhoods and utilization of medium density
residential uses as a transition between more intensive uses and single-family detached. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-5.5-2: DESCRIPTION:
The R-4 residential transition district is intended and designed to provide for a suburban environment of medium density residential development limited to
single-family detached, two-family dwellings and townhomes. This district shall only be located in areas of transition between existing or planned singlefamily
developments and multi-family, commercial or industrial land uses. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-5.5-3: PERMITTED USES:
Residential uses:
Community residences, within single-family detached structures only.
Single-family detached.
Townhomes.
Two-family dwellings. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-5.5-4: SPECIAL USES:
In the R-4 residential transition district, the following uses may be allowed when authorized by the village board pursuant to the requirements of this title:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 433/498
Educational uses:
Those permitted in the R-3 district.
Boarding schools on lots of not less than five (5) acres.
Colleges, junior colleges, universities and branches thereof.
Health and medical care institutions:
Children's daycare centers.
Nursing homes and convalescent care centers.
Planned unit developments.
Professional offices and limited commercial:
Limited commercial uses when considered as part of a unified petition for a planned unit development and where the planned commercial area does
not exceed forty five percent (45%) of the total area of the planned unit development. No fast food restaurants, bars or automobile service stations
will be permitted in an R-4 commercial area. The petitioner shall submit a list of the proposed commercial uses with the preliminary plan for review by
the planning and zoning board and approval by the village board of trustees. The approved list of commercial uses shall become a part of the final
planned unit development ordinance.
Medical and dental clinics.
Mixed use commercial and residential buildings.
Offices of attorneys, accountants, architects, landscape architects or engineers.
Public and quasi-public uses:
Those permitted in the R-3 district.
Essential services such as commercial communication towers, electrical substations, telephone exchanges and gas regulator stations, provided that
they are adequately screened.
Historic sites, museums or other landmarks preserved for public inspections and operated not for profit.
Recreational and social facilities:
Community center buildings, swimming pools, handball and tennis facilities owned and operated by the membership of a residential development.
Country clubs, including private and open to the public golf courses, tennis courts, swimming pools and other recreational facilities; eating and
drinking places accessory to such country clubs shall not be open to the public.
Golf courses.
Health and recreational clubs; eating and drinking places accessory to such clubs shall not be open to the public.
Stables and riding academies, but not including the rental of horses.
Religious institutions:
Places of worship.
Retreats, convents, seminaries, and monasteries.
Residential uses:
Group homes for greater than six (6) residents.
Housing for the elderly. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010; amd. Ord. 2015-9, 5-7-2015)
11-5.5-5: ACCESSORY USES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 434/498
In the R-4 district, accessory uses, buildings and structures as regulated in section 11-4-4 of this title shall be limited to the following:
Those permitted within the R-2 single-family residence district. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-5.5-6: DISTRICT STANDARDS:
All of the property located in the R-4 residential district is subject to the general standards and regulations of this title. Property located in this district is also
subject to the following:
A. Access To Nonresidential Districts: Property used for residential purposes in the R-4 district shall not be used as a driveway or other vehicular access to
any land which is located in a commercial or industrial district.
B. Commercial Vehicle Parking: Parking or storing of not more than one commercial vehicle other than to load or unload deliveries or to render a service
outside of a garage shall be permitted. Said commercial vehicle shall not be more than a four (4) wheeled vehicle and have a maximum net weight of
one ton. Individual equipment or material of a commercial nature that may be trailed by or attached to any motorized vehicle shall not be permitted to
be separately stored in the open, in addition said equipment or material that produces noxious odors, sounds, or is a safety or health hazard shall not
be permitted attached or unattached to any motorized vehicle.
C. Parking And Loading Facilities: Off street parking and loading shall be provided in accordance with chapter 9 of this title.
D. Signs: Signs shall conform to the applicable requirements of chapter 10 of this title. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-5.5-7: BULK REGULATIONS:
In the R-4 residential transition district, all uses and structures shall conform to the following bulk regulations:
A. Minimum Lot Size And Unit Size: The following minimum lot and unit sizes shall be continuously provided and maintained:
Descriptive Use Lot Size Unit Size
Single-family detached 7,500 sq. ft. 1,300 sq. ft.
Two-family residence 5,000 sq. ft. 1,200 sq. ft.
Townhomes 4,500 sq. ft. 1,000 sq. ft.
Professional offices 3 acres n/a
Educational uses (unless otherwise specified) 1 acre n/a
Public, quasi-public and governmental 10,000 sq. ft. n/a
Recreational and social facilities:
Stables, riding academies 3 acres n/a
Religious institutions 20,000 sq. ft. n/a
Planned developments As regulated As regulated
B. Lot Width:
1. For every single-family detached dwelling there shall be provided a lot width of not less than sixty feet (60').
2. For special uses, minimum lot widths greater than sixty feet (60') may be required as a condition for authorization.
C. Yards: The following minimum yards shall be provided and continuously maintained:
Front yard 25 feet
Interior side 8 feet
Corner side/reverse corner side 25 feet
Rear yard 30 feet
D. Maximum Height: No building or structure shall be erected or structurally altered to exceed a height of thirty five feet (35') as measured from existing
grade at the foundation to the peak of the roof.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 435/498
E. Floor Area Ratio: The maximum floor area ratio for specific uses shall be as follows:
Descriptive Use Maximum FAR
Single-family detached dwellings, including rectories, parsonages, and parish houses 0.40
Two-family dwellings 0.50
Townhomes 0.50
Educational institutions, nonboarding 0.20
Recreation and social facilities 0.20
Religious institutions, except rectories, parsonages, and parish houses 0.20
All other uses 0.20
(Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
Special uses may have the floor area ratio specified by the planning and zoning board. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010; amd. Ord. 2015-9, 5-7-
2015)
The floor area of accessory buildings shall be included in the total allowable floor area permitted on the zoning lot. However, any floor area devoted to off
street parking or loading facilities shall not be counted in the floor area used to determine floor area ratio. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
ARTICLE 6. R-5 GENERAL RESIDENCE DISTRICT
11-5.6-1: PURPOSE AND POLICY:
The R-5 general district is designed to provide for a planned mixture of residential dwelling types not to exceed nine (9) dwelling units per acre. Other
selected uses which are compatible with the residential character of the district may be allowed. Planned unit developments based upon the R-5 general
residence district guidelines are encouraged. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-5.6-2: DESCRIPTION:
The R-5 general residence district is intended to provide for an environment of building types which will be compatible with the predominately single-family
nature of the community. Further, the R-5 district allows for developments which are sensitive to local environmental constraints, opportunities and
conditions. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-5.6-3: PERMITTED USES:
Institutional uses:
Convents, monasteries, seminaries and nunneries.
Dormitories, fraternity/sorority houses, rooming/boarding houses or other residence halls.
Group daycare facilities, daycare centers and nursery schools.
Medical care facilities, limited to nursing facilities which have a capacity of less than fifty (50) beds.
Places of worship.
Private schools of general education.
Private schools of special education.
Public and quasi-public uses:
Colleges, universities.
Conference centers and retreat houses, operated by a religious or nonprofit organization.
Cultural centers, museums and similar facilities.
Fire stations.
Government property. Any other office, facility, building or property owned, leased or used by the federal government, the state or any local
government jurisdiction.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 436/498
Housing for the elderly.
Institutions providing housing and general care for the indigent, orphans and the like.
Libraries.
Medical care facilities, except nursing facilities which have a capacity of less than fifty (50) beds.
Police substations, branch governmental substations.
Post offices.
Private clubs and public benefit associations.
Quasi-public parks, playgrounds, athletic fields and related facilities.
Residential uses:
Multi-family dwellings.
Single-family, attached dwellings.
Single-family, detached dwellings. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-5.6-4: SPECIAL USES:
Institutional uses:
Convalescent centers, nursing homes, geriatric centers and rest homes.
Essential services such as commercial communication towers, electrical substations, telephone exchanges and gas regulator stations, provided that
they are adequately screened.
Group homes.
Institutions for the care of psychiatric disorders, alcohol and drug dependency, and for the care of the developmentally disabled.
Planned unit developments.
Residential uses:
Dormitories accessory to a permitted use.
Fraternities and sororities accessory to a permitted use.
Mixed use commercial and residential buildings.
Similar and compatible uses to those permitted and special uses in the R-5 district. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-5.6-5: ACCESSORY USES:
In the R-5 general residence district, accessory uses, buildings and structures as regulated by this title may include the following:
Those permitted in the R-2 single-family residential district. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-5.6-6: DISTRICT STANDARDS:
All of the property located in the R-5 general residence district is subject to the general standards and regulations of this title. Property located in this
district is also subject to the following standards:
A. Access To Nonresidential Districts: Land located in the R-5 general residence district shall not be used as a driveway or other vehicular access to any
land which is located in a commercial or industrial district.
B. Commercial Vehicle Parking: Parking or storing on public or private property of a truck, tractor, or other commercial vehicle outside of a garage or
accessory building for a period longer than to load or unload or to render a service shall be considered a business and not a residential use, and shall
not be allowed. Said commercial vehicle shall not be more than a four (4) wheeled vehicle and have a maximum net weight of one ton. Individual
equipment or material of a commercial nature that may be trailed by or attached to any motorized vehicle shall not be permitted to be separately stored
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 437/498
in the open, in addition said equipment or material that produces noxious odors, sounds, or is a safety or health hazard shall not be permitted attached
or unattached to any motorized vehicle.
C. Parking Requirements: Off street parking and loading facilities shall be provided in accordance with chapter 9, "Off Street Parking And Off Street
Loading", of this title.
D. Sign Regulations: Signs shall conform to the applicable requirements as set forth in chapter 10, "Signs", of this title. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-
2010)
11-5.6-7: BULK REGULATIONS:
In the R-5 general residence district, all uses and structures shall conform to the following bulk regulations:
A. Minimum Lot Size:
1. Single-family detached, as in the R-3 single-family district.
2. For every single-family attached dwelling, there shall be provided a minimum lot area of five thousand (5,000) square feet per dwelling unit.
3. For multi-family dwellings, there shall be provided a lot having a minimum lot area of:
a. Five thousand (5,000) square feet for each unit containing four (4) or more bedrooms;
b. Four thousand (4,000) square feet for each three (3) bedroom dwelling unit;
c. Three thousand six hundred fifty (3,650) square feet for each dwelling unit containing zero, one or two (2) bedrooms.
B. Minimum Lot Width:
1. For every single-family detached dwelling, there shall be provided a minimum lot width of sixty feet (60').
2. For every single-family attached dwelling, there shall be provided a yard of sufficient width to support use and density.
3. Multi-family dwellings shall provide a yard of sufficient width to support use and density.
4. Special uses may require lot widths in excess of the minimum.
C. Minimum Yards: The following minimum front yards in the R-5 general residence district shall be provided and continuously maintained:
1. Front Yards: A front yard of not less than twenty five feet (25').
2. Interior Side Yard:
a. Single-family detached, same as in R-3.
b. For uses other than single-family detached, a side yard of either side of the principal building equal to either one-half (1/2) the height of the building
or ten feet (10'), whichever is greater.
3. Corner Side Yard And Reversed Corner Side Yard: Twenty five feet (25') or one-third (1/3) the height of the building, whichever is greater.
4. Rear Yard: A rear yard of not less than twenty five feet (25') shall be continuously provided and maintained.
D. Maximum Lot Coverage: No more than seventy five percent (75%) of the lot area shall be devoted to impervious surface exclusive of retention ponds.
E. Maximum Building Height:
1. Single-family detached dwellings, thirty five feet (35').
2. All other structures, sixty five feet (65'). (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
Chapter 6
COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
ARTICLE 1. C-1 LIMITED COMMERCIAL AND OFFICE DISTRICT
11-6.1-1: PURPOSE AND POLICY:
The purpose of the C-1 limited commercial and office district is to provide for the development of limited convenience commercial and office uses including
retail, financial, service, governmental, and professional uses compatible with residential uses. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 438/498
11-6.1-2: DESCRIPTION:
The C-1 limited commercial and office district is characterized by residential scale structures suitable for small businesses, retail facilities, and office uses.
Typically the C-1 limited commercial and office district is located on arterial or secondary thoroughfares which had previously been developed with
residential structures suitable for conversion or which abut a single-family residential district. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-6.1-3: PERMITTED USES:
Educational institutions:
Dancing schools and studios.
Music schools.
Office uses:
Accounting, auditing, and bookkeeping services.
Architects' offices.
Attorney and law offices.
Chambers of commerce.
Detective agencies.
Employment agencies.
Engineering offices.
Insurance agencies.
Land surveyors' offices.
Landscape architectural services.
Merchants' associations.
Newspaper offices.
Offices, business and professional; miscellaneous.
Political organization offices.
Real estate offices.
Secretarial services.
Security and commodity brokers.
Public and quasi-public uses:
Forest preserves.
Historical buildings and landmarks preserved for the public.
Parks and playgrounds.
Public libraries.
Religious institutions:
Churches, chapels, temples and synagogues.
Religious reading rooms.
Retail uses:
Antique shops.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 439/498
Art galleries, but not including auction rooms.
Bookstores.
China and glassware stores.
Coin, philatelic, stamp and numismatic stores.
Drugstores and pharmacies.
Florist shops.
Gift shops.
Ice cream shops.
Jewelry stores.
Picture framing, when conducted for on premises retail trade.
Restaurants; entertainment, dancing, and serving of alcoholic beverages are prohibited. Drive-through prohibited.
Stationery stores.
Service uses:
Artists' studios.
Barbershops.
Beauty shops.
Clothes, hat and shoe repair stores.
Fix it shops; for general minor repair.
Interior decorating studios, including upholstering and making of draperies, slipcovers, and other similar articles, when conducted as part of the retail
operations and secondary to the principal use.
Photographic studios, including the developing of film and pictures, when conducted as part of the retail business on the premises.
Signs, business and advertising, as regulated by chapter 10 of this title.
Tailor and dressmaking shops.
Travel agencies and bureaus, and transportation ticket offices. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-6.1-4: SPECIAL USES:
Office uses:
Dental offices and clinics.
Medical offices and clinics.
Planned unit developments.
Public and quasi-public uses:
Essential services such as commercial communication towers, electrical substations, telephone exchanges and gas regulator stations, provided that
they are adequately screened.
Fire stations.
Government property. Other local, state and federal uses consistent with the purpose of this district.
Police stations.
Post offices.
Recreational and social uses:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 440/498
Clubs and lodges, private and not for profit.
Country clubs, health clubs, golf, tennis and/or swim clubs.
Residential uses:
Mixed use commercial and residential buildings.
Residence of owner/proprietor of the principal use.
Retail uses:
Building material sales.
Garden supply sales.
Temporary outdoor sales not accessory to principal use.
Service uses:
Banks, savings and loans, and other financial institutions including with drive-up facilities.
Currency exchanges.
Similar and compatible uses to those permitted in the C-1 district. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-6.1-5: ACCESSORY USES:
In the C-1 limited commercial and office district, accessory uses and structures as regulated by this title may include the following as well as similar uses
and structures:
Fences, as regulated by section 11-4-5-6 of this title.
Garages, carports and other parking spaces.
Signs as further regulated by chapter 10 of this title. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-6.1-6: BULK REGULATIONS:
In the C-1 limited commercial district, uses and structures shall conform to the following bulk regulations:
A. Minimum Lot Area: A minimum lot area is not required, except that planned unit developments shall conform to the required five (5) acre minimum.
B. Minimum Lot Width: A minimum lot width is not required.
C. Minimum Yards: The following minimum yards shall be provided and maintained:
1. Front Yard: Not less than fifty feet (50').
2. Side Yard: A minimum side yard of not less than ten feet (10') shall be required except:
a. A corner side yard shall be not less than fifteen feet (15').
b. A side yard adjoining residential dwelling units shall have a minimum side yard of twelve feet (12').
3. Rear Yard: Not less than twenty five feet (25').
D. Maximum Lot Coverage: The total ground area occupied by any principal building, together with all accessory buildings, shall not exceed thirty five
percent (35%) of the total area of the lot.
E. Maximum Building Height: No building or structure shall be erected or structurally altered to exceed a height of thirty five feet (35'). (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-
2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-6.1-7: DISTRICT STANDARDS:
All of the property located in the C-1 district is subject to the general standards and regulations of this title. Property located in this district is also subject to
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 441/498
the following standards:
A. Retail Or Service Only: All business establishments shall be retail or service establishments dealing directly with consumers. All goods produced on the
premises shall be sold at retail on the premises where produced.
B. Operation Within Enclosed Structures: All business, service, storage and display of goods shall be conducted within completely enclosed structures
except:
1. Off street parking and loading;
2. Outdoor sales accessory to garden supply stores and automobile service stations, and outdoor tables accessory to restaurants when permitted as a
special use; and
3. Temporary open sales or sidewalk sales, when authorized pursuant to chapter 12, "Temporary Uses And Structures", of this title.
C. Restriction On Sales And Services Involving Parked Motor Vehicles: No business establishments, except automobile service stations or drive-in bank
facilities when authorized as special uses, shall offer goods or services directly to customers waiting in parked motor vehicles, or sell beverages or food
for consumption on the premises in parked motor vehicles.
D. Truck Parking: The parking of trucks as an accessory use, when used in the conduct of a permitted or special use listed in this article, shall be limited to
vehicles of not over one and one-half (11/2) tons' capacity when located within one hundred fifty feet (150') of a residential district.
E. Limit On Warehousing: Warehousing and storage as an accessory use shall not exceed forty percent (40%) of the floor area of any building. For the
purpose of this provision, basement floor areas shall be included in the computation of the floor area of the building.
F. Landscaping Of Required Yards: Required yards of developed lots shall be landscaped and unpaved except for necessary drives, parking areas and
walks in accordance with section 11-4-10 of this title.
G. Parking Requirements: Off street parking and loading spaces shall be provided in accordance with chapter 9, "Off Street Parking And Off Street
Loading", of this title.
H. Signs: Signs shall conform to the applicable requirements as set forth in chapter 10, "Signs", of this title.
I. Fencing And Screening: Fencing and screening shall be provided and regulated in accordance with sections 11-4-5-6 and 11-4-10 of this title.
J. Vehicle Sales: No business shall allow motor vehicles for sale on the premises without being licensed for such sales.
K. Vehicle Repairs: Automotive repair facilities, auto parts stores and vehicle rental facilities shall not permit vehicle repairs to be made within the off street
parking areas. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
ARTICLE 2. C-2 NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
11-6.2-1: PURPOSE AND POLICY:
The C-2 neighborhood commercial district is designed to provide convenient, primary, neighborhood scale shopping centers. Consistent with village policy
well planned, attractively landscaped and appropriately sited neighborhood shopping centers are encouraged. Utilization of the village planned unit
development techniques is encouraged. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-6.2-2: DESCRIPTION:
The C-2 neighborhood commercial district will typically be located at or near the intersection of two (2) primary streets. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-
2010)
11-6.2-3: PERMITTED USES:
All those uses which are permitted in the C-1 limited commercial district and the following:
Office uses:
Animal hospitals; for care and treatment of domestic pets and animals only.
Chamber of commerce.
Chiropodists' offices.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 442/498
Chiropractors' offices.
Dental laboratories.
Dentists' offices.
Doctors', surgeons' and/or physicians' offices.
Labor union and organizations.
Medical and dental clinics.
Medical laboratories.
Opticians' offices.
Osteopaths' offices.
Real estate offices.
Secretarial services.
Security and commodity brokers.
Veterinary clinic; for care and treatment of domestic pets and animals only.
Retail uses:
Appliance stores.
Art supply stores.
Auction rooms.
Bakeries, in which the manufacture of goods is limited to goods retailed on the premises only.
Bicycle sales and repair shops.
Business machine sales and service.
Camera and photographic supply stores.
Candy and confectionery stores.
Carpet and rug stores.
Catering establishments.
Dairy products stores.
Delicatessens.
Department stores.
Drapery stores.
Dry goods stores.
Electrical and household appliance sales and service.
Food stores, grocery stores, meat markets, fish markets.
Frozen food stores, including locker rental in conjunction therewith.
Furniture stores.
Furriers.
Garden supply and seed stores.
Greenhouses and nurseries; retail sales.
Haberdasheries.
Hardware stores.
Hearing aid sales and service.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 443/498
Hobby shops.
Ice and milk sales.
Leather goods and luggage stores.
Linoleum and tile stores.
Millinery shops.
Musical instruments sales and repair.
Notions stores.
Office supply stores.
Optician sales; retail.
Paint and wallpaper stores.
Pet stores.
Phonograph record, tape, and sheet music store.
Radio and television sales and service.
School supply stores.
Secondhand stores.
Shoe stores.
Sporting goods stores.
Stationery stores.
Tobacco shops.
Toy stores.
Service uses:
Automobile driving schools.
Banks; not including drive-in.
Dry cleaners and laundries.
Financial institutions.
Investment companies.
Locksmith shops.
Newspaper distribution agencies.
Recording studios.
Savings and loans, not including drive-in facilities.
Shoe repair stores.
Telegraph offices.
Ticket agencies, amusement. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-6.2-4: SPECIAL USES:
Special uses permitted within a C-1 limited commercial district and the following special uses may be permitted when authorized by the village board
pursuant to the applicable provisions of this title:
Planned unit developments.
Public and quasi-public uses:
Fire stations.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 444/498
Police stations.
Publicly owned water reservoir or storage and treatment facilities.
Residential uses:
Hotels and motels.
Mixed use commercial and residential buildings.
Night watchman quarters.
Retail uses:
Arcades.
Banks, drive-through.
Building materials sales including outdoor display of products.
Cigar and tobacco stores.
Currency exchanges.
Drive-through services. Other facilities providing drive-through services.
Package liquor sales, except said sales in conjunction with the sale of petroleum products for automotive use shall be prohibited.
Pawnbrokers.
Payday loan facilities.
Restaurants, bars, taverns and cocktail lounges including the sale of alcohol.
Restaurants, drive-in.
Service uses:
Auto accessory, including radios, telephones and windshields, sales, service and installation.
Auto service station and limited auto repair, but not including body work or repair, painting or engine rebuilding.
Automobile and truck repair and service.
Automobile laundries, automatic and self-service.
Automobile minimarket.
Funeral and undertaking establishments.
Similar and compatible uses to those permitted in the C-2 district. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-6.2-5: ACCESSORY USES:
The following accessory uses are permitted in the C-2 neighborhood commercial district as regulated by chapter 4 of this title:
Parking lots and parking structures.
Sales and service of alcoholic beverages, subject to the granting of a special use pursuant to the provisions of section 11-13-8 of this title, accessory to
permitted retail uses and permitted recreational and social uses.
Signs, as regulated by chapter 10 of this title.
Vending machines.
Water retention and detention areas.
Other uses normally and customarily accessory to the uses permitted in the C-2 neighborhood commercial district. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-
2010)
11-6.2-6: BULK REGULATIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 445/498
In the C-2 neighborhood commercial district, uses and structures shall conform to the following bulk regulations:
A. Minimum Lot Area: A minimum lot area is not required.
B. Minimum Yards: The following minimum yards shall be continuously provided and maintained:
1. Front Yard: Not less than seventy five feet (75').
2. Side Yard: A minimum side yard of ten feet (10') shall be required on each side of a lot, except that a corner side yard of not less than fifty feet (50').
3. Rear Yard: A rear yard of not less than twenty feet (20') shall be provided.
C. Building Height: Buildings greater than forty feet (40') in height shall require a special use permit pursuant to the requirements of section 11-13-8 of this
title.
D. Additional Requirements:
1. Parking Requirements: There shall be provided a minimum parking ratio of not less than four and one-half (41/2) parking spaces per one thousand
(1,000) square feet of net leasable area.
2. Easement:
a. Blanket cross easements shall be provided generally parallel to all interior property lines. Said easements are designed to allow effective cross
access to adjoining similarly zoned properties without the necessity of entering upon the public streets.
b. Cross easements parallel to the front and rear yard shall be provided. Said easements shall not be within the required landscaped area.
c. Said cross easement shall be provided in a form acceptable to the village attorney. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-6.2-7: DISTRICT STANDARDS:
All of the property located in the C-2 district is subject to the general standards and regulations of this title. Property located in this district is also subject to
the following standards:
A. Operation Within Enclosed Structures: Same as in the C-1 district.
B. Truck Parking: Same as in the C-1 district.
C. Landscaping Of Required Yards: Same as in the C-1 district.
D. Signs: Signs shall conform to the applicable requirements as set forth in chapter 10 of this title.
E. Fencing And Screening: Fencing and screening shall be provided and regulated in accordance with sections 11-4-5-6 and 11-4-10 of this title. (Ord.
2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
F. Restrictions On Ingress And Egress: For new developments, all points of ingress and egress shall be submitted to the Streamwood planning and zoning
board for review and approval. All applicants shall submit the following minimum data in support of their request: (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-
2010; amd. Ord. 2015-9, 5-7-2015)
1. A detailed site plan for the development of the subject property including size and location of all proposed points of ingress and egress.
2. The location of all other curb cuts, traffic control devices and intersection improvements within two hundred fifty feet (250').
3. Existing and proposed topographic condition for all streets and rights of way at not greater than two foot (2') contour intervals within one hundred fifty
feet (150') of each requested point of ingress and egress. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
4. Cross easement documents at such locations as required by the planning and zoning board and in a form acceptable to the village attorney. (Ord.
2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010; amd. Ord. 2015-9, 5-7-2015)
G. Limitations On Warehousing: Warehousing and storage as an accessory use shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the floor area of any business.
H. Parking Requirements: Off street parking and loading berths shall be provided in accordance with chapter 9 of this title.
I. Signs: Signs shall conform to the applicable requirements of chapter 10 of this title.
J. Landscaping Requirements: Required yards of developed parcels shall be landscaped and unpaved except for necessary drives and walkways. (Ord.
2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 446/498
ARTICLE 3. C-3 HIGHWAY COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
11-6.3-1: PURPOSE AND POLICY:
The C-3 highway commercial district is designed to provide a wide variety of commercial facilities to serve the public both within as well as without the
village limits. This district is intended to implement the village policy to "utilize and institutionalize the latest design standards and planning concepts in the
development of new commercial areas". (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-6.3-2: DESCRIPTION:
The C-3 highway commercial district will usually be located on major arterials and will contain relatively large parcels. In most instances access to the
parcels within the C-3 district will be limited and controlled; full access will normally be at signalized locations. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-6.3-3: PERMITTED USES:
All those uses permitted within C-1 limited commercial and C-2 neighborhood commercial districts and the following are permitted in the C-3 highway
commercial district:
Office uses:
Home office operations.
International business headquarters and offices.
Regional sales offices.
Public and quasi-public uses:
Bus passenger stations.
Recreational and social uses:
Amusement parks; including permanent carnival, kiddie parks, golf driving ranges, pitch and putt or miniature golf courses, and other similar outdoor
amusement facilities.
Billiard and pool halls.
Bowling alleys.
Clubs, private (not profit).
Dance halls.
Gymnasiums, commercial.
Health clubs.
Lodges and fraternal organizations.
Skating rinks, indoor.
Swim clubs, swimming pools and buildings for indoor pools.
Tennis clubs, tennis courts and buildings for indoor tennis.
Theaters, indoor.
Retail uses:
Adult regulated uses.
Automobile accessory stores.
Automobile vehicle sales (new) and service, related and ancillary to the permitted vehicles sales.
Boat and marine showrooms and sales.
Building material supplies, sales, and service.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 447/498
Camper and recreational vehicle stores.
Catalog stores.
Farm supply stores.
Furniture stores, including upholstering, repair, and cleaning.
Furrier shops, including the incidental storage and conditioning of furs.
Home supply centers.
Live bait stores.
Lumber companies and/or yards.
Machinery sales.
Mail order houses.
Medical appliance stores.
Men's, women's, and children's clothing.
Newsstands.
Plumbing and heating showrooms.
Roofing sales and service.
Swimming pool sales and service.
Tombstone and monument sales.
Trading stamp stores.
Trailer sales and rentals.
Service uses:
Animal hospitals.
Automobile rentals.
Banks; with or without drive-in facilities.
Blueprinting and photostating establishments.
Clothes pressing establishments.
Clothes rental agencies.
Credit unions.
Dry cleaners, drive-in.
Equipment rental and leasing services.
Furnace supplies and service.
Furniture cleaning, repair, and upholstering service.
Interior decorating studios.
Lawn mower sales and repair.
Linen, towels, diaper, and other similar supply services.
News syndicates.
Radio and television service and repair shops.
Savings and loans, with or without drive-in facilities.
Veterinary clinics.
Water softener service.
Window cleaning firms. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 448/498
11-6.3-4: SPECIAL USES:
All special uses permitted within C-1 limited commercial and C-2 neighborhood commercial district, except for mixed use residential and commercial
buildings, and the following may be permitted as special uses when authorized by the village board of trustees pursuant to the applicable provisions of this
title:
Planned unit developments.
Public and quasi-public uses:
Fire stations.
Police stations.
Publicly owned water reservoir or storage and treatment facilities.
Residential uses:
Hotels and motels.
Mobile home parks.
Retail uses:
Mobile home sales.
Motorcycle sales.
Roadside stands, commercial.
Snowmobile sales and service.
Used car sales.
Service uses:
Automobile diagnostic centers and clinics.
Automobile laundries.
Automobile paint, undercoating and rustproofing establishments.
Automobile service stations, also permitting the retail sale of merchandise or services not related to the maintenance, service or repair of motor
vehicles.
Automotive maintenance and repair facilities.
Kennels.
Parking lots and garages; other than accessory, for the storage of private passenger automobiles, and subject to the provisions of chapter 9 of this
title.
Towing services.
Similar and compatible uses to those permitted in the C-3 district. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-6.3-5: ACCESSORY USES:
The following accessory uses are permitted in the C-3 highway commercial district as regulated by section 11-4-4 of this title:
Fences.
Parking structures.
Sales and service of alcoholic beverages, subject to the granting of a special use pursuant to the provisions of section 11-13-8 of this title, accessory to
permitted retail uses and permitted recreational and social uses.
Signs as regulated by chapter 10 of this title.
Vending machines.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 449/498
Water retention and detention areas. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-6.3-6: BULK REGULATIONS:
A. Front Yard:
1. There shall be a minimum front yard building setback of not less than one hundred feet (100').
2. There shall be a minimum front yard devoted entirely to landscaping of not less than twenty five feet (25').
B. Side Yard, Interior: No interior side yard building setback shall be required.
C. Corner Side Yard:
1. There shall be a minimum corner yard building setback of not less than fifty feet (50').
2. There shall be a minimum corner side yard devoted entirely to landscaping of not less than twenty five feet (25').
3. There shall be a minimum transitional side yard devoted entirely to landscaping of not less than twenty five feet (25').
D. Rear Yard:
1. Where the rear yard abuts a residential district, there shall be a rear yard devoted entirely to landscaping of not less than forty feet (40'). Said
landscaped area shall include a berm not less than five feet by eight feet (5' x 8') at a rate of slope not in excess of two and five-tenths to one (2.5:1).
2. Where the rear yard abuts a commercial or industrial district, a rear yard devoted entirely to landscaping of not less than twenty feet (20') shall be
required.
E. Maximum Building Height: No building or structure shall be erected or structurally altered to exceed forty five feet (45') in height.
F. Additional Requirements:
1. Parking Requirements:
a. There shall be provided a minimum parking ratio of not less than four and one-half (41/2) parking spaces per one thousand (1,000) square feet of
net leasable area.
b. Exclusive of required yard landscaping, an area not less than equal to five percent (5%) of the parking lot shall be landscaped.
2. Easement:
a. Blanket cross easements shall be provided generally parallel to all interior property lines. Said easements are designed to allow effective cross
access to adjoining similarly zoned properties without the necessity of entering upon the public streets.
b. Cross easements parallel to the front and rear yard shall be provided. Said easements shall not be within the required landscaped area.
c. Said cross easement shall be provided in a form acceptable to the village attorney. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-6.3-7: DISTRICT STANDARDS:
All property located within the C-3 highway commercial district shall be subject to the following additional regulations: (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-
2010)
A. Restrictions On Ingress And Egress: For all new developments, all points of ingress and egress shall be submitted to the Streamwood planning and
zoning board for review and approval. All applicants shall submit the following minimum data in support of their request: (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff.
1-1-2010; amd. Ord. 2015-9, 5-7-2015)
1. A detailed site plan for the development of the subject property including size and location of all proposed points of ingress and egress.
2. The location of all other curb cuts, traffic control devices and intersection improvements within two hundred fifty feet (250').
3. Existing and proposed topographic condition for all streets and rights of way at not greater than two foot (2') contour intervals within one hundred fifty
feet (150') of each requested point of ingress and egress. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
4. Cross easement documents at such locations as required by the planning and zoning board and in a form acceptable to the village attorney. (Ord.
2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010; amd. Ord. 2015-9, 5-7-2015)
B. Operations Within Enclosed Structures: All principal uses, both permitted and special, shall be conducted within enclosed structures. Display of
products and parking are excepted.
C. Limitations On Warehousing: Warehousing and storage as an accessory use shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the floor area of any business.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 450/498
D. Parking Requirements: Off street parking and loading berths shall be provided in accordance with chapter 9 of this title.
E. Signs: Signs shall conform to the applicable requirements of chapter 10 of this title.
F. Landscaping Requirements: Required yards of developed parcels shall be landscaped and unpaved except for necessary drives and walkways.
G. Adult Regulated Use Standards: Adult regulated uses shall comply with the following standards:
1. Advertisements, displays or other promotional materials, depicting or describing specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities, or
displaying instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with specified sexual activities shall not be shown or
exhibited so as to be visible from other areas open to the general public.
2. All building openings, entries and windows for an adult regulated use shall be located, covered or screened in such a manner as to prevent a view
into the interior of an adult regulated use from any area open to the general public.
3. All entrances to an adult regulated use shall be clearly and legibly posted by a notice indicating that minors are prohibited from entering the
premises.
4. No loudspeakers or sound equipment shall be used by an adult regulated use for the amplification of sound to a level discernible by the public
beyond the walls of the building in which the adult regulated use is conducted.
5. No residential structure or any other nonconforming structure shall be converted for use as an adult regulated use after enactment of the provisions
of this subsection.
6. An on site security program, including required interior and exterior lighting plans, shall be prepared and implemented. The security program shall
include the following:
a. The presence of an on site manager during all business hours.
b. All off street parking areas and building entries serving the adult regulated use shall be illuminated during all hours of operation with a lighting
system designed to provide a minimum maintained horizontal illumination of greater than one foot-candle of light on the parking surface and/or
walkway. In the event the adult regulated use shares its parking with other businesses, this requirement shall only apply within a radius of one
hundred feet (100') from any entrance into the adult regulated use.
c. All interior portions of the adult regulated use, except those areas devoted to mini-motion or motion pictures, shall be illuminated during all hours of
operation with a lighting system designed to provide a minimum maintained horizontal illumination of not less than two (2) foot-candles of light at
the floor.
7. All exterior areas of adult regulated use businesses, including building, landscaping and parking areas, shall be maintained in a clean and orderly
manner. Buildings and structures shall not be painted or surfaced with colors or textures or any design that would simulate a sign or advertising
message.
8. An adult regulated use shall not remain open for business, or permit any employee to engage in a performance, solicit a performance, make a sale,
solicit a sale, provide a service or solicit a service between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight and eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. of any particular
day. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
Chapter 7
INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
ARTICLE 1. I-1 OFFICE, RESEARCH AND RESTRICTED INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
11-7.1-1: PURPOSE AND POLICY:
A. The I-1 office, research and restricted industrial district is designed to provide adequate space in suitable locations for primary economic activities
including limited industrial, warehousing, administrative and research activities which are compatible with the predominately residential nature of the
village.
B. The I-1 office, research and restricted industrial district is designed to achieve the village objective to "establish and maintain a safe, pleasant and
functional environment in industrial areas through a policy which seeks to utilize and institutionalize the latest design standards and planning concepts
in the development of new industrial areas". (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-7.1-2: DESCRIPTION:
The I-1 office, research and restricted industrial district is designed to provide for development of office buildings, research facilities, training centers and
restricted industrial parks in suitable areas appropriately located with respect to traffic flow, and developed on relatively large tracts of land with landscaped
setbacks, high performance standards and relatively restrictive bulk regulations that will protect the environmental quality of the village. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-
3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-7.1-3: PERMITTED USES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 451/498
The following uses are permitted in the I-1 office, research and restricted industrial district:
Commercial service establishments:
Bookkeeping services.
Credit unions.
Data processing services.
Financial institutions, including drive-through facilities.
Industrial uses:
Machine shops and tool and die shops.
Manufacturing, fabricating, processing, assembly, packing and storage uses provided such uses conform with the requirements set forth in section
11-7.1-8 of this article.
Research and testing laboratories including electronic research, testing and manufacturing.
Storage, warehouse and distribution facilities.
Office uses:
Administrative offices.
Business offices, in which goods, wares or merchandise are not sold on the premises.
Contractors' offices, excluding outdoor storage of material and equipment.
Labor union offices.
Other uses:
Adult regulated uses.
Those other uses compatible to permitted uses in an I-1 industrial district. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-7.1-4: SPECIAL USES:
The following uses are permitted in the I-1 office, research and restricted industrial district when authorized in accordance with the procedures for special
uses as set forth in section 11-13-8 of this title:
Industrial uses:
Chemical processing and production.
Contractors' storage yards.
Electroplating.
Paper product manufacturing.
Pharmaceutical manufacturing, storage or testing.
Steel fabricating.
Yard waste transfer station.
Office uses:
Those office uses permitted as a permitted use or a special use in the C-3 highway commercial district, unless otherwise permitted in this I-1 district.
Medical and/or dental facilities when authorized as part of a planned unit development in the I-1 office, research and restricted industrial district.
Professional offices, but not including medical or dental facilities and similar office uses which depend upon patient, client, or customer traffic except
as otherwise provided.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 452/498
Planned unit developments.
Retail business uses:
Auto laundries, automatic and self-service.
Building material sales and storage.
Garden supply sales and storage, including wholesale and retail nurseries.
Health clubs; indoor, public or private.
Hotels and motels; provided, such use is developed as part of a planned industrial development of a minimum of thirty (30) acres.
Picture framing.
The following uses may be permitted in an office building when authorized as a special use and when operated primarily for the convenience of the
tenants:
Book and stationery stores.
Office supply stores.
Restaurants, sit down.
Service uses:
Those service uses as a permitted use or a special use in the C-3 highway commercial district, unless otherwise permitted in this I-1 district.
Essential services such as commercial communication towers, electrical substations, telephone exchanges and gas regulator stations, provided that
they are adequately screened.
Similar and compatible uses to those uses permitted in the I-1 office, research and restricted industrial district. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-
2010)
11-7.1-5: TEMPORARY USES:
A. Temporary uses, buildings and structures may be allowed subject to the issuance of temporary use permits in accordance with the provisions of this
title.
B. In the I-1 office, research and restricted industrial district, only the following uses may be permitted as temporary uses:
Contractor's office and equipment sheds.
Real estate sales office and model units. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-7.1-6: ACCESSORY USES:
Fences.
Garages, carports, and other parking facilities.
I-1 hotels, when part of an I-1 PUD, the following uses (in addition to those uses provided primarily for registered hotel guests which are customarily and
historically accessory to a hotel) may be permitted as accessory to a hotel use when located within the hotel or when located on the hotel grounds
(excluding the service and/or storage of alcoholic beverages), and/or operated primarily for the use of the registered guests of the hotel:
Banquet and ballroom facilities (including food and/or liquor service when required).
Convenience item shops.
Laundry and housekeeping facilities.
Liquor service including:
Freestanding complimentary service areas when limited to regular and specified hours of daily service and located as provided on the final development
plan for the I-1 PUD.
Lounge areas.
Live entertainment.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 453/498
Meeting/conference rooms.
Recreational and social facilities (swimming pool, exercise areas limited to hotel guests and their visitors).
Restaurant.
Vending machines.
Signs, as regulated by chapter 10 of this title.
Toolsheds and similar storage structures.
Vending machines, indoor only.
Water retention and detention areas. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-7.1-7: BULK REGULATIONS:
In the I-1 office, research and restricted industrial district, uses and structures shall conform to the following bulk regulations:
A. Minimum Lot Area:
1. A minimum lot area of not less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet is required for each permitted use.
2. For special uses a minimum lot size of greater than ten thousand (10,000) square feet may be required.
B. Minimum Lot Width:
1. For each permitted use, there shall be provided a minimum lot width of seventy feet (70').
2. For special uses, minimum lot widths greater than seventy feet (70') may be required as a condition for authorization.
C. Minimum Yards: The following minimum yards shall be provided and maintained:
1. Front Yard: A front yard of not less than fifty feet (50').
2. Interior Side Yard: A side yard on each side of the principal building equal to fifteen feet (15') or ten percent (10%) of the lot width, whichever is
greater.
3. Corner Side Yard: A side yard along the side street of not less than twenty five feet (25').
4. Rear Yard: A rear yard of not less than twenty feet (20').
5. Exceptions:
a. For special uses, minimum yards of greater depth may be required as a condition for authorization.
b. Side and rear yards adjoining a residence district shall be not less than thirty feet (30').
D. Maximum Lot Coverage: The total ground area occupied by any principal building, together with all accessory buildings shall not exceed thirty five
percent (35%) of the total area of the lot.
E. Maximum Building Height: No building or structure shall be erected or structurally altered to exceed forty feet (40') in height. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009,
eff. 1-1-2010)
11-7.1-8: DISTRICT STANDARDS:
All of the property located in the I-1 office, research and restricted industrial district is subject to the general standards and regulations of this title. Property
located in this district is also subject to the following:
A. Operations Within Enclosed Buildings: The operations and activities of all uses within this district, including the storage of materials but excluding off
street parking, shall be conducted wholly within the principal structure. Storage or shipping containers or commercial trailers may only be allowed on
the property as accessory structures, pursuant to a permitted special use.
B. Truck Parking: No trucks in excess of one and one-half (11/2) tons shall be parked as an accessory use within one hundred fifty feet (150') of a
residential district.
C. Landscaping In I-1 District:
1. All yards and open space between and about buildings, structures, off street parking and loading areas, and areas along exterior and interior streets
within the I-1 office, research and restricted industrial district shall be landscaped. All landscaping shall be properly and continually maintained by the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 454/498
owner and/or tenant of the premises.
2. So as to ensure an overall landscaping scheme the developer shall prepare a landscaping plan for submission to the village prior to the issuance of
a building permit. Such plan shall include the locations, size, and species of all trees, shrubs, and all plant material.
3. Undeveloped areas shall be continually mowed and kept free of debris until developed.
D. Screening Requirements In I-1 District: Screening and additional landscaping shall be provided as set forth in section 11-4-10 of this title.
E. Underground Utility Systems, Transformers And Metering Equipment: All on site utility lines including power and telephone lines, but excluding high
tension lines, shall be located underground. All transformer and terminal equipment and equipment for metering the usage of water, natural gas,
electricity, etc., shall be located underground or within buildings or shall be effectively screened from view from streets and adjacent properties, as
required in section 11-4-10 of this title.
F. Lighting: All exterior lighting, parking lot light, exterior building lights and landscape lighting shall be directed away from adjoining highways, streets, and
properties.
G. Performance Standards In I-1 District: It is the intent of these regulations to limit the use of land and buildings in the I-1 office, research and restricted
industrial district to those uses which will not create any dangerous, injurious, noxious or otherwise objectionable conditions. Neither will they create
any fire, explosive, radioactive or other kind of hazardous conditions, nor will they produce noise, vibrations, smoke, dust, odor or other forms of air
pollution. Electrical disturbances, glare, heat or any other conditions, substances or elements that are in a manner or amount so as to adversely affect
the community will not be permitted. Specifically, all uses shall operate in conformance with this code and shall be limited by the following:
1. Noise: No noise from operations (other than that emanating from vehicular traffic), either continuous or intermittent, shall be detectable at the limits
of the tract on which the use is located.
2. Glare Or Heat: No glare or heat shall be detectable at the limits of the tract on which the use is located.
3. Vibrations: No vibrations shall be detectable at the limits of the tract on which the use is located.
4. Toxic Matter, Odors, Particulate Matter: No toxic matter, noxious matter, smoke or gas, and no odorous or particulate matter shall be detectable at
the limits of the tract on which the use is located.
5. Fire And Explosive Hazards: Materials that present potential fire and explosive hazards shall be stored and used only in conformance with all
applicable village ordinances.
6. Radiation Hazards: Materials that present potential radiation hazards shall be stored and used only in conformance with the most restrictive of the
applicable municipal, state and federal regulations.
7. Electromagnetic Interference: Electromagnetic interference shall not adversely affect the operations of any equipment other than that belonging to
the creator of such interference, and must conform to the regulations of the federal communications commission.
H. Parking And Loading Requirements In I-1 District: Off street parking and loading spaces shall be provided in accordance with chapter 9, "Off Street
Parking And Off Street Loading", of this title.
I. Signs: Signs shall conform to the applicable regulations as set forth in chapter 10, "Signs", of this title.
J. Adult Regulated Use Standards: Adult regulated uses shall comply with the standards set forth in subsection 11-6.3-7G of this title.
K. Vehicles Sales: No business shall allow motor vehicles for sale on the premises without being licensed for such sales.
L. Vehicle Repairs: No business shall allow the repair of vehicles within approved storage yards or off street parking areas. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff.
1-1-2010)
ARTICLE 2. I-2 GENERAL INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
11-7.2-1: PURPOSE AND POLICY:
The I-2 general industrial district is designed to provide sites for basic employment activities. The I-2 district uses are intended opportunities for the citizens
of Streamwood to find gainful employment in their own community as well as benefit the village tax base. Utilization of the planned unit development is
encouraged. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-7.2-2: DESCRIPTION:
The provisions of the I-2 general industrial district will generally be located near major transportation facilities; this is especially true of truck accessibility.
(Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-7.2-3: PERMITTED USES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 455/498
All those uses permitted in the I-1 restricted industrial district and the following shall be permitted uses in the I-2 general industrial district:
Industrial uses:
Manufacturing, production, processing, assembly, fabricating, cleaning, repairing, storing, servicing and/or testing of goods, materials or products.
Printing and publishing facilities, including engraving, photoengraving and bookbinding.
Office uses:
Administrative and business offices.
Research and development laboratory facilities.
Wholesale and warehouse uses:
Miniwarehouses.
Warehouses and distribution facilities.
Wholesale establishments. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-7.2-4: SPECIAL USES:
The following uses may be permitted in the I-2 general industrial district, when authorized pursuant to the procedures for special uses as set forth in
section 11-13-8 of this title:
Industrial uses:
Concrete plant and processing.
Food processing plants.
Outside storage, servicing, testing, repairing and cleaning of products when conducted not less than five hundred feet (500') from a residential
district.
Planned unit developments.
Public and quasi-public uses:
Public buildings and uses.
Public elevated water tanks.
Public parks and playgrounds.
Public utility and service uses:
Essential services such as commercial communication towers, electrical substations, telephone exchanges and gas regulator stations, provided that
they are adequately screened.
Recreational and social facilities:
Health clubs.
Retail uses:
Automobile laundries, automatic and self-service.
Lumber and home improvement companies or yards.
Retail outlet stores.
Service uses:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 456/498
Consumer service establishments.
Contractors' offices and shops, including outdoor storage of materials and equipment when located not less than two hundred fifty feet (250') from a
residential district or use.
Wholesale uses:
Greenhouses, wholesale.
Nurseries, wholesale.
Similar and compatible uses to those uses permitted in the I-2 general industrial district. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-7.2-5: ACCESSORY USES:
In the I-2 general industrial district, accessory uses, buildings or other structures as regulated in section 11-4-4 of this title may include the following as well
as uses and structures similar to the following:
Aboveground storage tanks, a maximum of two (2) tanks per site, meeting the requirement of the building and fire codes. All tanks shall be a minimum of
thirty feet (30') from all property lines.
Air conditioning equipment.
Antennas.
Fences, as regulated by section 11-4-5-6 of this title.
Garages, carports and other parking facilities.
Storage sheds and similar structures.
Stormwater retention and detention areas.
Truck parking, provided each vehicle is operable.
Vending machines. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-7.2-6: TEMPORARY USES:
Temporary uses, buildings or other structures may be allowed subject to the issuance of temporary use permits in accordance with the provisions of
chapter 12 of this title. In the I-2 general industrial district, only the following uses may be allowed as temporary uses:
Contractor's office and equipment sheds.
Real estate sales office and model units.
Signs advertising the availability of buildings or land for sale, subject to the provisions of chapter 10 of this title. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-7.2-7: BULK REGULATIONS:
In the I-2 general industrial district uses and structures shall conform to the following bulk regulations:
A. Minimum Lot Area:
1. For every permitted use there shall be a minimum lot provided of not less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet.
2. For special uses, minimum lot areas of greater than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet may be required.
B. Minimum Lot Width:
1. A minimum lot width of not less than seventy five feet (75') shall be provided.
2. For special uses, lot widths of greater than seventy five feet (75') may be required.
C. Minimum Yards: The following minimum yards shall be continuously provided and maintained:
1. Front Yard: A front yard of not less than fifty feet (50').
2. Side Yard: Side yards equal to one-half (1/2) the height of the principal building shall be required. Where a required side yard abuts a residential
district, a minimum side yard abutting said residential district of twenty feet (20') shall be provided.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 457/498
3. Corner Side Yard: A corner side yard of twenty five feet (25') shall be provided.
4. Rear Yards: A rear yard of not less than twenty feet (20') shall be provided.
D. Maximum Lot Coverage: The total ground areas covered by any principal building and structure shall not exceed forty percent (40%) of the total lot
area.
E. Maximum Building Height: No building or structure shall be erected or structurally altered to exceed a height of forty five feet (45'). (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-
2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-7.2-8: DISTRICT STANDARDS:
All property located in the I-2 general industrial district is subject to the general standards and regulations of this title. Property located in this district is also
subject to the following standards:
A. Operations Within Enclosed Buildings: All operations, activities and storage shall be conducted or maintained within completely enclosed buildings
except:
1. Off street parking and loading facilities.
2. Signs.
3. Storage, servicing, repairing, cleaning and testing areas when located a minimum of two hundred fifty feet (250') from a residential district.
B. Truck Parking: No trucks in excess of one and one-half (11/2) tons shall be parked as an accessory use within one hundred feet (100') of a residential
district.
C. Landscaping Requirements In I-2 District:
1. All yards and open space between and about buildings, structures, off street parking and loading areas and areas along exterior and interior streets
shall be landscaped. All landscaping shall be properly and continually maintained by the owner and/or tenant of the premises.
2. Undeveloped areas shall be continually mowed and kept free of debris.
D. Screening And Landscaping Requirements In I-2 District: Screening and additional landscaping shall be provided as set forth in section 11-4-10 of this
title.
E. Underground Utility Systems, Transformers And Metering Equipment: All on site utility lines, including power and telephone lines but excluding high
tension lines, shall be located underground. All transformer and terminal equipment and equipment for metering the usage of water, natural gas,
electricity and all similar facilities shall be located underground or within buildings or shall be effectively screened from view from streets and adjacent
properties. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-7.2-9: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
Any use in the I-2 general industrial district shall be so designed and operated as to continuously comply with the performance standards hereinafter set
forth. To ensure compliance with the performance standards contained hereafter, the community development director may require certification of
compliance.
A. Noise: At no point on the boundary of residence or business districts shall the sound intensity level of any individual operation or plant (other than the
operation of motor vehicles or other transportation facilities) exceed the decibel levels in the designated octave bands shown in table 1 of this section
for the districts indicated.
TABLE 1
Octave Band
(Frequency,
Cycles Per Second)
Maximum Permitted Sound Level (Decibels)
Along
Residence District
Along
Commercial District
0 to 75 72 79
75 to 150 67 74
150 to 300 59 66
300 to 600 52 59
600 to 1,200 46 53
1,200 to 2,400 40 47
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 458/498
2,400 to 4,800 34 41
Above 4,800 32 39
B. Smoke And Particulate Matter: Any use established in the I-2 district shall be so operated as to comply with the performance standards governing
smoke and particulate matter set forth hereinafter for the district in which such use shall be located. No use already established on the effective date
hereof shall be so altered or modified as to conflict with, or further conflict with, the performance standards governing smoke and particulate matter
established hereinafter for the district in which such use is located.
In addition to the performance standards specified hereinafter, the emission of smoke or particulate matter in such manner or quantity as to endanger
or to be detrimental to the public health, safety, comfort, or welfare is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and shall henceforth be unlawful.
For the purpose of grading the density of smoke, the Ringelmann chart published and used by the United States bureau of mines shall be employed.
The emission of smoke or particulate matter of a density greater than no. 2 on the Ringelmann chart is prohibited at all times except as otherwise
provided hereinafter.
The emission, from all sources within any lot area, of particulate matter containing more than ten percent (10%) by weight of particles having a particle
diameter larger than forty four (44) microns is prohibited.
Dust and other types of air pollution, borne by wind from such sources as storage areas, yards, roads and the like within lot boundaries, shall be kept to
a minimum by appropriate landscaping, paving, oiling, fencing, or acceptable means. Emission of particulate matter from such sources in excess of the
weight limitations specified hereinafter is prohibited.
1. The emission of more than ten (10) smoke units per hour per stack is prohibited, including smoke of a density in excess of Ringelmann no. 2.
However, during one 1-hour period in each twenty four (24) hour day, each stack may emit up to twenty (20) smoke units when blowing soot or
cleaning fires. Only during fire cleaning periods, however, shall smoke of Ringelmann no. 3 be permitted, and then for not more than four (4) minutes.
2. The rate of emission of particulate matter from all sources within the boundaries of any lot shall not exceed a net figure of one pound per acre of lot
area during any one hour, after deducting from the gross hourly emission per acre the correction factor set forth in tables 2, 3, and 4 of this section,
for height, velocity and temperature of emission, respectively. Determination of the total new rate of emission or particulate matter within the
boundaries of any lot shall be made as follows:
a. Determine the maximum emission in pounds per hour from each source of emission and divide this figure by the number of acres of lot area,
thereby obtaining the gross hourly rate of emission in pounds per acre.
b. From each gross hourly rate of emission derived in subsection B2a of this section, deduct the appropriate correction factor (interpolating as
required) for height, velocity, and temperature of emission set forth in tables 2, 3, and 4 of this section, thereby obtaining the net rate of emission in
pounds per acre per hour from each source of emission.
c. All together the individual net rates of emission derived in subsection B2b of this section, to obtain the total net rate of emission from all sources of
emission within the boundaries of the lot. Such total shall not exceed one pound per acre of lot area during any one hour.
TABLE 2
ALLOWANCE OF HEIGHT OF EMISSION1
Height Of Emission
Above Grade (Feet)
Correction (Pounds
Per Hour Per Acre)
50 0.01
100 0.06
150 0.10
200 0.16
300 0.30
400 0.50
Note:
1.Interpolate for intermediate values not shown in table.
TABLE 3
ALLOWANCE FOR VELOCITY OF EMISSION1
Exit Velocity
(Feet Per Second)
Correction (Pounds
Per Hour Per Acre)
0 0.00
20 0.03
40 0.09
60 0.16
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 459/498
80 0.24
100 0.50
Note:
1.Interpolate for intermediate values not shown in table.
TABLE 4
ALLOWANCE FOR TEMPERATURE OF EMISSION1
Temperature Of Emission
(Degrees Fahrenheit)
Correction (Pounds
Per Hour Per Acre)
200 0.000
300 0.001
400 0.002
500 0.003
1,000 0.01
1,500 0.04
2,000 0.10
Note:
1.Interpolate for intermediate values not shown in table.
C. Toxic Or Noxious Matter: Any use established in the I-2 general industrial district shall be so operated as to comply with the performance standards
governing emission of toxic or noxious matter set forth hereinafter for the district in which such use shall be located. No use shall for any period of time
discharge, across the boundaries of the lot wherein it is located, toxic or noxious matter in such concentrations as to be detrimental to or endanger the
public health, safety, comfort, or welfare, or cause injury or damage to property or business.
D. Odors: Any use established in the I-2 district shall be so operated as to comply with the performance standards governing odorous materials, set forth
hereinafter for the district in which such use shall be located. No use already established on the effective date hereof shall be so altered or modified as
to conflict with, or further conflict with, the performance standards governing odorous materials established hereinafter for the district in which such use
is located.
The emission of odorous matter in such quantities as to be readily detectable at any point along lot lines or as to produce a public nuisance or hazard
beyond lot lines is prohibited.
E. Fire And Explosion Hazard (Limits In I-2 District): Any use established in the I-2 district shall be so operated as to comply with the performance
standards governing fire and explosive hazards set forth hereinafter for the district in which such use shall be located. No use already established on
the effective date hereof shall be so altered or modified as to conflict with, or further conflict with, the performance standards governing fire and
explosive hazards established hereinafter for the district in which such use is located.
1. The storage, utilization, or manufacture of materials or products ranging from incombustible to moderate burning, as determined by the community
development director, is permitted, subject to compliance with all other performance standards for the district.
2. The storage, utilization, or manufacture of materials, goods or products ranging from free, or active burning to intense burning, as determined by the
community development director, is permitted subject to compliance with all other performance standards for the district, and provided the following
conditions are met:
a. Said materials or products shall be stored, utilized, or produced within completely enclosed structures having fire resistive construction in
accordance with requirements of the building code.
b. All such structures shall be set back at least forty feet (40') from lot lines; or, in lieu thereof, all such structures shall be protected throughout by an
automatic sprinkler system (or a carbon dioxide system of equal protection) in compliance with installation standards prescribed by the National
Fire Protection Association.
3. Manufacture or processing of materials or products which produce flammable or explosive vapors or gases at ordinary weather temperature shall not
be permitted, except when such materials are used in secondary processes or are required in emergency or standby equipment; but their storage for
use as power or heating fuels shall be permitted if in conformity with standards prescribed by the National Fire Protection Association and with
applicable requirements embodied in regulations promulgated by the state of Illinois department of public safety.
F. Vibration: Any use established in the I-2 district shall be so operated as to comply with the performance standards governing vibration set forth
hereinafter. No use already established on the effective date hereof shall be so altered or modified as to conflict with, or further conflict with, the
performance standards governing vibration established hereinafter. Any use or portion thereof creating intense earth shaking vibrations such as are
created by heavy hydraulic surges shall be set back at least five hundred feet (500') from any lot line.
G. Glare Or Heat (Restrictions In I-2 District): Any use established in the I-2 district shall be so operated as to comply with the performance standards
governing glare or heat set forth hereinafter. No use already established on the effective date hereof shall be so altered or modified as to conflict with,
or further conflict with, the performance standards governing glare or heat established hereinafter. Any operation producing intense glare or heat shall
be performed within a completely enclosed building in such manner as not to create a public nuisance or hazard along lot lines.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 460/498
H. Lighting: All exterior lighting, parking lot light, exterior building lights and landscape lighting shall be directed away from adjoining highways, streets, and
properties.
I. Adult Regulated Use Standards: Adult regulated uses shall comply with the standards set forth in subsection 11-6.3-7G of this title. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-
2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
Chapter 8
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS
11-8-1: DEFINITION:
A "planned development" shall mean a tract of land containing not less than five (5) acres, comprehensively planned as an entity via a unitary plan which
permits flexibility in building, mixture of housing types and land uses, usable open spaces and the preservation of significant natural features. The
president and board of trustees may modify or waive the acreage restriction upon request. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-8-2: PURPOSE:
The purposes of this planned development chapter are:
A. To promote flexibility in design and permit planned diversification in the location of structures;
B. To promote the efficient use of land to facilitate a more economic arrangement of buildings, circulation systems, land use and utilities;
C. To preserve to the greatest extent possible the existing landscape features and amenities and to utilize such features in a harmonious fashion;
D. To provide for more usable and suitably located recreational facilities and other public and common facilities than would otherwise be provided under
conventional development procedures;
E. To combine and coordinate architectural styles, building forms and building relationships within the planned development;
F. To ensure a quality of design and construction for developments within the village and to provide greater amenities, flexibility and other benefits in the
best interest of the village; and
G. To give developers reasonable assurance of approval before they expend complete design monies, while providing village officials with assurance that
the project will retain the character envisioned at the time of approval. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-8-3: APPLICATION PROCEDURES:
A. The following shall be required for all planned developments. Prior to filing a formal application for approval, the petitioner shall request a preapplication
conference with the village manager or his designee. No such conference shall be binding upon the village. The purpose of the preapplication
conference is to advise and assist the petitioner before presentation of the development plan, so that the petitioner may determine:
1. Whether the proposed planned development appears, in general, to be in compliance with the provisions of the zoning and other applicable
ordinances.
2. Whether it appears that any zoning amendment or variance is required.
3. Whether it appears that the proposed planned development will be in conformity with the comprehensive development plan of the village.
B. The preapplication conference is mandatory, but does not require formal application, fee or filing of a planned development. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009,
eff. 1-1-2010)
11-8-4: PRELIMINARY DEVELOPMENT PLAN:
11-8-4-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the preliminary development plan is to provide information necessary to evaluate the planned development. The preliminary development
plan and the final development plan may be combined for planned developments of less than twenty (20) acres in which case the applicant may, with the
prior approval of the village manager in his sole discretion, permit the applicant to proceed with submission of the combined preliminary development plan
and final development plan. Should the applicant elect to proceed with this combined submission for preliminary/final development plan approval, the
requirements of this section, for both phases of approval, shall still apply, and the applicant does so entirely at his own risk and the village is under no
obligation to approve said combined development plan. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 461/498
11-8-4-2: REQUIREMENTS:
Application for preliminary plan approval of a planned development shall be filed with the village clerk accompanied by sufficient copies of the preliminary
development plan in such number as may be determined by the village clerk. The filing fee shall be submitted for all or specified phases of the planned
development as required by the village. The following information shall be required for all preliminary plans:
A. Ownership: Evidence of ownership indicating the entire site of the planned development shall be under single ownership and/or unified control.
B. Persons To Be Sent Notices: Names and addresses of the person to whom notices of hearings shall be sent including the petitioner, the designers of
the subdivision and the owners of the land within two hundred fifty feet (250'), exclusive of public right of way, of the planned development.
C. Survey And Legal Description: A boundary survey and legal description of the areas prepared and certified by a registered Illinois land surveyor,
showing thereon the total acreage to the nearest one-hundredth (1/100) of an acre, a true north point and the date of preparation.
D. Topographical Survey: A topographical survey of the area, at one foot (1') contour intervals, extending one hundred feet (100') past the subject property
line.
E. Land Use Plan: A land use plan for the entire planned development showing the boundaries of the proposed development; its relative location within the
village; the plans for the future development of the area; and the types, location and acreage of land uses. Any residential use areas shown on the plan
shall show the proposed number and type of dwelling units and the densities by type, during each phase of the planned development. Drawings shall
be provided showing each proposed residential type of housing unit. More detailed information may be required for that part intended for initial
development.
F. Traffic Study: A traffic study, prepared by a traffic engineer providing a general description of existing roads on and adjacent to the proposed road
improvements necessary for the development. A circulation diagram indicating the proposed movement of vehicles, goods and pedestrians within the
development and to and from existing thoroughfares, indicating any special engineering features and traffic regulation devices needed to ensure the
safety of persons and property.
G. Modifications, Exceptions And Variances: A description of the requested modifications, exceptions and variances of and from this section or the village
subdivision control ordinance (title 10 of this code).
H. Market Research Report: A market research report, or its equivalent, to establish the marketability for the proposed development.
I. PUD Agreement: A draft of proposed PUD agreement, or any covenants and restrictions required by the village or otherwise that are intended to be filed
in the office of the recorder of deeds of Cook County prior to the disposition of any land in the planned development. The village shall require such
covenants and adequate provisions to assure proper maintenance and repair of all areas and facilities under common ownership, including the
payment therefor and enforceability thereof by or on the behalf of the village as well as any proposed charter and bylaws of an association, if any, for
homeowners, merchants or industrial owners.
J. Site Plan And Supporting Maps: A site plan and any maps necessary to show the major details of the proposed planned development must contain the
following minimum information:
1. The existing site conditions including contours at one foot (1') intervals, watercourses, floodplains, trees over six inches (6") in diameter as measured
one foot (1') above grade prepared in accordance with sections 10-6-9 and 10-3-3 of this code, unique natural features and existing coverage and
the results of soil borings twenty feet (20') below the ground surface at four hundred foot (400') intervals or as required by village engineer. Said
borings shall include information regarding subsurface conditions of the area, subsurface soil, rock, groundwater conditions and depth to
groundwater.
2. Proposed lot lines and plot designs.
3. The location and floor area size of all existing and proposed buildings, structures and other improvements, including maximum heights, types of
dwelling units, density per type and nonresidential structures, including commercial facilities.
4. The location and size in acres or square feet of all areas to be conveyed, dedicated or reserved as common open spaces, public parks, recreational
areas, school sites or similar public and semipublic uses.
5. The existing and proposed circulation system of arterial, collector and local streets, including off street parking areas, service areas, loading areas
and major points of access to public right of way (including major points of ingress and egress to the development).
6. The existing and proposed pedestrian circulation system, including its interrelationship with the vehicular circulation system, indicating proposed
treatment of points of conflict.
7. The existing and proposed utility systems including sanitary sewers, storm sewers, water and easements.
8. A general preliminary landscape plan indicating the treatment of materials used for private and public open spaces.
9. General street and public area lighting plan.
10. Boundary lines of adjoining unsubdivided land within one hundred feet (100'), identifying by name and ownership, existing land use, zoning average
density per acre, public facilities and unique natural features of the landscape.
11. Bicycle plan in conformance with the comprehensive plan.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 462/498
12. Wetland mitigation plan in a manner approved by the village engineer.
K. Development Schedule: A development schedule indicating the approximate date when construction of the planned development and phases of the
planned development can be expected to begin and be completed.
L. Describe Character Of Area: An explanation of the character of the area covered by the preliminary plan and the reasons why it is suitable for a planned
development.
M. Other Uses Than Residential: Statement on the type and amount of ancillary and nonresidential uses in a residential development, including the
amount of common open space, recreational areas and facilities.
N. Title Of Development: Statement of title under which proposed development is to be recorded, names and addresses of owners and present tract
designation including book and page, if available, according to official records in the office of the recorder of deeds.
O. Floor Plans And Elevations: Floor plans and elevations of proposed structures.
P. Required Letters: All required letters, as described in the village subdivision regulations (title 10 of this code), including letters of approval from the
department of conservation and Illinois historic preservation agency as well as letters of acceptance of required land donations or cash in lieu of land
from the Streamwood park district and school district U-46.
Q. Tree Survey: Tree survey, if applicable. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-8-4-3: PUBLIC HEARING:
The planning and zoning board shall hold a public hearing on the application for a planned development and preliminary plan. Notice shall be given of the
time and place of the hearing by publishing a notice thereof at least once in a newspaper of general circulation in the village, said publication to be not
more than thirty (30) days nor less than fifteen (15) days prior to the date of hearing. Notice shall be provided owners of record within two hundred fifty feet
(250') exclusive of public rights of way, of the planned development not more than thirty (30) days nor less than fifteen (15) days prior to the date of
hearing. The form of notice to be provided by the village clerk shall be either certified or registered mail, return receipt requested. The petitioner must
submit signed, mailed cards or electronic verification of signatures as proof at the time of the hearing. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010; amd. Ord.
2015-9, 5-7-2015)
11-8-4-4: ACTION BY VILLAGE:
A. Planning And Zoning Board Action: Within ninety (90) days after the close of public hearing, the planning and zoning board shall give a written opinion
to the president and board of trustees recommending approval, modification or disapproval of the preliminary plan of development.
B. President And Board Of Trustees Action: The president and board of trustees after receipt of the preliminary development plan of the development,
shall approve, modify or disapprove such plan. The president and board of trustees may require such special conditions as they may deem necessary
to ensure conformity with the intent and purpose of all village ordinances. Upon approval by the president and board of trustees of the plan by an
ordinance, a record shall be prepared, including findings of fact, setting forth the terms of relief and/or variances granted from existing ordinances in
general and specifically from the subdivision and other improvement ordinances. Approval of a preliminary plan shall not constitute approval of the final
plan. The president and board of trustees shall notify the planning and zoning board and applicant of its action. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-
2010; amd. Ord. 2015-9, 5-7-2015)
11-8-4-5: STATUS OF APPROVED PRELIMINARY PLAN:
Approval of a preliminary plan by the president and board of trustees shall not constitute approval of the final plan nor qualify a plat of the planned
development for recording. In the event that a preliminary plan is approved and thereafter, but not prior to final approval, the petitioner shall choose to
abandon such plan and notify the planning and zoning board in writing, or fail to file application for final plan approval within the required time period or any
extension thereof, the preliminary plan approval shall be deemed to be revoked and all that portion of the area included in the plan for which final approval
has not been given, shall be subject to all applicable ordinances. No building permit shall then be issued for any structure until approval for the issuance
has been given by the president and board of trustees of the final plan. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010; amd. Ord. 2015-9, 5-7-2015)
11-8-5: FINAL DEVELOPMENT:
11-8-5-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the final development plan is to:
A. Designate the land subdivided into lots;
B. Designate the division of other lands into common open building areas;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 463/498
C. Designate and limit the specific use of land, buildings and structures thereon;
D. Ensure substantial compatibility with preliminary plans. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-8-5-2: REQUIREMENTS:
The final plan of the planned development shall substantially conform to the preliminary plan as approved. It may be submitted in stages with each stage
being a portion of the approved preliminary plan which is to be developed and recorded; each such portion shall conform to all requirements of this
chapter. After reviewing the final plan and supporting data, the planning and zoning board shall approve or disapprove the plan within sixty (60) days. The
required procedure for approval of the final plan of a planned development shall be as follows: (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010; amd. Ord. 2015-9,
5-7-2015)
A. Submission Of Final Plan: Within twelve (12) months after approval of the preliminary development plan, the petitioner shall submit a final plan for
approval. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
B. Filing Application With Clerk: Application, final plan and supporting data shall be filed with the village clerk with sufficient copies of the plan as
determined by the village clerk. The planning and zoning board shall certify that the final plan is in conformity with this section and in agreement with
the approved preliminary plans. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010; amd. Ord. 2015-9, 5-7-2015)
C. Acreage: Final plans for all or part of the planned development shall be submitted to the village clerk. There shall be no minimum acreage requirement
with respect to final plans. Said plans shall be in substantial compliance with development schedule.
D. Final Subdivision Plat: If the planned development constitutes a subdivision, a final subdivision plat shall be submitted. Any such final subdivision plat
shall set forth suitable dedications of permanent open and recreational space to be owned in common, rights of way and other requirements of the
ordinances and statutes, as the same may be in force from time to time.
E. Location Of Buildings, Parking And Loading Spaces: The final version of the plan of the planned development shall be filed indicating the locations of all
buildings, parking and loading spaces and any other special structure, facility or feature approved or required by the president and board of trustees.
F. Final Version Of Covenants: The final version of the covenants, if any, by which the petitioner proposes to regulate land use and otherwise protect the
proposed development, accompanied by the written representation and warranty of the petitioner, in form and substance satisfactory to the village
attorney, to the effect that the owner of the real property which is the subject of the proposed planned development has not sold or otherwise disposed
of any interest in said property and will not sell or otherwise dispose of any such interest prior to the filing for record of said covenants in the office of
the recorder of deeds of Cook County, Illinois.
G. Deeds And Easement Agreements: Such deeds or easement agreements, if any, as are required by the president and board of trustees, shall be filed
in form and substance approved by the village attorney conveying ownership interest in the parcels within the proposed planned development which
are to be subject to public or common ownership.
H. Homeowners' Association: Submitting a copy of the articles of incorporation of the homeowners', merchants' or industrial owners' association, if any,
and a complete copy of such bylaws, all certified by the secretary of state of Illinois or otherwise, as existing authenticated not more than thirty (30)
days prior to submission.
I. Details Of Final Plan: All final plans shall be prepared in accordance with section 10-3-4 of this code in such detail as may be required by the village
engineer, including:
1. Sanitary and storm sewer systems;
2. Water supply system;
3. Street and public area lighting systems;
4. Sidewalks, trails and paths;
5. Landscape plan;
6. Tree protection and preservation plan; and
7. Wetland mitigation plan.
J. Improvements; Cost Established: Estimate of the cost of installation of all proposed public improvements confirmed by a registered Illinois engineer.
K. Floor Plan: Final floor plan and elevations of proposed structures.
L. Delinquent Taxes Or Assessments: A certificate furnished by the county collector that no delinquent taxes exist against the property and that all special
assessments constituting a lien on the whole or in part of the property of the planned development have been paid. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-
2010)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 464/498
11-8-6: STANDARDS:
In reviewing the preliminary plans and final plans, the planning and zoning board and the president and board of trustees shall be guided by the following
standards: (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010; amd. Ord. 2015-9, 5-7-2015)
A. All plans shall be designed so that the public health, welfare and safety shall be protected.
B. The proposed development shall be such that it does not cause substantial injury to the value of other property in the immediate area.
C. All plans shall provide for protection of both the aesthetics and function of the natural environment, including, but not limited to, conditions pertaining to
floodplains, soil and geologic characteristics, air quality and preservation of vegetation.
D. Residential use areas should have a variety of housing types and densities necessary to achieve a balanced neighborhood.
E. The planned development shall include land area necessary to accommodate cultural, educational, recreational and other public and quasi-public
activities necessary to serve the needs of the residents thereof.
F. The proposed development shall provide for the orderly and creative arrangement of all land uses with respect to each other and to the entire village.
(Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-8-7: CONTINUING CONTROL:
All planned developments shall be developed in strict compliance with the recorded final plan and supporting data. All final plans and covenants filed and
recorded hereunder shall be contractual undertakings by and shall be binding upon the applicant thereof, the owners of the land covered by such planned
development, their successors and assigns, and shall limit and control the construction location and use and operation of all land in such planned
development and all improvements and structures to be located thereon.
A. Approval of any planned development by the village president and board of trustees shall carry with it approval of the development for completion for
each phase or segment thereof as contained in the application, including any changes or amendments imposed by the village president and board of
trustees and accepted by the applicant.
In the event any portion of such development schedule is not met, the village president and board of trustees, upon a written request by the applicant
for an extension of time, delivered to the village president and board of trustees at least twenty (20) days prior to the expiration of the completion date
for which such extension is requested, may, for good cause shown, extend said completion date for such length of time as the village president and
board of trustees, in their sole discretion, deem justified by the circumstances.
Upon the failure of an applicant to satisfactorily meet any phase or segment of the development schedule within thirty (30) days after the expiration
thereof, or within thirty (30) days after any extension thereof granted by the village president and board of trustees, the planned development granted
as a special use thereunder shall forthwith lapse, terminate and become null and void, and the tract of land subject to such special use shall retain its
underlying zoning classification; provided, however, that the village president and board of trustees shall permit such portion of the planned
development special use to remain in effect with respect to such tract as is reasonably warranted by the then current state of development so as to
avoid manifest injustice to the applicant and his successors in title. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
The applicant may apply for approval of a new planned development or for rezoning of the subject premises within sixty (60) days after termination. In
the event the applicant does not make such application within the sixty (60) day period, the village president and board of trustees shall initiate
consideration of rezoning of the subject property by referring the matter to the planning and zoning board for public hearing and recommendations.
(Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010; amd. Ord. 2015-9, 5-7-2015)
B. Upon issuance of a special use permit and the necessary building permits, no major changes may be made, during or after the development of the final
plan as approved and recorded; however, such major changes may be made pursuant to section 11-8-9, "Plan Changes", of this chapter. (Ord. 2009-
34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-8-8: ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS:
A. Revocation: In any case where a planned development has not been substantially commenced within one year from the date of granting thereof, the
planning and zoning board may recommend and the president and board of trustees, after notice and public hearing thereon, may repeal the ordinance
authorizing any such planned development.
B. Use Exceptions: The planning and zoning board may recommend and the president and board of trustees may authorize specified uses permitted in
part of the area of a proposed planned development, which are not permitted by the use regulations of the district in which said development is located,
provided, that the planning and zoning board shall find: (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010; amd. Ord. 2015-9, 5-7-2015)
1. That the uses permitted by such exception are necessary or desirable and are appropriate with respect to the preliminary purpose of the planned
development; and
2. That the uses permitted by such exception are not of such a nature, or so located, as to be a detrimental influence on the surrounding neighborhood.
(Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 465/498
C. Bulk Regulations: In the case of any planned development, the planning and zoning board may recommend and the president and board of trustees
may authorize exceptions to the bulk regulations of this zoning title within the boundaries of such planned developments; provided, that the petitioner
shall present sufficient evidence to the planning and zoning board that such exception shall be solely for the purpose of promoting an integrated site
plan no less beneficial to the residents of occupations of such development as well as the neighboring property, than would be obtained under the bulk
regulations of this chapter for buildings developed on separate zoning lots. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010; amd. Ord. 2015-9, 5-7-2015)
D. Maintenance Of Recreational Space And Permanent Common Open Spaces: In the event that the organization established to own and maintain
common open space, recreation areas and related facilities, or any successor organization, shall at any time after establishment of the planned
development fail to maintain the common open space, recreation areas and related facilities in reasonable order and condition, in accordance with the
plan, the village may serve written notice upon such organization or upon the residents of the planned development setting forth the manner in which
the organization has failed to maintain the space in a reasonable condition and said notice shall include the following:
1. A demand that such deficiencies of maintenance be cured within thirty (30) days. If such deficiencies are not cured within said thirty (30) days, the
village shall serve notice of hearing. Said notice shall state the date and place of hearing and shall be sent registered mail not less than five (5) days
nor more than ten (10) days from the hearing date. At the hearing, if the village finds the deficiencies cannot be cured by the responsible party, the
village in order to preserve the taxable values of the properties within the planned development, and to prevent the common open space from
becoming a public nuisance, may enter upon said property and maintain the same for a period of one year. Said entry and maintenance shall not
vest in the public any rights to use the common open space or recreation areas. Before the expiration of said year, the village shall, upon its initiative
or upon the request of the organization theretofore responsible for the maintenance of the common open space, call a public hearing upon notice to
such organization, or to the residents of the planned development to show cause why such maintenance by the village shall not, at the election of the
village, continue for a succeeding year. If the president and board of trustees shall determine that such organization is not ready and able to maintain
said common open space and recreation areas in a reasonable condition, the village may, in its discretion, continue to maintain such common open
space during the next succeeding year thereafter. The decision of the president and board of trustees in any case shall constitute a final
administrative decision, subject to review in accordance with appropriate provisions of this section.
2. The cost of such maintenance by the village shall be assessed against the properties within the planned development that have a right of enjoyment
of the common space and recreation space. The village may pursue such payments by appropriate legal action. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-
2010)
11-8-9: PLAN CHANGES:
A. Major Changes: Changes which alter the concept of the planned development, including, but not limited to, changes in density, type and location, height
of buildings and proposed open space, must be approved by submission of preliminary and final development plans pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter and provisions for a public hearing under section 11-8-4-3 of this chapter.
B. Minor Changes: Minor changes in locations, siting or character of buildings may be authorized by the village manager, if required by engineering or
architectural constraints, or other circumstances not foreseen at the time the final development plan was approved. The village manager may not
authorize as a minor change any increase in the size of a building or structure. The village manager may authorize as a minor change, changes in the
location of any building or structure in any direction up to ten feet (10'); further, any such changes in the location of a building or structure exceeding ten
feet (10') may be approved by the village manager, provided such change shall be approved by the president and board of trustees. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-
3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-8-10: PERMITS:
Building, zoning and occupancy permits shall be required for each structure in a planned development. No building permit relating to any part of a planned
development shall be issued prior to the approval of a final plan of such part of the planned development. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-8-11: PUBLIC FACILITIES, SURETY, COSTS, FEES AND CHARGES:
Prior to the recordation of a final plat of a planned development, the applicant shall submit an irrevocable letter of credit, in accordance with section 10-3-6
of this code, as a guarantee for the completion of all public facilities and improvements made necessary as a result of the planned development in
conformance with the subdivision regulations. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-8-12: GUARANTEE DEPOSIT:
In addition to the deposit provided for in section 11-8-11 of this chapter, a deposit shall be made to the village in either cash or irrevocable letters of credit,
in accordance with section 10-3-6 of this code, or maintenance bond equal to ten percent (10%) of the estimated cost of public facility installations. This
deposit shall be a guarantee of satisfactory performance of the facilities constructed within the planned development and shall be held by the village for a
period of twenty four (24) months after acceptance of such facilities by the village. After such twenty four (24) months, the deposit shall be refunded if no
defects have developed, or if any defects have developed, then the balance of such deposit shall be refunded after reimbursement for amounts expended
in correcting any defective facilities. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-8-13: ACCEPTANCE OF PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS:
Upon completion of construction of any public improvements required by the approved final plan, the applicant can request acceptance of all required
public improvements, by the village board, in conformance with section 10-3-7 of this code. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-8-14: EFFECT OF OTHER ORDINANCES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 466/498
All other subdivision and improvement ordinances of the village shall remain in full force and effect, unless otherwise varied by this chapter. (Ord. 2009-34,
12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
Chapter 9
OFF STREET PARKING AND OFF STREET LOADING
11-9-1: PREAMBLE:
The regulations of this chapter are established to:
A. Increase safety and lessen congestion in the public streets;
B. Meet the need for parking and loading spaces associated with the development of land and increased automobile and truck usage;
C. Set standards for the requirements of off street parking and off street loading facilities according to the amount of estimated traffic generated by each
use; and
D. Minimize the on street parking of vehicles. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-9-2: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
A. Scope Of Regulations: In all zoning districts, off street parking and loading facilities shall be provided and maintained as required by these regulations
for all uses, buildings, and structures.
B. Duty To Provide: It shall be the joint and several responsibility of the operator, lessee and owner of the building, structure or premises for which parking
and loading facilities are required to provide and maintain such facilities.
C. Existing Parking And Loading Facilities: Accessory off street parking and loading facilities in existence on the effective date hereof and located on the
same lot as the building, structure or use shall not hereafter be reduced below, or if already less than, shall not be further reduced below the
requirements for a similar new building, structure or use under the provisions of this title.
D. Change Of Intensity Use: When the intensity of use of any building, structure, or premises shall be increased through the addition of dwelling units,
gross floor area, seating capacity, or other units of measurements specified herein for required parking and loading facilities, such additional parking
and loading facilities as required shall be provided. However, if the said building or structure was lawfully erected prior to the effective date hereof
additional parking or loading facilities are mandatory only in the event the floor area of the building or structure is increased, and then only to the extent
required by the additional space.
E. Change Of Use: Whenever the existing use of a building, structure or premises shall hereafter be changed to a new use, parking and loading facilities
shall be provided as required for such new use. However, if the building or structure was lawfully erected prior to the effective date hereof, additional
parking or loading facilities are mandatory only in the event the floor area of the building or structure is increased.
F. Damage Or Destruction:
1. When any building, structure or use is restored or continued in operation after being damaged or destroyed by fire, collapse, explosion or other
cause, to the extent that the cost of restoration exceeds one hundred percent (100%) of the appraised value, there shall be provided the off street
parking and loading facilities required by this title.
2. When any building, structure, or use which is in existence on the effective date hereof, is restored or continued in operation after being damaged or
destroyed by fire, collapse, explosion or other cause, to the extent that the cost of restoration does not exceed one hundred percent (100%) of the
appraised value, there need be provided only the off street parking and loading facilities equivalent of any maintained at the time of such damage or
destruction.
3. In no case, however, shall it be necessary to restore or maintain parking or loading facilities in excess of those required by this title for equivalent
new uses or construction.
G. Utilization Of Parking And Loading Spaces:
1. Required off street parking facilities shall be solely for the parking of passenger vehicles of patrons, occupants, and employees of the uses to which
they are accessory.
2. Space allocated to any off street loading berth shall not be used to satisfy the space requirements for any off street parking facilities or portions
thereof.
3. Off street parking and loading facilities shall not be used for the sale, storage, repair, dismantling, or servicing of any vehicles, equipment, materials,
goods or supplies. Emergency service required to start vehicles shall be permitted.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 467/498
H. Permissive Parking And Loading Facilities: Nothing in this title shall be deemed to prevent the voluntary establishment of off street parking and loading
facilities in excess of the number required; provided, that there is adherence to all regulations herein governing the location, design and operation of
such facilities.
I. Required Approval And Site Plan:
1. Approval: The arrangement, access, surfacing, drainage provisions, wheelstops, screening, landscaping, and illumination of any off street parking or
loading facilities shall be subject to the approval of the community development director.
2. Site Plan: A site plan, which is drawn to scale and fully dimensioned, showing the location, layout, and landscaping of required off street parking and
loading facilities shall accompany each application for a zoning certificate. The completion of the improvements according to such site plan shall be a
requisite for the validity of the certificate. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-9-3: OFF STREET PARKING:
11-9-3-1: LOCATION OF PARKING:
Required parking spaces shall be located on the same zoning lot as the building, structure or use to which they are accessory.
A. Exception: The board of trustees may authorize for a specific use the location of all or part of the required off street parking spaces on a lot other than
the zoning lot occupied if the parking spaces to be shared are within a distance of not greater than two hundred feet (200') from zoning lot to zoning lot.
B. Open Parking: Off street parking spaces, open to the sky, may be located in any yard, provided that in the commercial districts parking spaces shall be
located at least five feet (5') from the nearest lot line.
C. Location In Residential Districts:
1. Off street parking shall be permitted in the front yard in residential districts; provided, that the required parking spaces are in the driveway area of the
zoning lot requiring same, except that in the R-0, R-1, R-2, R-3 and R-4 districts said off street parking which is open to the sky shall not occupy
more than forty five percent (45%) of the required front yard. The maximum driveway width shall not exceed twenty five feet (25') in width, except
that a lot which contains a unit with an attached three (3) car garage may have a maximum driveway width of thirty feet (30'). A service walk
adjoining a driveway shall be included as part of the maximum allowable width. All driveway widths, at the point where the full width of the private
driveway meets the public right of way, shall conform to the width of the driveway in the public right of way. Expansion shall only be toward the side
property line, unless such expansion is determined to be impractical by the community development director or his designee. No expansion shall
exceed one additional nine foot (9') lane width, from the number of parking stalls provided by an attached garage (see diagram 1 of this section).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 468/498
2. Driveway aprons shall not exceed twenty five feet (25') in total width inclusive of a two foot (2') taper, on each side of the apron, at the curb. Where a
lot has a three (3) car garage, the driveway at the property line must be a minimum of twenty two feet (22') and the driveway apron may have a
maximum total width of thirty feet (30') inclusive of the required two foot (2') taper on each side of the apron, at the curb (see diagram 1 of this
section).
3. Open off street parking shall be permitted in the required rear yard except that said parking along with other impervious surfaces shall not occupy
more than thirty five percent (35%) of the required rear yard.
4. On corner lots where the required front yard is being utilized for open off street parking, the required corner side yard may not be utilized for off street
parking or access to the rear yard. On corner lots where the front yard is not utilized for open off street parking, the required corner side yard may be
utilized for open off street parking under the same restrictions contained in subsection C1 of this section.
5. In no instance may both a corner side yard and a front yard be utilized for open off street parking.
6. No residential zoning lot shall have more than one curb cut for the purpose of accessing said lot. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-9-3-2: PROVISION OF PARKING FACILITIES:
A. Collective Provisions: Off street parking facilities for separate uses may be provided collectively, if the total number of spaces so provided is not less
than the sum of the separate requirements for each such use and provided that all regulations governing location of parking spaces, in relation to the
use served, are observed. Further, no parking space or portion thereof, shall serve as the required space for more than one use, unless otherwise
specifically authorized in accordance with this title.
B. Joint Use Of Parking Facilities: Parking spaces already provided to meet the off street parking requirements for stores, office buildings, and industrial
establishments, or off street parking facilities provided by the village, may be used to meet up to thirty five percent (35%) of the total requirements for
parking spaces for churches, auditoriums, or other places of public or private assembly, subject to the approval of the board of trustees and to the
following:
1. The parking spaces to be shared must be within a walking distance of not greater than three hundred feet (300') from the place of assembly.
2. The schedules of operation of all uses involved are such that none of the uses sharing the space require the off street parking spaces at the same
time as any other use sharing the space. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-9-3-3: DESIGN, DEVELOPMENT AND MAINTENANCE OF PARKING SPACES:
Every parcel of land hereafter used as a public or private parking area shall be designed, developed and maintained in accordance with the following
requirements:
A. Open And Enclosed Spaces: Off street parking spaces may be open to the sky or enclosed in a building or structure.
B. Surfacing:
1. Single-Family And Two-Family Dwellings: Off street parking areas, except for those parking areas limited to the parking of recreational vehicles, and
access drives accessory to single-family and two-family dwellings shall be paved or otherwise surfaced with either asphalt, concrete or brick pavers.
Dissimilar materials are not allowed, except an eighteen inch (18") width of brick pavers may be installed adjacent to a concrete or asphalt driveway
on private property. Said eighteen inches (18") of pavers shall be calculated as part of the overall width of the approved drive. That portion of the
driveway connecting from the curb line to the property line shall be paved with concrete or asphalt in accordance with village standards. Driveways in
front yards shall be located a minimum of one foot (1') from the side property line and the resulting setback from said property line must include
approved landscaping over the entire setback area.
2. Other Uses: Off street parking areas and access drives except parking areas and access drives accessory to single-family and two-family dwellings,
shall be improved with a compacted macadam base, or equal, not less than four inches (4") thick, and surfaced with asphaltic material or equal, not
less than two inches (2") thick.
3. Recreational Vehicles In Single-Family And Two-Family Dwellings: Off street parking areas specifically limited to recreational vehicles accessory to
single-family and two-family dwellings shall be paved or otherwise surfaced with an asphalt, concrete, paving blocks or other materials approved by
the community development director, designed to support the full weight of the recreational vehicle. When the parking pad is adjacent to the driveway
it shall be constructed of the same material as the driveway, and be included as part of the total allowable driveway width. The parking pad shall be
no less in total square footage area than the total area in square footage of the outside dimensions of the recreational vehicle parked on the pad.
C. Maintenance: To sustain their usefulness, all required off street parking facilities shall be continually maintained in a state of good repair. The existing
enclosed off street parking spaces shall not be reduced unless they are replaced with additional spaces within structures on the same zoning lot.
D. Drainage And Snow Removal:
1. Drainage: Adequate provisions shall be made for the disposal of stormwater in accordance with village ordinances. Such water shall not flow into
adjacent property or onto or across sidewalks in a quantity or manner that would be detrimental thereto or inconvenient to persons using the
sidewalks.
2. Snow Removal: Provisions shall be made for the storage and/or removal of snow from the parking areas. Areas for snow storage shall be
designated reasonably close to drains or catch basins. Snow storage on planting areas should be avoided to prevent physical and salt damage to
plant material.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 469/498
E. Curbing And Wheel Stops:
1. Curbing: For all parking areas containing more than fifteen (15) spaces, continuous permanent curbing or retaining walls constructed of portland
cement concrete, or equal, to prevent the washing of soil to and from adjoining property shall be provided and shall also be provided between all
landscaping areas and adjacent parking lot and driveway paving where necessary.
2. Wheel Stops: For all parking areas containing more than four (4) spaces, wheel stops of masonry, steel, or heavy timber shall be placed near all
exterior parking lot lines to protect abutting property and also along street lot lines so as to prevent protrusion of vehicles into street rights of way.
F. Landscaping And Screening: Landscaping and screening shall be provided for all parking areas as required in section 11-4-10 of this title.
G. Lighting: Parking lot lighting is required and must conform to the following:
1. All parking lot lights shall be mounted on poles and placed around the exterior of the parking lot. Additional lights may be added to the interior of this
lot in order to ensure conformance with subsection G3 of this section.
2. No parking lot lights shall be affixed to any signage or building facades.
3. Photometric plans must be submitted which indicate lighting for a safe environment and ensure light level uniformity. The photometric plans for the
illumination of off street parking areas shall:
a. Indicate light levels at 9.0 foot-candles under the source and 0.5 foot-candle at the lot line, with 3.0 foot-candles on average over the entire site
and must conform to the most current, village adopted International Code Council (ICC) energy code;
b. Have a maximum pole height of eighteen feet (18');
c. Use lights with flat or recessed lenses;
d. Minimize color distortion through the use of metal halide lamping, with wattage ranging from one hundred (100) to two hundred fifty (250),
depending on pole spacing;
e. Provide refractors to disperse light and avoid glare; tilting of fixtures is prohibited; and
f. Arrange lights to project direct rays of light away from adjacent property or street rights of way.
4. All building lighting shall have internal diffusers so that all light is directed downward. Exterior lighting in all districts shall direct so that there is no
more than 0.5 foot-candle at the property line.
H. Size, Access And Marking For Parking Spaces:
1. Size Of Parking Spaces: Every off street space shall measure nine feet (9') in width by eighteen feet (18') in length. Those spaces adjacent to
landscaped areas shall measure ten feet (10') in width. Each parking space shall have a vertical clearance of at least seven feet (7').
2. Access To Parking Spaces: Each off street parking space shall open directly upon an aisle or driveway. Each off street parking space shall have
access drives or aisles, ramps, columns, or work areas in accordance with the standards set forth in table 1 of this section.
TABLE 1
Parking Angle Aisle Width
90° 24'
75° 22'
60° 18'
45° 15'
3. Access To Parking Facilities: All off street parking facilities shall be provided with appropriate means of vehicular access to a street or alley in a
manner which will least interfere with traffic movements.
4. Marking Of Parking Facilities: The location of each off street parking space and direction of movement along the aisles and driveways providing
access thereto shall be indicated by markings on the surface and approved directional signs. Directional signs shall conform to the provisions of
chapter 10 of this title.
5. Parking Aisle Ends: Raised curbed islands shall be placed, as necessary, within parking lots to clearly define all parking rows, collector aisles and
general circulation routes. Corner radii of islands shall be a minimum of nine feet (9') for perpendicular aisles and spaces.
6. Parallel Parking Spaces: The use of parallel parking spaces shall be prohibited.
I. Provisions For Handicapped: Provision of parking spaces for the handicapped shall comply with all state and federal regulations.
J. Speed Control Devices: The use of speed bumps, speed humps or other similar speed control devices shall be prohibited.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 470/498
K. Intersection Sight Visibility: No structure, landscape material or parked vehicle(s) shall be located within an intersection sight distance triangle, equal to
fifty feet (50') from the point of intersection, in such a manner as to limit or obstruct the sight distances of motorists entering or leaving an intersection.
This shall include intersections within parking areas. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-9-3-4: UNITS OF MEASUREMENT:
For the purposes of this section 11-9-3, the following units of measurements shall apply:
A. Floor Area: Floor area, when prescribed as the basis of measurement for off street parking spaces for any use, shall be the sum of the gross horizontal
area of the several floors of the building, excluding:
1. Areas used for off street parking and off street loading facilities;
2. The horizontal areas of the basement and cellar floors that are devoted exclusively to uses accessory to the operation of the entire building; and
3. The horizontal areas of boiler and mechanical rooms used for heating, ventilating and air conditioning equipment whether located on the roof or
within the building.
B. Dwelling Units: A "dwelling unit" shall mean one room or a suite of two (2) or more designed for or used by one family for living and sleeping purposes
and having only one kitchen or kitchenette.
C. Seat Or Seating Space: A seat shall be the space intended for one individual. In places where patrons or spectators occupy benches, pews, or other
seating facilities, each eighteen (18) linear inches of such seating facilities shall be counted as one seat.
D. Employees: Parking spaces required for employees shall be based on the maximum number of employees on the premises at any one time whether on
duty or residing therein.
E. Computation: When determination of the number of off street parking spaces required in this section 11-9-3 results in the requirement of a fractional
space, any fraction shall require one additional space. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-9-3-5: REQUIRED SPACES:
There shall be provided for each building, structure and use hereafter erected, structurally altered, or enlarged, the minimum number of accessory off
street parking spaces in accordance with the following, except that residential lots having an area of seven thousand eight hundred (7,800) square feet or
less and provided said lots were platted and recorded prior to January 1, 1989, may be exempted from the provisions of subsection A of this section at the
discretion of the community development director. In allowing said exemption the community development director shall consider the practical planning
and economic difficulties of providing additional off street parking. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
A.
Residential uses:
Single-family dwellings and multi-family dwellings with individual entrances 4 parking spaces, of which 2 must be enclosed, for
each dwelling unit
Multiple-family dwellings Other than those designated above, 3 parking spaces
for each dwelling unit
Senior housing (assisted and supportive living) 0.7 parking space for each dwelling unit
Senior housing (independent living) 1 parking space for each dwelling unit
B.
Commercial uses:
Automobile service station 1 parking space for each island of pumps plus 2
parking spaces for each service stall plus 1 parking
space for each employee on duty, plus 1 parking
space for each emergency vehicle
Beauty parlors, salons and barbershops 1 parking space shall be provided for each 150
square feet of gross floor area
Drive-in establishments 6 stacking spaces per lane dedicated to customer
service; if order and pick up windows are within the
same lane, 1 additional space must be provided
between said windows
Food stores, grocery stores and supermarkets 1 parking space shall be provided for each 175
square feet of gross floor area
Furniture and appliances stores and establishments for repair of household
equipment or furniture
1 parking space shall be provided for the first 1,000
square feet and 1 parking space for each additional
300 square feet
Leather goods and luggage shop 1 parking space shall be provided for each 250
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 471/498
square feet of gross floor area
Motor vehicle, motorcycle and bicycle sales and service 1 parking space shall be provided for each 400
square feet of gross floor area
Photocopying, blueprinting establishments 1 parking space shall be provided for each 250
square feet of gross floor area
Restaurants: The following requirements may be made more or less restrictive by
no more than 25 percent of the required total by the board of trustees upon the
recommendation of the planning and zoning board:
Carryout type 1 space shall be provided for each 120 square feet of
gross floor area
Sit down 1 parking space shall be provided for each 60 square
feet of gross floor area
Retail stores 1 parking space shall be provided for each 200
square feet of gross floor area
Theaters, indoor 1 parking space shall be provided for each 4 seats
Undertaking establishments and funeral parlors 8 parking spaces shall be provided for each parlor or
chapel, plus 1 parking space for each funeral vehicle
kept on the premises
C.
Office uses:
Banks, savings and loans, financial institutions 1 parking space shall be provided for each 200
square feet of gross floor area
Business or professional offices 1 parking space shall be provided for each 250
square feet of gross floor area
Drive-in establishments 6 stacking spaces per teller or lane dedicated to
customer service
Medical clinics and dental clinics 4 patient parking spaces shall be provided for each
staff doctor, plus 2 parking spaces for each 3
employees, plus 1 parking space for each staff doctor
D.
Industrial uses:
Manufacturing uses 1 parking space for each 1,000 square feet of gross
floor area plus 1 appropriately sized parking space for
each vehicle used in the conduct of the enterprise
Warehousing and storage uses 1 parking space for each 1,750 square feet of gross
floor area, plus 1 parking space for each vehicle used
in the conduct of the enterprise
E.
Schools, institutions and places of assembly:
Auditoriums and places of assembly with fixed seating 1 parking space shall be provided for each 3 seats
Auditoriums and places of assembly without fixed seating 1 parking space shall be provided for each 3 persons
of the total capacity as determined by this code
Libraries, museums, historic sites, and art galleries 1 parking space shall be provided for each 800
square feet of gross floor area
Nursery schools, day nurseries and childcare centers 1 parking space shall be provided for each teacher
and employee, plus 1 parking space for each 10
students
Nursing homes, convalescent centers, and similar establishments 1 parking space shall be provided for each 4 patient
beds, plus 2 parking spaces for each 3 employees,
plus 1 parking space for each staff doctor
Places of worship 1 parking space shall be provided for each 3 seats; if
fixed seating is not used, then 1 parking space shall
be provided for each 3 persons of the total capacity
as determined by this code
Religious residences, dormitory type 1 parking space shall be provided for each 1,000
square feet of gross floor area
Schools: Where a school has an auditorium or assembly hall which may be used by
persons other than students of the school, the parking requirements set forth under
"auditoriums and places of assembly" if greater, shall be used to fulfill the parking
requirements of the school.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 472/498
Elementary, junior high and the equivalent private or parochial schools 2 parking spaces shall be provided for each 3
teachers and employees
Senior high schools, colleges, universities, institutions of higher learning and the
equivalent private or parochial schools
2 parking spaces shall be provided for each 3
teachers and employees, plus 1 parking space for
each 5 students, based on the design capacity of the
facility
Commercial and trade schools 3 parking spaces shall be provided for each 5
students, plus 2 parking spaces for each 3 teachers
and employees
F.
Recreational and social facilities:
Bowling alleys 5 parking spaces shall be provided for each lane, plus
such additional spaces as may be required herein for
affiliated uses such as restaurants and the like
Private clubs and lodges 1 parking space shall be provided for each 3 persons
based on the design capacity of the facility
Public parks, playgrounds and athletic fields (noncommercial) 1 parking space shall be provided for each 5,000
square feet of gross land area
Public swimming pools 1 parking space shall be provided for each 75 square
feet of water area
Other recreational uses 1 parking space shall be provided for each 3 patrons,
based on the design capacity of the facility in terms of
the largest number of patrons to be served at one
time
G.
Planned unit developments: Parking facilities shall be provided on the basis of the
required number of spaces for each use contained
therein
H.
Other uses: Parking spaces for other uses not listed above shall
be provided in accordance with requirements
recommended by the planning and zoning board and
approved by the board of trustees
I.
Additional requirements for commercial, industrial and nonresidential uses: For any building in excess of 5,000 square feet,
parking facilities shall be provided on the basis of the
required number of spaces for each use group
contained therein
(Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010; amd. Ord. 2015-9, 5-7-2015)
11-9-4: OFF STREET LOADING:
In all districts, there shall be provided off street loading facilities as regulated in this section 11-9-4 for any building or structure which is to be erected or
substantially altered, which requires the receipt or distribution of materials or merchandise by trucks or similar vehicles. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-
2010)
11-9-4-1: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
A. Location:
1. All required off street loading berths shall be located on the same zoning lot as the use to be served.
2. No portion of the vehicle shall project into a street, alley, access drive or parking area.
3. No permitted or required loading berth shall be located within forty feet (40') of the nearest point of intersection of any two (2) streets.
4. No loading berth shall be located in a required front yard, or side yard adjoining a street.
B. Size: Unless otherwise specified in this title, a required off street loading berth shall be at least twelve feet (12') in width by at least fifty feet (50') in
length, exclusive of aisle and maneuvering space, and shall have a vertical clearance of at least fifteen feet (15').
C. Access And Maneuvering Area: In addition to the required loading space, all loading spaces shall include a maneuvering area as follows:
1. Each required off street loading berth shall have an adjacent open paved area, other than a street or public way, of adequate size and so located as
to provide for all required maneuvering for truck access to the loading berth.
2. Each required off street loading berth shall be designed with appropriate means of vehicular access to a street or alley in a manner so as to provide
for safe traffic movements.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 473/498
3. The maneuvering area shall not use any portion of the site containing parking stalls or customer service areas. Maneuvering areas shall be of such
size as to permit the backing of truck tractors and coupled trailers into the loading space, without blocking the use of other loading spaces, drives,
parking spaces, or maneuvering areas on public right of way.
4. All plans for maneuvering areas and vehicular access shall be reviewed and approved by the community development director.
D. Surfacing: All open off street loading berths, access drives, aisles, and maneuvering space shall be improved with a dustless all weather, heavy duty
pavement and shall be subject to review and approval by the village engineer.
E. Maintenance: All required off street loading facilities, including loading berths, aisles, access drives and maneuvering space shall be continually
maintained in a state of good repair.
F. Screening: All open off street loading berths shall be screened in accordance with the applicable provisions of section 11-4-10 of this title.
G. Minimum Facilities: Uses located in buildings of less floor area than the minimum required for off street loading facilities, shall be provided with
adequate receiving facilities, accessible by motor vehicles from an adjacent alley, service drive or open space serving that lot. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-
2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-9-4-2: REQUIRED NUMBER OF OFF STREET LOADING BERTHS:
Off street loading facilities shall be provided in accordance with the following minimum requirements: (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
A.
Residential uses:
For multiple-family dwellings
containing 20,000 to 200,000 square
feet of gross floor area
1 off street loading berth shall be provided, plus 1 additional loading berth for each additional
200,000 square feet of gross floor area or fraction thereof
B.
Commercial uses:
1. For the uses listed hereunder:
Banks and financial institutions
Medical and dental clinics
Offices, business and professional
1 loading berth shall be provided for buildings containing 10,000 to 100,000 square feet of gross floor
area; for each additional 100,000 square feet of gross floor area up to 500,000 square feet, 1
additional loading berth shall be provided, plus 1 additional loading berth for each additional 500,000
square feet of gross floor area or fraction thereof in excess of 500,000 square feet
2. For the uses listed hereunder:
Clubs and lodges (not for profit)
containing retail shops, convention
halls, auditoriums, exhibition halls,
or business or professional offices
1 loading berth shall be provided for buildings containing 10,000 to 150,000 square feet of gross floor
area, plus 1 additional loading berth for each additional 150,000 square feet of gross floor area or
fraction thereof. Each such loading berth for buildings in excess of 20,000 square feet of gross floor
area shall be not less than 12 feet in width by 55 feet in length
3. For the uses listed hereunder:
Clubs and lodges (not for profit)
containing no retail shops,
convention halls, auditoriums,
exhibition hall, or business or
professional offices
Schools: music, dance, business
and trade
Theaters, indoor
1 loading berth shall be provided for buildings containing 10,000 to 200,000 square feet of gross floor
area, plus 1 additional loading berth for each additional 200,000 square feet of gross floor area or
fraction thereof
4. For the uses listed hereunder:
Amusement establishments: bowling
alley, indoor tennis and racquetball
courts, and gymnasiums
1 loading berth shall be provided for building containing 10,000 to 100,000 square feet of gross floor
area, plus 1 additional loading berth for each additional 100,000 square feet of gross floor area or
fraction thereof
5. For the uses listed hereunder:
Undertaking establishments and
funeral parlors
1 loading berth shall be provided for buildings containing 7,000 to 100,000 square feet of gross floor
area plus 1 additional loading berth for each additional 100,000 square feet of gross floor area or
fraction thereof
6. For all other commercial uses,
loading facilities shall be provided in
accordance with the following
schedule:
Gross Floor Area
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 474/498
Of Establishments In Required Number
Thousands Of Square Feet And Size Of Berths
7 to 201 - (12' x 30' each)
21 to 352 - (12' x 30' each)
36 to 1003 - (12' x 55' each)
For each additional 200,000 square
feet of gross floor area
1 additional loading berth shall be provided, such additional berth to be at least 12 feet in width by 55
feet in length
C.
Industrial uses:
Any production, processing,
cleaning, servicing, testing, repair or
storage of materials, goods or
products:
1. For buildings containing 7,000 to
40,000 square feet of gross floor
area
1 loading berth shall be provided
2. For buildings containing 40,000 to
100,000 square feet of gross floor
area
2 loading berths shall be provided, plus 1 additional loading berth for each additional 100,000 square
feet of gross floor area or fraction thereof. Each such loading berth for buildings in excess of 10,000
square feet of gross floor area shall be not less than 12 feet in width by 55 feet in length
3. For all other industrial uses,
loading facilities shall be provided in
accordance with the following
schedule:
Gross Floor Area
Of Establishments In Required Number
Thousands Of Square Feet And Size Of Berths
7 to 201 - (12' x 30' each)
11 to 242 - (12' x 30' each)
25 to 402 - (12' x 55' each)
41 to 1003 - (12' x 55' each)
For each additional 200,000
square feet of gross floor area or
fraction thereof
1 additional loading berth shall be provided; such additional loading berth to be at least 12 feet in
width by 55 feet in length
D.
Schools, institutions and places of
assembly:
1. For the uses listed hereunder:
Auditoriums and places of assembly
Health and medical institutions,
including nursing homes
Nursery schools and daycare
centers
1 loading berth shall be provided for buildings containing 10,000 to 100,000 square feet of floor area,
plus 1 additional loading berth for each additional 100,000 square feet of floor area or fraction
thereof. Each such loading berth for buildings in excess of 20,000 square feet in floor area shall be
not less than 12 feet in width by 65 feet in length
2. For the uses listed hereunder:
Places of worship
Schools and similar education
institutions, but excluding nursery
schools
1 loading berth shall be provided for buildings containing 10,000 to 200,000 square feet of floor area,
plus 1 additional loading berth for each additional 200,000 square feet of floor area or fraction thereof
E.
Special uses, including planned
developments:
For special uses, other than those
listed above
Loading berths adequate in number and size to serve such uses shall be provided as recommended
by the planning and zoning board and approved by the board of trustees
(Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010; amd. Ord. 2015-9, 5-7-2015)
11-9-5: TERMINATION OF NONCONFORMING PARKING SURFACES:
A. By Abandonment: Abandonment or cessation for a period of ninety (90) days or the change of the principal use to which the nonconforming parking
surface is accessory shall terminate immediately the right to maintain such surface.
B. By Violation Of This Section: Any violation of the provisions of this section shall terminate immediately the right to maintain a nonconforming surface.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 475/498
C. By Destruction, Damage Or Obsolescence: The right to maintain any nonconforming surface shall terminate and shall cease to exist whenever the
surface:
1. Is damaged or destroyed, from any cause whatsoever, to the extent that its repair or replacement cost exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the
replacement cost as of the date it became nonconforming; or
2. Becomes obsolete or substandard under any applicable ordinance of the village; or
3. Becomes a hazard or a danger.
D. By Amortization: The right to maintain a nonconforming surface shall terminate, in any event, on May 31, 2003. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-
2010)
Chapter 10
SIGNS
11-10-1: PREAMBLE:
A. Principles: The provisions of this chapter recognize that:
1. There is a significant relationship between the manner in which signs are displayed and public safety and the value and economic stability of
adjoining property.
2. The reasonable display of signs is necessary as a public service and necessary to the conduct of competitive commerce and industry.
3. Signs are a constant and very visible element of the public environment and as such should meet the same high standards of quality set for other
forms of development in the community.
B. Regulations: Accordingly, it is deemed necessary and in the public interest to regulate signs. To this end, this chapter:
1. Establishes minimum standards for the display of signs in direct relationship to the functional use of property and to the intensity of development as
permitted within the zoning districts which are provided in this title.
2. Regulates the size, location, height, installation and other pertinent features of new signs.
3. Requires the removal of derelict signs and the amortization of nonconforming signs.
4. Provides for the effective administration and endorsement of these regulations. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-10-2: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
11-10-2-1: EXEMPT SIGNS:
The following signs are exempt from the provisions of this chapter, excepting for such instances when any sign listed herein is found to be unsafe or
unlawful as provided for in section 11-10-6 of this chapter:
A. Memorial Signs: Memorial plaques or tablets, grave markers, statuary or other remembrances of person or events that are noncommercial in nature.
B. Public Signs: Signs erected by a governmental body, or under the direction of such a body, and bearing no commercial advertising, such as traffic signs,
railroad crossing signs, safety signs, and signs identifying public schools and playgrounds. The signs must be in keeping with "Manual On Uniform
Traffic Control Devices" printed by Illinois department of transportation.
C. Holiday Decorations: Temporary decorations displayed in connection with traditionally accepted patriotic or religious holidays.
D. Flags: Flags, emblems and insignia of political, religious or educational organizations displayed for noncommercial purposes.
E. Directional Signs: Small nonilluminated signs not exceeding two (2) square feet in gross surface area, displayed strictly for the direction, safety, or
convenience of the public, including signs which identify restrooms, freight entrances, telephones, and the like.
F. Works Of Art: Work of fine art when not displayed in conjunction with a commercial enterprise which enterprise may benefit direct commercial gain from
such display.
G. Vending Machines: Permanent, nonflashing signs on vending machines, gas pumps or ice containers indicating only the contents of such devices, and
limited in size to three (3) square feet.
H. Occupant Signs: Signs limited in content to the name of occupant and the address of the premises are further limited to:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 476/498
1. Wall and ground signs.
2. No more than two (2) per street frontage.
3. No more than three (3) square feet in gross surface area per sign.
4. No more than six feet (6') in height.
5. Signs may be illuminated, but shall not be flashing or moving signs. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-10-2-2: LIMITATION ON SIGNS:
The following provisions are applicable to all signs subject to the provisions of this section:
A. Signs Painted On Walls: No sign shall be painted on walls, doors, roof or fences.
B. Roof Signs: Signs shall not be erected on the roof of any building or structure.
C. Signs Over Public Ways: No signs, streamer, banner, flag, pennant or other advertising structure shall encroach upon, over or across any public street,
alley, sidewalk, parkway or park except as a temporary sign, as provided in this title.
D. Obstructions: No sign shall block any required accessway or window.
E. Signs On Trees: No sign shall be attached to a tree.
F. Signs On Vacant Property: No sign, other than an authorized temporary sign, may be erected on vacant property.
G. Awnings, Marquees And Canopies: Signs on awnings, marquees and canopies shall be considered to be wall signs under the terms of this section and
subject to the regulations therefor, where applicable.
H. Unlawful Signs: In order to obtain and secure traffic safety, it shall be unlawful for any person to erect or maintain:
1. Any moving or flashing sign or any other moving or flashing advertising device, except where such signs are located within enclosed buildings and
are not observable from the exterior of such buildings.
2. Any sign or other advertising structure in such a manner so as to obstruct free and clear vision or as to distract the attention of the driver of any
vehicle by reason of position, shape or color thereof.
3. Any sign or other advertising structure, in such a manner as to be likely to interfere with, obstruct the view of, or be confused with, any authorized
traffic sign, signal or device.
I. Obscenity Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to display upon any sign or other advertising structure any matter in writing or in picture which,
considered as a whole, predominantly appeals to prurient interest, that is, a shameful or morbid interest in nudity, sex, or excretion, and goes
substantially beyond customary limits of candor in description or representation of such matters.
J. Signs On Parked Vehicles: Signs placed on or affixed to vehicles and/or trailers, which are parked on a public right of way, public property, or private
property so as to be visible from a public right of way where the apparent purpose is to advertise a product or direct people to a business or activity, are
prohibited. However, this is not in any way intended to prohibit signs placed on or affixed to vehicles and trailers, such as lettering on motor vehicles,
where the sign is incidental to the primary use of the vehicle or trailer. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-10-2-3: CONSTRUCTION, MAINTENANCE AND ALTERATION:
A. According To Code: All signs shall be constructed in accordance with the applicable provisions of the village building and electrical codes.
B. Maintenance: The permittee of any sign or other advertising structure shall maintain such sign in a state of good repair to prevent rust or rotting and
shall maintain an attractive appearance.
C. Alteration: No sign or other advertising structure shall be altered, rebuilt, enlarged, extended or relocated except in conformance with the provisions of
this title. The repainting, changing of parts, and preventive maintenance of signs shall not be deemed to be alterations. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff.
1-1-2010)
11-10-2-4: ILLUMINATION:
A. Permitted Signs: Permitted signs may be illuminated, provided that signs located in commercial or industrial zoning districts shall have a light source
which is internally illuminated.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 477/498
B. No Glare: Signs shall be designed to avoid casting glare or direct rays from artificial illumination upon adjoining streets and property.
C. Flashing Signs: Flashing signs are prohibited.
D. Timing: Any illuminated sign located within one hundred twenty feet (120') of a residential district shall be extinguished at the close of business
conducted within any building or upon the premises to which such sign is attached or located, or at eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M., whichever is later.
E. Temporary Signs: Temporary signs shall not be illuminated in any manner.
F. Colored Lights: No sign shall be illuminated by any red, yellow, orange, green or other colored light in such a manner as may interfere with, mislead or
confuse traffic. Moreover, no sign shall be illuminated by outlining or otherwise bordering the sign with neon, tubing or other forms of exterior
illumination. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-10-2-5: GROSS SURFACE AREA OF SIGN:
A. In General: The gross surface area of a sign shall mean and be computed to include the product of the length and the width of the smallest rectangle
which encompasses the full height and width of all allowable letters, symbols, and shapes contained on the sign.
B. Ground Signs: The gross surface area of ground signs shall be the sum of the gross surface areas of all faces or all surfaces upon which the message,
device or design is mounted. The distance between sign faces of a double faced or multiple faced sign, where such distance does not exceed twelve
inches (12"), shall not be considered in computing the sign area, nor shall the structural elements or supports which do not comprise a part of the plane
or face of the sign be included in computing the sign area. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-10-3: DISTRICT REGULATIONS:
11-10-3-1: RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS:
In all residential districts, only the following are permitted and then only if accessory and incidental to a permitted or special use in such districts:
A. Identification Signs: Subject to the following:
1. Single- And Two-Family Dwellings:
a. Number, Area And Content: There shall not be more than one identification sign, not exceeding three (3) square feet in gross surface area, for
each dwelling unit indicating the name and address of the occupant. On a corner lot, two (2) such signs for each dwelling unit, one facing each
street shall be permitted.
b. Type: Identification signs may be ground signs or wall signs.
c. Location: Identification signs may be located in a required front or side yard but shall not extend over any lot line.
d. Height: No wall identification sign shall be located higher than fifteen feet (15') above grade. No ground identification sign shall exceed six feet (6')
above grade.
2. Multiple-Family Dwellings:
a. Number, Area And Content: There shall not be more than one identification sign, not exceeding four (4) square feet in area, for each building
containing multiple-family dwellings, or development containing multiple-family dwellings, indicating only the name and address of the
management thereof. On a corner lot, two (2) such signs, one facing each street, shall be permitted.
b. Type: Identification signs may be ground signs or wall signs.
c. Location: No sign shall be located within fifteen feet (15') from any lot line.
d. Height: No wall identification sign shall be located higher than fifteen feet (15') above grade. No ground identification sign shall exceed six feet (6')
above grade.
3. Nonresidential Uses: For nonresidential uses which are lawfully established in the residential districts under this title: (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff.
1-1-2010)
a. Number, Area And Content: There shall be not more than one identification sign per zoning lot, not exceeding twenty four (24) square feet in area.
Such sign shall indicate only the name and address of the use. On a corner lot, two (2) such signs, one facing each street, shall be permitted. One
electronic message center sign per zoning lot may be allowed with a special use permit in conformance with subsection 11-10-3-2G of this chapter.
(Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010; amd. Ord. 2015-8, 5-7-2015)
b. Type: Identification signs may be ground signs or wall signs.
c. Location: No sign shall be located less than fifteen feet (15') from any lot line.
d. Height: No wall identification sign shall be located higher than fifteen feet (15') above grade. No ground identification sign shall exceed six feet (6')
above grade.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 478/498
B. Bulletin Boards: For public, semipublic and religious institutions, which are lawfully established in residential districts under this title, and subject to the
following:
1. Number And Area: There shall be not more than one bulletin board per zoning lot. Such sign shall not exceed eighteen (18) square feet in area.
2. Type: Bulletin boards may be ground signs or wall signs.
3. Location: No sign shall be located closer to a front or side lot line than one-half (1/2) of the minimum setback required in the district regulations.
4. Height:
a. Wall signs: No sign shall be located higher than fifteen feet (15') above grade.
b. Ground signs: No sign shall be located higher than six feet (6') above grade.
C. Signs Accessory To Parking Area: Shall be permitted as regulated in subsection 11-10-3-2C of this chapter.
D. Subdivision Identification Signs: Permanent residential development signs shall be located at major entrances and designed to identify a residential
subdivision or planned unit development and shall contain no commercial advertising. Such sign shall not exceed a height six feet (6') from grade nor
exceed twenty four (24) square feet in sign area. The sign shall be constructed of material which is the same or of a more permanent nature than the
material used in the development.
E. Temporary Signs: Subject to the provisions of section 11-10-4 of this chapter, the following temporary signs shall be permitted in the residential districts:
Construction signs.
Garage sale signs.
Political signs.
Quasi-public signs.
Real estate signs. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-10-3-2: COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS:
In all commercial districts, only the following signs are permitted and then only if accessory and incidental to a permitted or special use in such districts:
A. Identification Signs: Subject to the following:
1. Number And Content: There shall be not more than one identification sign for each zoning lot. Such sign shall indicate only the name and/or address
of the owner(s) or business establishment(s). On a corner lot, two (2) such signs, one facing each street, shall be permitted.
2. Type: Identification signs may be ground signs or wall signs.
3. Area: No identification sign shall have more than two (2) exposed faces, nor have a gross surface area larger than ten (10) square feet per face.
4. Location: Identification signs may be located in any required yard, provided they are placed adjacent to the principal or secondary entrance to the
principal building or zoning lot and do not extend over any lot line.
5. Height: No identification sign shall be located higher than fifteen feet (15') above curb level.
B. Business Signs: Which advertise the activity, services or merchandise offered or conducted on the premises thereof are permitted, subject to the
following:
1. Wall Signs:
a. Number: For each use occupying the premises, no more than one wall sign is permitted, except when approved by the village board as a special
use, additional signage may be allowed facing a public street, public right of way, easement for access or parking area.
b. Area: The maximum surface area in square feet for all wall signs shall not exceed the following:
(1) Front walls, eight percent (8%) of the area of the building wall to which the sign(s) is affixed.
(2) Side walls, four percent (4%) of the area of the building wall to which the sign(s) is affixed, if approved.
c. Location: Wall signs may be located on the outermost wall of the principal building fronting on a public street, public right of way, easement for
access or parking area.
d. Height: Wall signs shall not project higher than the parapet line of the roof of a building or more than thirty feet (30') above grade, whichever is
lower.
e. Construction: All wall signs shall be individual letters or symbols; box type applications are prohibited.
f. In Multi-Tenant Developments: Wall signage shall conform to the following:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 479/498
(1) Sign programs for multi-tenant developments shall be required as a condition of the development plan approval. Such programs shall address
size, location, style, colors and materials.
(2) Wall signs for structures developed on outlots of shopping centers shall be consistent with the wall sign program established or approved for
the shopping center in which they are located.
2. Ground Signs:
a. Number: No more than one ground sign shall be permitted per zoning lot except as follows:
Planned unit developments.
b. Area: The maximum surface area for all ground signs shall not exceed thirty two (32) square feet for each exposed face nor exceed an aggregate
surface area of sixty four (64) square feet, except as follows:
Planned unit developments.
c. Location: Ground signs may be located in a required front, corner side, side or rear yard but shall be a minimum of five feet (5') from any lot line.
d. Height: Ground signs shall not project higher than fifteen feet (15') above the curb level, except:
Planned unit developments.
3. Monument Signs: Monument signs are permitted only in shopping centers, with gross floor area of fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet or more, if
they meet the following six (6) requirements:
a. No more than one sign per zoning lot.
b. That the sign is not less than five feet (5') from any street right of way line.
c. The area of the sign shall be limited to one hundred (100) square feet on each side.
d. The advertising displayed on the sign shall be limited to business, merchandise and services found within the respective shopping center.
e. No part of the sign, including braces, supports or lights, shall be exposed, nor exceed a height of twenty feet (20').
f. The height of the sign shall be measured from grade level directly below the face of the sign to the highest part of the sign. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-
2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
4. Window Signs: No windows shall be fully painted or an affixed film installed so as to obstruct line of sight into the business. Window signs shall not
cover more than fifty percent (50%) of the total window area, shall not obstruct line of sight, shall not be flashing and shall conform to all
requirements of the village sign code. Any window outline lighting shall be installed on the interior of the window only. All outline lighting shall be
maintained in good repair or removed within ten (10) days of notice.
a. Electronic message centers installed on the interior of storefront windows shall conform to the following requirements:
(1) The maximum size of the sign is six (6) square feet;
(2) The message shall be a single color; and
(3) The message shall be static for a minimum of thirty (30) seconds at a time. (Ord. 2015-8, 5-7-2015)
5. Plan Required For Businesses Located In Shopping Centers: A sign plan is required to allow for a uniform appearance of signs within shopping
centers. Tenants and owners must comply with the shopping center's approved sign plan. The shopping center sign plan shall be approved as part of
the building permit for the shopping center, or if an existing center, by the submittal and approval of a signage plan by the community development
department. The sign plan must include provisions to ensure signs within the shopping center are compatible in type, size, shape, color, style,
illumination, material, and relative position on the building face. Amendments to the approved sign plan must be submitted in writing by the shopping
center owner or management company, for consideration by the zoning administrator. The requirements in the approved sign plan are in addition to
the requirements of this chapter. In the event that there is a conflict between the requirements of the sign plan and this chapter, the more restrictive
requirements shall control.
C. Signs Accessory To Parking Areas: For nonresidential uses which are lawfully established in residential districts under this title, subject to the following:
1. Number And Area: Signs designating parking area entrances or exits are limited to one sign for each such entrance or exit, and to a maximum size
of two (2) square feet each. One sign per parking area, designating the conditions of use or identity of such parking area and limited to a maximum
size of nine (9) square feet, shall be permitted. On a corner lot, two (2) such signs, one facing each street, shall be permitted.
2. Type: Signs accessory to parking areas may be ground signs or wall signs.
3. Location:
a. Signs designating parking entrances or exits may be located within a required front, side or rear yard but shall not extend over any lot line.
b. Signs designating the conditions of use or identity of such parking area shall be located no closer to a front, side or rear lot line than one-half (1/2)
of the minimum setback required in the district.
4. Height: No sign shall be located higher than six feet (6') above the established average grade of the parking area.
D. Temporary Signs: Subject to the provisions of section 11-10-4 of this chapter. The following temporary signs shall be permitted in all commercial
districts:
Construction signs.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 480/498
Political signs.
Quasi-public signs.
Real estate signs.
Temporary business signs.
E. Landscaping: Ground signs and monument signs, as defined herein, shall have landscaping areas surrounding said signs, equal to two (2) times the
square footage of the permitted sign, which includes a minimum of fifty percent (50%) live landscaping. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
F. Menu Boards And Outdoor Speakers Accessory To Drive-Through Facilities: Menu boards used at drive-through lanes and signs used by gas stations
that only display gasoline prices shall not require a special use permit. Such information on menu boards at drive-through lanes and gas stations that
display only gas prices shall be displayed in a static manner (no motion permitted), have a uniform color, and illumination levels shall not exceed
surrounding light levels. Only one menu board for an approved drive-through facility shall be permitted; such menu board shall not exceed thirty two
(32) square feet in size, and shall not be encumbered with attachments or additional advertising. Speakers incidental to the use of the menu board
shall, where feasible, be incorporated therein. If a separate speaker, with video display is provided, no additional advertising on the display or exterior
of the structure shall be permitted. The speaker must match the menu board in color, material and design. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010;
amd. Ord. 2015-8, 5-7-2015)
G. Electronic Message Centers: Electronic message centers may be allowed by special use permit issued in accordance with the general objectives
outlined in section 11-13-8 of this title.
1. Any sign with copy, graphics, or display that changes by electronic or mechanical means, shall remain fixed, motionless and nonflashing.
a. The electronic message center shall serve the public convenience at its location and shall be located no closer than three hundred feet (300') to
another such device that is directed or facing the same street.
b. The lot where the sign is located shall have a minimum frontage of three hundred (300) linear feet along the arterial road.
c. The message on the electronic message center may include public service information such as time, temperature, date, weather, traffic conditions
or other messages of interest to the traveling public.
d. The electronic message centers shall:
(1) Be designed and located so that the entire message is legible to motorists intended to view it;
(2) Be constructed from nonreflective materials and illuminated in a manner that does not create glare; and
(3) The amount of text shall be limited so as to display a message that is legible to motorists intended to view it.
e. The size of the electronic message center shall conform to all applicable regulations as specified in this chapter. No more than six (6) permanent
items of information shall be permitted on a sign that incorporates an electronic message center. Electronic message centers shall be installed as
part of the monument signage for the property. The electronic message center portion of the sign shall be limited to less than fifty percent (50%) of
the total area of the sign face.
f. The message format shall conform to the following requirements:
(1) The message shall not consist of flashing, scintillating, chasing or animated lights, or include animated pictorial graphics;
(2) Text shall be uniform in color, appearance, and font; and
(3) The message, including single and multiple lines of text, shall not change more frequently than once every ten (10) seconds;
g. A display time, shorter or longer than that provided in subsection G1f(3) of this section, may be required due to site specific circumstances, traffic
patterns, and/or traffic volume.
h. The operation of an electronic message center under a special use permit for an electronic message center, which was granted prior to the
effective date of subsection G1f of this section that permitted a message display to change more frequently than as provided in that subsection,
shall be a nonconforming use and require a new special use permit upon the extension, expansion, enlargement, increase in intensity or
destruction over fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the electronic message center.
i. Electronic message center signs shall not exceed a maximum illumination of five thousand (5,000) nits (candelas per square meter) during daylight
hours and a maximum illumination of five hundred (500) nits (candelas per square meter) between dusk to dawn as measured from the sign's face
at maximum brightness. All electronic message center signs shall have an ambient light monitor that will automatically adjust the brightness levels
based on ambient light conditions. Prior to applying for a special use permit, the applicant shall submit photos of the proposed electronic message
center, as it would appear during daytime and evening hours.
j. All electronic message center signs must be equipped with a default mechanism that will stop the messaging or freeze the image in one position
when a malfunction in electronic programming occurs. (Ord. 2015-8, 5-7-2015)
11-10-3-3: INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS:
In all industrial districts, only the following signs are permitted and then only if accessory and incidental to a permitted or special use in such districts:
A. Business Signs: Which advertise the activity, services or merchandise offered or conducted on the premises thereof are permitted, subject to the
following:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 481/498
1. Wall Signs:
a. Number: There shall be no limit on the number of wall signs; provided, however, that where more than four (4) wall signs are located on a zoning
lot, the fifth such sign and each succeeding sign, respectively, shall reduce the aggregate allowable sign area by twenty percent (20%).
b. Area: The aggregate surface area in square feet for all wall signs on a zoning lot shall not exceed the linear feet of frontage of such zoning lot.
c. Location: Wall signs may be located on any wall of the principal building fronting on a public street, public right of way, easement for access or
parking area.
d. Height: Wall signs shall not project higher than the parapet line of the roof of a building or more than twenty feet (20') above grade, whichever is
lower.
2. Ground Signs:
a. Number: No ground sign shall be permitted on any industrial zoning lot except as follows:
(1) Industrial parks, as set forth below.
(2) Where a zoning lot has a frontage in excess of one hundred fifty feet (150'), one ground sign shall be permitted.
(3) Where a zoning lot has a frontage in excess of five hundred feet (500'), one additional ground sign shall be permitted.
b. Area: The maximum surface area for a ground sign shall not exceed forty five (45) square feet for each exposed face nor exceed an aggregate
surface of ninety (90) square feet, except as follows:
Industrial parks.
Planned unit developments.
c. Location: Ground signs may be located in a required front, side or rear yard, but shall be at least ten feet (10') from any lot line.
d. Height: Ground signs shall not project higher than fifteen feet (15') above curb level, except:
Industrial parks.
B. Industrial Park Signs: One additional ground sign on each street frontage, other than those signs regulated in subsection A of this section, shall be
permitted, subject to the following:
1. Content: Such signs shall advertise only the name and location of such industrial park and the name and type of businesses within the park.
2. Area: Such signs shall have no more than two (2) exposed faces with a gross surface area per face not greater than one hundred (100) square feet.
3. Location: The permitted industrial park signs may be located in any required yard, but shall be at least ten feet (10') from any lot line.
4. Height: The permitted industrial park signs shall not project higher than twenty feet (20') above curb level.
C. Signs Accessory To Parking Area: Shall be permitted as regulated in subsection 11-10-3-2C of this chapter.
D. Temporary Signs: Subject to the provisions of section 11-10-4 of this chapter. The following temporary signs shall be permitted in all industrial districts:
Construction signs.
Political signs.
Quasi-public signs.
Real estate signs.
E. Landscaping: Business signs and industrial park signs, as defined herein, shall have landscaping areas surrounding said signs, equal to two (2) times
the square footage of the permitted sign, which includes a minimum of fifty percent (50%) live landscaping. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-10-4: TEMPORARY SIGNS:
Temporary signs may be erected and maintained in accordance with the following provisions of this section 11-10-4. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-
2010)
11-10-4-1: GENERAL CONDITIONS:
A. Permit Required: No person shall erect, alter or relocate within the village, any temporary sign, except for real estate and political signs, without first
obtaining a permit from the community development director, as provided for in section 11-10-6 of this chapter.
B. Materials And Methods: The community development director shall impose as a condition of the issuance of a permit for temporary signs, such
requirements as to the material, manner of construction and methods of erection of a sign as are reasonably necessary to assure the safety and
convenience of the public. All temporary signs must be kept in good repair, level, and vertical at all times.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 482/498
C. Illumination: Temporary signs shall not be illuminated.
D. Sign Types: Temporary signs shall be nonprojecting wall signs or ground signs as defined herein, except that in the case of permitted temporary
business signs and quasi-public signs, bunting, banners, pennant and flags may be utilized.
E. Location: Signs shall not be mounted to accessory structures, sheds, decks or fences. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-10-4-2: REAL ESTATE SIGNS:
Subject to the following:
A. Number: There shall be not more than one real estate sign per zoning lot, except that on a corner lot, two (2) such signs one facing each street, shall be
permitted.
B. Area:
1. Residential Districts: In all residential districts, no real estate sign shall have more than two (2) exposed faces nor have a gross surface area larger
than ten (10) square feet per face nor higher than six feet (6') from grade.
2. Nonresidential Districts: In all nonresidential districts, no real estate sign shall have more than two (2) exposed faces nor have a gross surface area
larger than twenty (20) square feet per face nor higher than fifteen feet (15') above grade.
C. Location: Real estate signs shall be located only upon the premises for sale or lease. Such sign may be located in the required front or side yards, but
shall not extend beyond any lot line.
D. Special Conditions: Real estate signs shall be removed within ten (10) days after the execution of a contract for sale or lease of the premises upon
which it is located. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-10-4-3: CONSTRUCTION SIGNS:
Subject to the following:
A. Number: There shall be not more than one construction sign per zoning lot, except that on a corner lot, two (2) such signs, one facing each street, shall
be permitted.
B. Area:
1. Residential Districts: In all residential districts, no construction sign shall have more than two (2) exposed faces nor have a gross surface area larger
than eighteen (18) square feet per face nor higher than six feet (6') from grade.
2. Nonresidential Districts: In all nonresidential districts, no construction sign shall have more than two (2) exposed faces nor have a gross surface area
larger than thirty two (32) square feet per face nor higher than fifteen feet (15') from grade.
C. Location: Construction signs shall be located only upon the premises where construction either is about to commence or is actually under way. No such
sign shall be located closer to the front, side or rear lot line than one-half (1/2) of the minimum setback required in the district regulations.
D. Special Conditions:
1. Timing: Construction signs shall be permitted only as accessory to an approved building permit. Construction signs may be established and
maintained prior to actual construction, but only for a period not to exceed sixty (60) days. Such signs shall be removed within two (2) days after a
certificate of occupancy has been issued by the community development department.
2. Required Construction Signs: The regulations of this section shall not apply where there is a specific conflict with a requirement for signs in
connection with a construction grant from the state of Illinois or the United States government. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-10-4-4: GARAGE SALE SIGNS:
Subject to the following:
A. Number: There shall be not more than one garage sale sign per zoning lot, except that on a corner lot, two (2) signs, one facing each street shall be
permitted. Two (2) additional signs shall be permitted in accordance with subsection C of this section. Each sign shall clearly identify the address of the
garage sale location and date of garage sale with letters and numbers no less than one and one-half inches (11/2") high.
B. Area: No garage sale sign shall have more than two (2) exposed faces nor have a gross surface area larger than three (3) square feet per face.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 483/498
C. Location: Garage sale signs shall be located only upon the premises where the garage or home sale is taking place or in the case of the two (2)
additional signs as noted in subsection A of this section which may be placed anywhere in the village limits, provided permission is given by the owner
of the property. Such sign may be located in the required front yard or side yard, but shall not extend beyond any lot line. Signs shall be located wholly
on private property and shall not be mounted on motor vehicles.
D. Height:
1. Wall Signs: No wall sign shall be located higher than fifteen feet (15') above grade.
2. Ground Signs: No ground sign shall be located higher than five feet (5') above grade.
E. Special Conditions; Sign Removal: Garage sale signs shall be removed by sunset of the last day of the garage sale. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-
2010)
11-10-4-5: QUASI-PUBLIC SIGNS:
Giving notice of events and activities sponsored by civic, patriotic, religious, or charitable organizations for noncommercial purposes, subject to the
following:
A. Number, Area, Height, And Location:
1. The permitted number, area, height, and location, size and construction of quasi-public temporary signs shall be determined by the community
development director with consideration given to public safety and the signage reasonably necessary and appropriate for the intended purpose.
2. Any temporary sign which is permitted to extend over or onto any street, alley, sidewalk, or other public way shall be erected or installed in such a
manner as to not interfere and obstruct traffic signs and signals along any such public way.
B. Special Conditions:
1. Timing: Quasi-public signs shall not be erected or maintained more than thirty (30) days prior to the date on which the event or activity advertised is
to occur and shall be removed immediately after the termination of the event or activity.
2. Limit On Number Of Permits: No more than four (4) permits for quasi-public temporary signs shall be issued for the same zoning lot in one standard
calendar year (January 1 through December 31). (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-10-4-6: POLITICAL SIGNS:
Subject to the following:
A. Number: There shall be no limit to the number of political signs permitted on a zoning lot.
B. Area:
1. Residential Districts: In all residential districts, no political sign shall have more than two (2) exposed faces nor have a gross surface area larger than
twenty four (24) square feet per face, nor higher than six feet (6') from grade.
2. Nonresidential Districts: In all nonresidential districts, no political sign shall have more than two (2) exposed faces, nor have a gross surface area
larger than thirty two (32) square feet per face, nor higher than fifteen feet (15') above grade.
C. Location: Political signs shall be located only upon private property, with the consent of the owner.
D. Special Conditions: Political signs shall not be erected or maintained more than thirty (30) days prior to the date on which elections begin, or an event is
scheduled to occur and shall be removed within forty eight (48) hours after the termination of the election or event. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-
2010)
11-10-4-7: TEMPORARY BUSINESS SIGNS:
Calling attention to a special, unique or limited activity, service, product or sale of limited duration, as follows:
A. Number, Area And Height: The permitted number, area, height, and construction of temporary business signs shall be determined by the director of
community development with consideration given to public safety and the signage reasonably necessary and appropriate for the intended purpose.
Portable or temporary sale signs shall be permitted under the following conditions:
1. The sign must be on private property, in a safe location so as not to obstruct the public right of way.
2. Portable signs, mounted on wheels or which are capable of being moved from one location to another, shall not exceed thirty two (32) square feet in
sign face and shall not exceed a height greater than eight feet (8') from grade level.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 484/498
3. Banners and pennants may be used as temporary signs, provided that banners shall be limited to one square foot per linear foot of building frontage,
not to exceed one hundred (100) square feet, and pennants shall be limited to two (2) times the length of the linear building frontage. Pennants and
banners shall be counted separately as two (2) distinct and unique signs.
4. Grand opening or anniversary signs shall be permitted, once per year, for fourteen (14) consecutive days, inclusive of the grand opening or
anniversary date. The date of a grand opening shall be designated by the business owner within the first six (6) months of operation. Anniversaries
shall be considered the annual observance of the date of the grand opening. Grand opening/anniversary signage may include a combination of
banners, pennants and temporary or portable sale signs, as defined elsewhere in this title.
B. Location: Temporary business signs shall be located only on the lot upon which the special sale or activity is to occur. Such signs may be located in any
required yard, but shall not extend over any lot line.
C. Special Conditions:
1. Timing: Temporary business signs shall be erected and maintained for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days, at the expiration of which period the
permittee shall immediately remove such temporary signs.
2. Limit On Number Of Permits: No more than four (4) permits for temporary signs shall be issued for the same zoning lot in one standard calendar
year (January 1 through December 31). (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-10-5: NONCONFORMING SIGNS:
11-10-5-1: DECLARATION OF PUBLIC POLICY:
It is reasonable that a time limit be placed upon the continuance of existing nonconforming signs. An amortization program permits the owner to plan
during a period when he is allowed to continue the nonconforming signs while at the same time assuring that the district in which the nonconforming signs
exist will eventually benefit from a substantial uniformity of permanent signs. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-10-5-2: DEFINITION OF NONCONFORMING SIGNS:
A "nonconforming sign" shall be any sign which:
A. On the effective date of this title was lawfully erected in accordance with the provisions of any prior zoning or other applicable ordinance but which sign
does not conform to the limitations and standards established by this title in the district in which the sign is located; or
B. On or after the effective date of this title was lawfully maintained and erected in accordance with the provisions of the amendatory ordinance but which
sign, by reason of amendment to this section after effective date thereof, does not conform to the limitations established by the amendment to this title
in the district in which the sign is located. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-10-5-3: CONTINUANCE OF NONCONFORMING SIGNS:
A. Subject to the termination hereinafter provided, any nonconforming sign may be continued in operation and maintained after the effective date of this
title; provided, however, that no such sign shall be changed in any manner that increases the nonconformity of such sign with the provisions hereof
established for signs in the district in which the sign is located; and, provided further, that the burden of establishing a sign to be nonconforming under
this section, rests entirely upon the person or persons, firm or corporation claiming a nonconforming status for a sign.
B. A sign which is nonconforming only by reason of its height or size and does not exceed the standards of this title in such respects by more than ten
percent (10%), shall not be subject to termination by amortization as hereinafter provided. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-10-5-4: TERMINATION OF NONCONFORMING SIGNS:
A. By Abandonment: Abandonment or cessation for a period of ninety (90) days or the change of the principal use to which the nonconforming sign is
accessory shall terminate immediately the right to maintain such sign.
B. By Violation: Any violation of the provisions of this section shall terminate immediately the right to maintain a nonconforming sign.
C. By Destruction, Damage Or Obsolescence: The right to maintain any nonconforming sign shall terminate and shall cease to exist whenever the sign:
1. Is damaged or destroyed, from any cause whatsoever, to the extent that its repair or replacement cost exceeds fifty percent (50%) of replacement
cost as of the date it became nonconforming; or
2. Becomes obsolete or substandard under any applicable ordinance of the village; or
3. Becomes a hazard or a danger.
D. By Amortization: The right to maintain a nonconforming sign shall terminate in any event on September 30, 2005. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-
2010)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 485/498
11-10-6: ADMINISTRATION:
A. Permit Required: No person shall erect, alter or relocate within the village any sign without first obtaining a permit from the community development
director with the following exceptions:
1. Those signs exempt from the regulations of this section as indicated in section 11-10-2-1 of this chapter.
2. Identification signs for single- and two-family dwellings, real estate signs and political signs are exempt from the permit requirements, but must
comply with all other applicable provisions of this title.
3. Changing of the copy of a bulletin board or marquee or maintenance where no structural or electrical changes are made, or changing of
interchangeable letters on signs designed for use of interchangeable letters.
B. Application And Fees:
1. Applications for sign permits shall be submitted to the community development director and shall be accompanied by payment of the required fees
and such scale drawings, site plans and other information as the director may require.
2. Fees for sign permits shall be as fixed from time to time by the village board.
C. Removal Of Certain Signs:
1. Unsafe And Unlawful Signs:
a. If the community development director shall find that any sign or other advertising structure is unsafe or insecure, or is a danger to the public
safety, or has been constructed or erected or is being maintained in violation of the provisions of this title, he shall give written notice to the
permittee thereof or the owner of the premises where located. If the permittee or owner fails to repair, remove, or alter the structure so as to
comply with the standards herein set forth, within twenty (20) days after giving of such notice, such sign or other advertising structure may be
removed by the community development director at the expense of the person to whom such notice was given.
b. The community development director may cause any sign or other advertising structure which is an immediate peril to persons or property, to be
removed without notice and at the expense of the permittee or owner.
2. Obsolete Signs: Any sign or other advertising structure now or hereafter existing, which advertises a business no longer being conducted, or a
product no longer being sold, shall be taken down and removed by the owner, agent, or person having the beneficial use of the building, structure, or
premises upon which it may be found, within twenty (20) days after written notification from the community development director. Upon failure to
comply with such notice within the time specified, in such order, the community development director is hereby authorized to cause removal of such
sign and any expense incidental thereto shall be paid by the person to whom such notice was given.
3. Nonconforming Signs: Nonconforming signs shall be removed by their owner within ten (10) days of the period set forth in section 11-10-5-4 of this
chapter, or the director of community development shall cause their removal at the expense of the owner. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
D. Appeals And Modifications: Appeals from the decisions of the community development director, under this chapter, and all requests for modifications
from the regulations set forth herein shall be made to the planning and zoning board as provided in section 11-13-6 of this title. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-
2009, eff. 1-1-2010; amd. Ord. 2015-9, 5-7-2015)
Chapter 11
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES AND USES
11-11-1: PREAMBLE:
This title establishes separate districts, each of which is an appropriate area for the location of the uses which are permitted in that district. Within such
districts, however, there exists lots, structures, uses of land and structures, and characteristics of uses which were lawful before this title was passed or
amended, but which are prohibited, regulated or restricted under the terms of this title or future amendments hereto.
Recognizing both the legitimate interest of those who lawfully established such a nonconformity and the need to protect the public health, safety, comfort
and general welfare, the provisions of this chapter are intended to provide for the regulation of nonconformities within the following:
A. It is the intent of this chapter to permit most nonconformities to continue until they are removed, but not to encourage their survival.
B. It is the intent of this chapter that nonconformities shall not be enlarged upon, expanded or extended, nor be used as grounds for adding other
structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same district.
C. It is recognized and declared that those nonconformities which substantially and adversely affect the orderly development, maintenance, use and
taxable value of other property in the district (property that is itself subject to the regulations of this title) should eventually be eliminated. (Ord. 2009-34,
12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-11-2: CONTINUANCE OF NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES AND USES:
Any nonconforming structure or principal use which exists lawfully at the time of the adoption of this title and which remains nonconforming or which shall
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 486/498
become nonconforming upon the adoption of this title or any subsequent amendment thereto, may be continued only in accordance with the provisions of
subsections A and D of this section.
Any use of the property other than the principal use shall be brought into conformity immediately unless otherwise provided for in this title.
A. Nonconforming Structures: No nonconforming structure shall be:
1. Structurally altered;
2. Added to or enlarged in any manner;
3. Moved or relocated, in whole or in part; or
4. Restored or reconstructed if damaged or destroyed if the cost of reconstruction or restoration will exceed fifty percent (50%) of the replacement cost
of the entire structure at that time.
B. Nonconforming Use Of Land: No nonconforming use of land shall be:
1. Renewed if abandoned for a period of six (6) consecutive months;
2. Expanded or extended beyond the area it occupied on the effective date hereof; or
3. Changed, except if such change will make the use conforming.
C. Nonconforming Use Of Building Or Structure: No nonconforming use of a building or structure shall be:
1. Renewed if abandoned for a continuous period of one year;
2. Expanded or extended into any part of a building or structure not occupied by such use on the effective date hereof; or
3. Changed, except if such change will make the use conforming.
D. Exceptions:
1. Structural alterations or repairs of a nonconforming building required by law shall be permitted.
2. Structural alteration, additions, enlargements, and restoration in excess of fifty percent (50%) of value at the time of such action may be made to a
nonconforming building upon the approval of the board of zoning appeals, provided that:
a. Such nonconforming building is located in a residential district and is occupied by a permitted or special use;
b. The proposed alterations, addition, enlargement or reconstruction does not adversely affect the value, use and enjoyment of surrounding property;
and
c. In the case of restoration in excess of fifty percent (50%) of value the reconstruction shall be upon the original foundation which must still be
usable for such purposes.
3. Provided that the result is to change the status of a structure or use from nonconforming to conforming, such a structure or use may be:
a. Structurally altered;
b. Added to or enlarged;
c. Moved or relocated, in whole or in part;
d. Expanded or extended;
e. Changed; or
f. Restored or reconstructed.
4. When the cost of reconstructing or restoring a damaged, nonconforming structure is less than fifty percent (50%) of the replacement cost of the
entire structure, it may be restored or reconstructed if initiated within one year of partial destruction and diligently pursued to completion. (Ord. 2009-
34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-11-3: NONCONFORMING LOTS OF RECORD:
"Nonconforming lots of record" as herein defined may be used as permitted in subsection 11-4-3B of this title and in accordance with the following:
A. Separate Ownership: A nonconforming lot of record owned separately and individually from all adjoining tracts of land shall be subject to the following
provisions:
1. Residential Districts: In residential districts, a nonconforming lot of record may be used for a single-family dwelling and accessory use.
2. Nonresidential Districts: In a nonresidential district, a nonconforming lot of record may be used for any permitted, accessory, special or temporary
use allowed in the district in which it is located.
3. Zoning Requirements: All zoning requirements other than those which make the lot of record nonconforming shall apply.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 487/498
4. Undeveloped Lots: Undeveloped nonconforming lots of record in all zoning districts shall provide and maintain all setbacks as required for that
particular zoning district. Further required is that all corner yards must be maintained according to the setbacks required for that particular zoning
district.
5. Variance: Variance from any other requirements shall be obtained only through the procedures as outlined in chapter 13, "Administration And
Enforcement", of this title.
B. Common Ownership:
1. Where two (2) or more lots or combinations of lots and portions of lots with continuous frontage in single ownership are of record at the time of
passage or amendment of this title, and where all or part of the lots do not meet the requirements established for lot widths and area, the lands
involved shall be considered to be a single zoning lot for the purpose of this title. No portion of said zoning lot shall be used or sold which would
diminish compliance with lot width and area requirements established by this title.
2. Lots or parts of lots resulting from the division of such nonconforming lots held in common ownership at the time of or subsequent to the effective
date hereof shall not be entitled to zoning certificates or building permits as provided elsewhere in this title.
3. The use and zoning requirements of these lots shall be the same as those specified in section 11-11-2 of this chapter.
C. Construction, Repair And Alteration: Construction of new buildings or repair of existing buildings that are being used for permitted uses but are located
on nonconforming lots of record shall be permitted. If any building is damaged or destroyed, it may be rebuilt for its original permitted use to the extent
of its original development, or a new building may be constructed for any use to the extent permitted in subsection A of this section. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-
3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-11-4: CHANGE TO CONFORMING USE OR STRUCTURE:
Whenever a nonconforming use or a nonconforming structure is changed so as to conform to the regulations of the district in which it is located, such
structure or premises shall not thereafter be used, occupied or altered so as to become nonconforming. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-11-5: CONVERSION TO SPECIAL USE:
Any nonconforming building, structure or use may be converted to a special use pursuant to the appropriate procedure set forth in section 11-13-8 of this
title. This conversion may occur only when it is shown that the nonconforming building, structure or use is providing a service to the area, and that the
building, structure or use is not substantially detrimental to the surrounding properties. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-11-6: ELIMINATION OF NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES AND USES:
A. Nonconforming Signs: Nonconforming signs shall be removed, altered or converted to conforming signs as provided in chapter 10 of this title.
B. Nonconforming Use Of Land: A nonconforming use of land on which there is no building or structure shall be made to conform to the provisions of this
title within a period of two (2) years after the adoption of this title.
C. Nonconforming Parking Surfaces: Nonconforming parking surfaces shall be removed, altered or converted to conforming surfaces as provided in
section 11-9-5 of this title.
D. Nonconforming Fences: Nonconforming fences shall be removed, altered or converted to conforming fences as provided in chapter 4 of this title. (Ord.
2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
Chapter 12
TEMPORARY USES AND STRUCTURES
11-12-1: PREAMBLE:
The provisions of this chapter are based on the recognition that there are uses and structures which, because of their unique characteristics, cannot be
permitted in any particular district on a permanent basis but which may be either necessary or desirable for a temporary period provided they are carefully
regulated with respect to location and operation. The temporary uses and structures permitted by this chapter shall be so established and maintained as to
least interfere with the use and enjoyment of neighboring uses and structures and to ensure public safety and convenience. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff.
1-1-2010)
11-12-2: PERMIT REQUIRED:
A temporary use permit shall be required prior to the establishment of any temporary use or structure. Compliance with the standards and the purposes of
this title and with all other applicable village ordinances shall be a prerequisite for the continued validity of all temporary use permits. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-
2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 488/498
11-12-3: PROCEDURES:
Application for a temporary use permit shall be made to the community development director and shall be granted upon full compliance with the standards
set forth in this title. The community development director, in order to determine whether or not the applicant will meet the standards set forth in this title,
may require the applicant to submit any or all of the following information:
A. A survey of legal description of the property to be used, rented, or leased for the temporary use, including all information necessary to accurately locate
and portray the property.
B. A written description and/or drawing of the proposed temporary use or structure.
C. Sufficient information to determine the yard requirements, sanitary facilities, and availability of parking spaces to adequately service the proposed
temporary use of structure.
D. Such other data and certification as may reasonably be required by the community development director to reach a determination that the proposed
temporary uses or structure will comply with this title. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-12-4: USES AND STRUCTURES:
Temporary uses and structures which may be allowed pursuant to this chapter shall include, but are not limited to, the following:
A. Carnival Or Circus: On any site not used for residential purposes, a temporary use permit shall be required for a carnival or circus. This permit shall be
for a period not to exceed fifteen (15) days.
B. Christmas Tree Sales: On any site not used for residential purposes, a temporary use permit shall be required for the display and open lot sales of
Christmas trees which permit shall be for a period not to exceed forty (40) days.
C. Contractor's Office And Equipment Sheds: In any district, a temporary use permit shall be required for a contractor's temporary office and equipment
sheds incidental and necessary to construction in the village. The permit shall be valid for a six (6) month period and renewable for four (4) successive
periods at the same location. However, the office, shed or storage area shall be removed within thirty (30) days of completion of the construction
project.
D. Home And Garage Sales: In any residential district, no temporary use permit shall be required for a home or garage sale.
E. Real Estate Sales Office And Model Units: In any district, a temporary use permit shall be required for a temporary real estate sales office and model
unit, or either, in any development which has been approved in accordance with this title and the village subdivision regulations (title 10 of this code).
The temporary permit for a real estate sales office and model homes or either, shall be valid for not more than one year, but is renewable. The office
shall be removed and the model homes shall be closed within thirty (30) days after the sale of the last unit of the development. All activities conducted
within either the temporary office or model homes shall be directly related to the construction and sales of properties with the particular development or
within the village. The temporary office and model homes, or either shall not be used for the general office operation of any firm.
F. Block Parties And Street Dances: In any district, a temporary use permit shall be required for a block party, street dance or similarly public gathering
involving the closing of a public street or streets. Major or secondary thoroughfares shall not be blocked and such activities shall be conducted within all
applicable regulations contained in this code. Each permit shall be issued for a period not to exceed three (3) days.
G. Temporary Outdoor Sales: On any site not used for residential purposes, a temporary use permit shall be required for sidewalk sales, rummage sales,
bazaars, and similar outdoor sales. Such activities shall be conducted within all applicable regulations contained in this code. There shall be no more
than four (4) such permits issued for any zoning lot within a calendar year from January 1 to December 31. Each permit shall be valid for a period not to
exceed seven (7) days. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-12-5: CONDITIONS FOR APPROVAL:
In addition to the specific regulations and time limits set forth above, temporary uses and structures shall be subject to such conditions and restrictions on
their location and operation as deemed necessary for the protection of the public interest by the community development director. Such conditions and
restrictions shall be fully set forth at the time of the issuance of the permit for the temporary use. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
Chapter 13
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
11-13-1: ORGANIZATION:
A. Offices: The administration of this title is hereby vested in the following offices of the government of the village: (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 489/498
Community development director (section 11-13-2 of this chapter)
Planning and zoning board (title 2, chapter 1 of this code)
Village manager (title 1, chapter 7 of this code) (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010; amd. Ord. 2015-9, 5-7-2015)
B. Authority And Administrative Functions: This chapter shall first set out the authority of each of the administrative offices, and then describe the
procedure and substantive standards with respect to the following administrative functions:
1. Issuance of zoning certificates.
2. Issuance of certificates of occupancy.
3. Variations.
4. Appeals.
5. Amendments.
6. Special uses.
7. Annexations.
8. Fees.
9. Enforcement.
10. Violations.
11. Penalties. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-13-2: DIRECTOR OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT:
The position of director of community development established by this code shall administer and enforce this title and shall be responsible as follows:
A. Building Permits: Issue all building permits, following approval as required in this title and all other applicable ordinances, and make and maintain
records thereof.
B. Occupancy Certificates: Issue all certificates of occupancy, following approval as required in this title and all other applicable ordinances, and make and
maintain records thereof. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
C. Planning And Zoning Board: Receive and forward to the planning and zoning board, all applications for appeals, and special uses. Receive and forward
to the planning and zoning board all applications for map amendments and zoning text amendments, when such amendments are part of a
preannexation agreement.
D. Parking Plans: Receive and review all plans for parking facilities, as provided for in this title, and approve same prior to the granting of a permit.
E. Landscaping Plans: Receive and review all plans for landscaping as required in this title and approve same prior to the granting of a permit.
F. Review Of Zoning Title: Review on a continuing basis the provisions of this title and make recommendations for amendments to improve the
effectiveness of such provisions.
G. Inspections: Conduct continuing inspections of structures and uses of land to determine compliance with the terms of this title.
H. Records: Provide and maintain public information pertaining to this title.
I. Assignments: Perform such other duties relative to this title as may be assigned to him by the board of trustees. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010;
amd. Ord. 2015-9, 5-7-2015)
11-13-3: ZONING CERTIFICATES AND PERMITS:
A. Certification Required: No permit pertaining to the use of land or buildings shall be issued by any officer or employee of the village unless the
application for such permit has been examined by the community development director, or his authorized representative, and the director, or his
authorized representative, has certified that either the proposed structure or use, or both, comply with all of the provisions of this title.
B. Submission Of Necessary Information: All applications for a permit shall be accompanied by such information as the director deems necessary to
determine and provide for the endorsement of this title. Such information may include, but is not limited to, scale drawings, a legal description of the
subject property, proof of ownership, or if the land is held in trust, a disclosure of all beneficial interest and a fee. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-
2010)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 490/498
11-13-4: CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY:
A. Intent: Certificates of occupancy (CO) shall certify that the structure or use for which it is issued is in full compliance with the provisions of this title and
that such structure is habitable and in conformance with all applicable building regulations.
B. Certificate Required:
1. New Structure, Addition Or New Use: No structure or addition to an existing structure constructed after the date of this title shall be used for any
purpose, until a certificate of occupancy has been issued by the community development director or his designee.
2. Change In Use: No change in a use shall be made until a certificate of occupancy has been issued.
C. Application For Certificate Of Occupancy:
1. Building Permit: Every application for a building permit or zoning certificate shall be deemed to be an application for a certificate of occupancy.
2. No Building Permit: Application for a change in use of land or structure where no building permit is required shall be made directly to the community
development director.
D. Issuance Of Certificate Of Occupancy:
1. Conditions: No certificate of occupancy for a building, or portion thereof, constructed after the effective date hereof shall be issued until construction
has been completed and the premises inspected and certified to be in conformity with the plans and specifications upon which the building permit
was based.
2. Temporary Certificate: Pending the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, a temporary certificate may be granted to be valid for a period not to
exceed six (6) months from its date of issuance during the completion of any addition or during partial occupancy of the premises.
3. Notice Of Noncompliance: A certificate of occupancy shall be issued within twenty (20) business days after the office of the community development
director is notified in writing that such building premises or structure is ready for occupancy. In the event a certificate of occupancy cannot be issued,
written notice setting forth the reasons shall be given to the applicant within the above stated period. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
E. Appeal: If any applicant for a certificate of occupancy is denied due to apparent noncompliance with this title, such decision may be appealed to the
planning and zoning board as provided in section 11-13-6 of this chapter. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010; amd. Ord. 2015-9, 5-7-2015)
11-13-5: VARIATIONS:
A. Purpose: It is the intent of this section to provide for exceptions in the application of this title in order to provide for a flexible method of providing relief
from the rigid requirements of this title.
B. Authorized Variations: Variations from the dimensional and/or quantitative requirements of this title may be considered and shall be granted only upon
findings in compliance with subsection C of this section. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
C. Standards For Variation: The planning and zoning board shall recommend the granting of a variation when and only when, it has determined from
evidence presented to them and placed on the record, that all the following standards have been met: (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010; amd.
Ord. 2015-9, 5-7-2015)
1. That the requested variation does not permit a use otherwise excluded from that particular zoning district;
2. That the relief sought cannot be accomplished except by the granting of the requested variation and that said variation is the minimum relief
necessary to accomplish the relief sought;
3. That the proposed variation will not impair an adequate supply of light or air to any other properties or uses, nor will it substantially increase the
potential spread of fire or in any way endanger the public health or safety; and
4. That the proposed variation will not adversely impact the value of other properties in the vicinity, nor will the granting of the variation adversely
impact upon the ability of surrounding properties to be used and enjoyed for the purposes for which they have been planned and zoned. (Ord. 2009-
34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
D. Conditions Of Variations: The planning and zoning board may recommend and the village board may require such conditions and restrictions upon the
subject property as may be necessary to guarantee that the implementation of the variation will further the standards set forth in subsection C of this
section. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010; amd. Ord. 2015-9, 5-7-2015)
E. Application For Variation:
1. Standing: A request for a variation from this title may be made by a property owner, a contract purchaser, or anyone having a proprietary interest in
the subject property.
2. Fees: Each application for a variation shall be accompanied by a filing fee. The amount of said fee shall be determined by the president and village
board of trustees in January of each calendar year. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
3. Filing: Application shall be filed in writing with the community development director and shall be accompanied by such documents and information as
the community development director or as the planning and zoning board may require. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010; amd. Ord. 2015-9, 5-
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 491/498
7-2015)
F. Public Hearing: The petitioner shall notify every owner of property within two hundred fifty feet (250') exclusive of right of way of the subject property by
certified mail or personal service. Return receipts, signed, mailed cards or electronic verification of signatures, shall be submitted by petitioner at the
public hearing.
The village clerk shall publish the notice of said hearing in a newspaper of general local circulation. Such notice shall be mailed and published not more
than thirty (30) days nor less than fifteen (15) days before the date of the hearings.
The public notice shall contain, at a minimum, the following:
1. Date, place and time of hearing;
2. Purpose of hearing;
3. Legal description of subject property; and
4. Common address of subject property. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
In the event the noticed date and time of the hearing must be changed, because of a lack of quorum by the planning and zoning board, the item so
noticed shall be immediately transferred to the next regularly scheduled planning and zoning board meeting, which date and time shall be posted at
the noticed place of the hearing, without renotification in the newspaper or by mail or personal service.
G. Decisions: The concurring vote of four (4) members of the planning and zoning board shall be required to affirmedly recommend the granting of any
variation. The planning and zoning board shall decide the case exclusively based upon the evidence and sworn testimony presented and made part of
the public record. The planning and zoning board shall make a decision and file its findings with the village clerk within thirty (30) days of the close of
the public hearing. Failure to act within the proscribed thirty (30) days shall be deemed to be a recommendation to grant the variation as requested. No
variation shall be valid for a period greater than twelve (12) months from the date of the final vote by the village board of trustees.
H. Action By Board Of Trustees: Upon receipt of the recommendation and findings of the planning and zoning board, the village board of trustees may
enact the variation, with or without change, may reject the request or may refer it back to the planning and zoning board for further consideration.
Where the planning and zoning board has recommended denial of the variation, said variation may only be passed by a three-fourths (3/4) vote of the
village board of trustees voting on the matter. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010; amd. Ord. 2015-9, 5-7-2015)
I. Effect Of Denial: No application for a variation which has been denied wholly or in part by the board of trustees shall be resubmitted for a period of one
year from the date of said order of denial except on the showing of new evidence or proof of substantially changed circumstances or conditions which
relate directly to the reasons for denial. Such a new hearing may be ordered only by the village board of trustees. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-
2010)
11-13-6: APPEALS:
A. Scope Of Appeals: An appeal may be taken by any aggrieved party by a decision of the community development director acting in his official capacity in
the administration of this title to the planning and zoning board. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010; amd. Ord. 2015-9, 5-7-2015)
B. Application:
1. Standing: An appeal shall be filed within thirty (30) days after the decision of the community development director. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-
1-2010)
2. Filing: The appeal shall be filed in writing with the community development director with copies to the village clerk, village attorney, and the planning
and zoning board. Said appeal shall contain at a minimum the disputed section of this zoning title and the applicant's interpretation of the disputed
section. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010; amd. Ord. 2015-9, 5-7-2015)
3. Fee: The president and village board of trustees shall in January of each calendar year establish filing fees, if any, for appeals from an administrative
decision of this title. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
C. Transmittal Of Record: The community development director shall, at the time of the filing of an appeal, transmit to the planning and zoning board all
the records, plans and other documents in his possession which constitute a record upon which the appeal was made. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff.
1-1-2010; amd. Ord. 2015-9, 5-7-2015)
D. Effort Of Appeal: An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed. If, however, the community development director certifies in
writing that such a stay would cause imminent peril to life, and/or property, the proceedings would not be stayed. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-
2010)
E. Hearing: The planning and zoning board shall, as soon as is practical and possible, hold a hearing on the appeal. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-
2010; amd. Ord. 2015-9, 5-7-2015)
F. Notice: The village shall cause a notice to be published in a newspaper of general local circulation and the subject property to be posted at least seven
(7) days prior to the hearing. The notice published in the paper shall contain the following minimum information:
1. Date, place, and time of the hearing;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 492/498
2. Legal description of the subject property;
3. Common address of the subject property; and
4. A description of the appeal. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
In the event the noticed date and time of the hearing must be changed, because of a lack of quorum by the planning and zoning board, the item so
noticed shall be immediately transferred to the next regularly scheduled planning and zoning board meeting, which date and time shall be posted at
the noticed place of the hearing, without renotification in the newspaper or by mail or personal service.
G. Decision: The planning and zoning board may reverse or affirm, wholly or in part, or may modify the order, decision, requirements, or determination of
the community development director. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010; amd. Ord. 2015-9, 5-7-2015)
11-13-7: AMENDMENTS:
A. Authority: The regulations imposed and the districts created under the authority of this title may be amended by ordinance from time to time in the
manner provided for by the Illinois Compiled Statutes and this title. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
B. Text Amendments:
1. Standing: An application for an amendment to the text of this title may be filed by any interested party including the village board, the planning and
zoning board, the zoning hearing officer, any resident of Streamwood, any owner of land within the corporate limits or any individual who is the
contract purchaser of land either within the corporate limits or contiguous to the corporate limits. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010; amd. Ord.
2015-9, 5-7-2015)
2. Filing: An application for text amendment shall be filed with the office of the community development director. Said application shall include at a
minimum the relevant portion of the text for which the amendment is proposed and exact wording of the proposed new text.
3. Fee: Each application for amendment shall be accompanied by a filing fee as set forth from time to time by the village board. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-
2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
4. Public Hearing:
a. Timing: Within sixty (60) days of the filing of an application and payment of all fees, the planning and zoning board shall hold a public hearing.
(Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010; amd. Ord. 2015-9, 5-7-2015)
b. Public Notice: Following the filing of an application for an amendment to the text of this title and the payment of all fees the village clerk shall cause
to be published in a newspaper of general local circulation notice of the public hearing. Said notice shall contain the date, time, place and a copy of
the proposed new text and the section(s) of this title to be deleted if any. Said notice shall appear at least once not less than fifteen (15) days nor
more than thirty (30) days prior to the hearing. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
c. Lack Of Quorum: In the event the noticed date and time of the hearing must be changed, because of a lack of quorum by the planning and zoning
board, the item so noticed shall be immediately transferred to the next regularly scheduled planning and zoning board meeting, which date and
time shall be posted at the noticed place of the hearing, without renotification in the newspaper or by mail or personal service.
5. Standards: Within thirty (30) days of the close of the public hearing, the planning and zoning board shall make a recommendation accompanied by
such findings as supported by the evidence with respect to the following matters: (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010; amd. Ord. 2015-9, 5-7-
2015)
a. That said amendment(s) is consistent with the purpose and intent of the title;
b. That said amendment(s) is consistent with village policy;
c. That said amendment(s) does not unnecessarily create a hardship on property owners such as by creating numerous nonconformities;
d. That said amendment(s) are not in conflict with this title or other village ordinances. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
6. Decisions: The concurring vote of four (4) members of the planning and zoning board shall be necessary to recommend approval of a petition for a
text amendment.
7. Action By Board Of Trustees: Upon receipt of the recommendation and findings of the planning and zoning board, the village board of trustees may
enact the variation, with or without change, may reject the request or may refer it back to the planning and zoning board for further consideration.
Where the planning and zoning board has recommended denial of the variation, said variation may only be passed by a three-fourths (3/4) vote of the
village board of trustees voting on the matter.
C. Map Amendments:
1. Standing: An application for an amendment to the official zoning map may be filed by the board of trustees, the planning and zoning board, the
owner of the subject property or anyone having a proprietary interest in the property. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010; amd. Ord. 2015-9, 5-7-
2015)
2. Filing: An application for an amendment to the official zoning map shall be filed with the community development department along with such
documents and information deemed necessary by the community development director. This information may include, but is not limited to, a legal
description of the property, proof of ownership or standing and if a land trust is involved, disclosure of all beneficial interest.
3. Fee: Each application for a map amendment shall be accompanied by a filing fee as set forth from time to time by the village board. (Ord. 2009-34,
12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
4. Public Hearing:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 493/498
a. Timing: The planning and zoning board shall, within sixty (60) days of receiving a complete application for a map amendment, hold a public
hearing. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010; amd. Ord. 2015-9, 5-7-2015)
b. Public Notice:
(1) The applicant shall provide notification of the hearing by certified mail or personal service to each owner of property within two hundred fifty feet
(250') of the subject property, by submitting signed, mailed cards or electronic verification of signatures. Such notice shall be given not more
than thirty (30) days nor less than fifteen (15) days before the hearing.
(2) Following the filing of an application for a map amendment to the text of this title and the payment of fees, the village clerk shall cause to be
published in a newspaper of general circulation notice of the public hearing. Said notice shall be published not less than fifteen (15) nor more
than thirty (30) days prior to the hearing and shall contain the following information:
(A) Date, time and place of hearing;
(B) Legal description of the subject property;
(C) Common address of the subject property;
(D) A description of the relief sought. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
c. Lack Of Quorum: In the event the noticed date and time of the hearing must be changed, because of a lack of quorum by the planning and zoning
board, the item so noticed shall be immediately transferred to the next regularly scheduled planning and zoning board meeting, which date and
time shall be posted at the noticed place of the hearing, without renotification in the newspaper or by mail or personal service.
5. Findings: Where the purpose and effect of the proposed amendment is to change the zoning classification of particular property, the planning and
zoning board shall make findings based upon the evidence presented to it in each specific case with respect to the following matters: (Ord. 2009-34,
12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010; amd. Ord. 2015-9, 5-7-2015)
a. Existing uses of property within the general area of the property in question.
b. The zoning classification of property within the general area of the property in question.
c. The suitability of the property in question for the uses permitted under the existing zoning classification.
d. The trend of development, if any, in the general area of the property in question, including changes, if any, which may have taken place since the
day the property in question was placed in its present zoning classification.
e. The length of time the property has been vacant as zoned considered in the context of land development in the area surrounding the subject
property.
f. The extent to which property values are diminished by particular zoning restrictions.
6. Decisions: The concurring vote of four (4) members of the reviewing body shall be necessary to recommend approval of a petition for a map
amendment. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
7. Action By Board Of Trustees:
a. The village board shall not act upon a proposed map amendment to this title until it shall have received a written report and recommendation from
the planning and zoning board.
b. In cases where the planning and zoning board has by a majority vote recommended denial, such amendment shall not be passed except by a
favorable vote of three-fourths (3/4) of the members of the board voting on the matter. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010; amd. Ord. 2015-9,
5-7-2015)
c. If an application for a proposed amendment is not acted upon finally by the village board within sixty (60) days of the time of receipt of the
recommendation, it shall be deemed to have been denied unless an additional and specific period of time is granted by the village board.
d. The decision reached by the village board shall take into account findings of the reviewing body.
e. If an amendment to the official zoning map is adopted by the board of trustees, said amendment shall be included in an ordinance adopted by the
village board. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
8. Effect Of Denial Of Map Amendment: No application for an amendment which has been denied wholly or in part by the village board shall be
resubmitted for a period of one year from the date of said order of denial, except on grounds of new evidence or proof of changed conditions found to
be valid by the planning and zoning board. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010; amd. Ord. 2015-9, 5-7-2015)
11-13-8: SPECIAL USES:
A. Purpose: In order to accomplish the general purpose and intent of this title, certain uses in each zoning district are classified as special uses. Because
of their unique characteristics, such uses often require larger land areas or need specific regulations to achieve compatibility with existing development.
The effects of such uses cannot normally be foreseen until a specific site is proposed. These uses then must be given careful consideration relative to
the existing and proposed development in the area. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
B. Standards: Standards for planned unit developments are contained in chapter 8 of this title. A special use other than a planned unit development shall
be authorized only when the planning and zoning board shall find all of the following: (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010; amd. Ord. 2015-9, 5-7-
2015)
1. Compatible With Existing Development: The nature and intensity of the activities involved and the size and placement of any structures proposed will
be so planned that the special use will be compatible with the existing development and will not impede the normal and orderly development and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 494/498
improvement of surrounding property.
2. Lot Of Sufficient Size: The size of the lot will be sufficient for the use proposed.
3. Traffic: The location of the special use within the village will be such that adverse effects on surrounding properties will be minimal, particularly
regarding the traffic generated by the special use.
4. Parking And Access: Parking areas will be of adequate size for the particular use and properly located, and the entrance and exit drives will be laid
out so as to prevent traffic hazards and nuisances.
5. Effect On Neighborhood: In all respects, the special use will not be significantly or materially detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the
public or injurious to the other property or improvements in the neighborhood, nor will it diminish or impair property values in the surrounding area.
6. Adequate Facilities: That adequate utilities, access roads, drainage and/or other necessary facilities have been or are being provided.
7. Adequate Buffering: Adequate fencing and/or screening shall be provided to ensure the enjoyment of surrounding properties, to provide for the
public safety or to screen parking areas and other visually incompatible uses. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
C. Additional Special Use Standards:
1. Alcoholic Beverage Sales And Service: The planning and zoning board shall consider and make findings that the subject site's location: (Ord. 2009-
34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010; amd. Ord. 2015-9, 5-7-2015)
a. Relative to existing or planned churches, synagogues, temples or other places of worship will not adversely impact on the use and function of said
places of worship.
b. Relative to existing public and private elementary, junior high schools, high schools and nursery schools will not adversely impact on the use,
function or pupils of said institutions.
c. Relative to the proximity of automobile service stations is consistent with village policy and will not have an adverse impact on the health, safety or
general welfare of the public. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
2. Commercial Communication Towers: The planning and zoning board shall consider and make findings that the subject site's location: (Ord. 2009-34,
12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010; amd. Ord. 2015-9, 5-7-2015)
a. Relative to existing or planned churches, synagogues, temples or other places of worship will not adversely impact on the use and function of said
places of worship. No commercial communication tower shall be located within five hundred (500) linear feet of any zoning lot containing existing
or planned churches, synagogues, temples or other places of worship.
b. Relative to the proximity of residential structures will not have an adverse impact on the health, safety or general welfare of the public. No
commercial communication tower shall be located within five hundred (500) linear feet of any zoning lot containing existing residential structure(s).
c. Will be adequately screened and secured so as to minimize any potential adverse impact on adjacent uses and safeguard the health, safety and
general welfare of the public. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
3. Signs: The planning and zoning board shall consider and make findings that the subject site's location:
a. Will serve the public convenience and not merely serve as a convenience to the petitioner at the location of the subject sign; or that the
establishment, maintenance or operation of the special use will not be detrimental to or endanger the visibility, public safety, comfort or general
welfare;
b. Will be in harmony and scale with the architecture of the building(s) in the development and with other signs in the immediate vicinity;
c. Will not be injurious to the use and enjoyment of other property in the immediate vicinity of the subject property for the purposes already permitted;
nor substantially diminish and impair other property values within the immediate vicinity; nor impair the visibility of adjacent signs;
d. The nature, location and size of the sign(s) involved with the establishment of the special use will not impede, substantially hinder, or discourage
the installation of signs on adjacent property in accordance with the village sign ordinance; and
e. Shall in all other respects conform to the applicable regulations of the village sign ordinance except as such regulations may, in such instance, be
modified as provided by this chapter. (Ord. 2015-8, 5-7-2015)
D. Application For A Special Use:
1. Standing: Application for a special use may be made by the village, the owner of the subject property or anyone having proprietary interest in the
subject property.
2. Filing: Applications shall be filed with the community development director and shall be accompanied by such documents and information deemed
necessary by the director. This information may include, but is not limited to, a legal description of the subject property, proof of ownership and if the
land is held in trust, disclosure of all beneficial interest.
3. Fees: Each application for special use shall be accompanied by a filing fee as set forth from time to time by the village board. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-
2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
E. Public Hearing: The planning and zoning board shall, within sixty (60) days of receiving a complete application for a special use, hold a public hearing,
pursuant to the following: (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010; amd. Ord. 2015-9, 5-7-2015)
1. Public Notice: Public notice shall be made as follows:
a. By Applicant: The applicant shall provide notification of the hearing by certified mail or personal service to each owner of property within two
hundred fifty feet (250') of the subject property, by submitting the signed, mailed cards or electronic verification of signatures, at the time of the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 495/498
hearing. Such notice shall be given not more than thirty (30) days nor less than fifteen (15) days before the hearing.
b. By Village: The village clerk shall publish notice at least once, not more than thirty (30) days nor less than fifteen (15) days before the hearing, in a
newspaper of general circulation in the village.
2. Content Of Notice: The public notices provided by the applicant and published by the village clerk shall contain, at a minimum, the following:
a. Date, place and time of hearing.
b. Purpose of hearing.
c. Legal description of the subject property.
d. Common address of the subject property. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
3. Lack Of Quorum: In the event the noticed date and time of the hearing must be changed, because of a lack of quorum by the planning and zoning
board, the item so noticed shall be immediately transferred to the next regularly scheduled planning and zoning board meeting, which date and time
shall be posted at the noticed place of the hearing, without renotification in the newspaper or by mail or personal service.
F. Recommendation Of The Planning And Zoning Board:
1. Timing: Within sixty (60) days after the close of the hearing on a proposed special use, the planning and zoning board shall forward written findings
of fact and a recommendation regarding the application to the board of trustees.
2. Standards: The planning and zoning board's recommendation shall be consistent with the objectives and intent of this title and shall refer to specific
zoning district standards as a guide to the establishment of requirements for each special use.
3. Conditions: The planning and zoning board may recommend such conditions or restrictions upon the location, construction, design and operation of
a special use as they shall find necessary and appropriate to assure compliance with the requirements set forth in subsection B of this section, and
the objectives and intent of this title. These conditions may include, but are not limited to, regulations regarding landscaping, signage, adequate
drainage of stormwater, exterior lighting, fence height and the duration of the special use.
G. Action By The Board Of Trustees:
1. Decisions: The board of trustees shall consider the findings of fact received from the planning and zoning board in terms of the impact on the village
as a whole.
2. Condition Of Approval:
a. Conditions: The board of trustees shall stipulate, upon the recommendation of the planning and zoning board, such conditions and restrictions as
deemed necessary for the protection of public interest and to secure compliance with the standards enumerated above. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009,
eff. 1-1-2010; amd. Ord. 2015-9, 5-7-2015)
b. Guarantees: The board of trustees may require such evidence and guarantees as it may deem necessary to ensure compliance with the stipulated
conditions.
c. Review: The board of trustees may stipulate that all such conditions and restrictions may be modified or revised from time to time by the board of
trustees following notice and hearing. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
3. Effect Of Denial Of Special Use: No application for a special use which has been denied wholly or in part by the board of trustees shall be
resubmitted for a period of one year from the date of the decision, except on the grounds of new evidence or proof of changed conditions found to be
valid by the planning and zoning board and the board of trustees. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010; amd. Ord. 2015-9, 5-7-2015)
4. Time Limits: A special use shall become null and void if not established or actively pursued within one year of the date of approval, except for a
planned unit development as provided in chapter 8, "Planned Unit Developments", of this title. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-13-9: FEES:
A. Fees Required: Any application for the following shall be accompanied by the requisite fee:
Amendments
Annexations
Appeals
Special use/planned unit developments
Variations
B. Amount Of Fee: The amount of each fee shall be as established by resolution of the village board in an official schedule of fees.
C. Payment: All fees shall be collected by the village collector for deposit with the village treasurer at the time of application. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff.
1-1-2010)
D. Exempted From Fees: No fee is required for applications filed in the public interest by members of the board of trustees, the planning and zoning board
or the office of the director of community development. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010; amd. Ord. 2015-9, 5-7-2015)
11-13-10: ENFORCEMENT:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 496/498
It shall be the duty of all officers, citizens and employees of the village, particularly of all members of the police department, to assist the municipal officers
and bodies charged with the administration and enforcement of this title by reporting to them any new construction, reconstruction, change in land use or
apparent violation. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-13-11: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with the requirements of this title shall, upon conviction, be fined not less than one
hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall
constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
Chapter 14
APPENDICES
11-14-1: APPENDIX I, SUMMARY OF PERMITTED AND SPECIAL USES:
Land Use
Zoning Districts
R-0
R-1
R-2
R-3
R-4
R-5
C-1
C-2
C-3
I-1
I-2
Accessory uses P P P P P P P P P P P
Adult uses P P P
Apartments P
Automobile - laundries S S S S
Automobile - rental S
Automobile - sales and service (new) P
Automobile - sales and service (used) S
Automobile - service station S S
Bakeries P P
Banquet facilities S S
Bars/cocktail lounges with entertainment S S
Blueprinting/photostatting establishments S P P
Body shops S S S
Bus passenger stations S
Catalog stores P
Catering establishments P P
Chemical processing S S
Churches, synagogues, places of worship S S S S S P P P
Clinics - medical and dental S P P
Community residences P P P P P
Contractor's storage yard S P
Currency exchanges S S S
Dairy products stores P P
Daycare centers S S S S S P
Department stores P P
Dry cleaners P P
Duplex dwellings P P
Electroplating S S
Equipment rental and leasing services P
Essential services - telephone exchanges, electric substations, communication S S S S S S S S S S S
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 497/498
towers
Financial institutions (with drive-through) S S S P P
Financial institutions (without drive-through) S P P P
Fire stations S S S S S
Frozen food stores, including locker rental and food processing P P S S
Funeral parlors S S S S
Furnace supplies and service P
Furniture cleaning, repair, and upholstering service P
Greenhouses and nurseries, retail P P S S
Group homes S S S S S S
Health clubs S S P S S
Home office operations P P P P P P
Hotels and motels S S S S
Kennels S
Laboratories - research and medical P P
Libraries S S S S P P P P S S
Lumber companies and/or yards P S S
Manufacturing P P
News syndicates P P S S
Newsstands P P S S
Offices - general business, professional and medical S S P P P P P
Package liquor stores and sales S S
Parking lots and garages, for the storage of private passenger automobiles S
Parks and playgrounds S S S S S P P P P S S
Planned unit developments S S S S S S S S S S S
Plumbing and heating showrooms P S S
Police stations S S S S S
Printing and publishing facilities S S S
Publicly owned water reservoir or storage and treatment facilities S S S S
Radio and television sales P P
Recreational facilities S S S S S P S S S S S
Recreational vehicle sales S S
Restaurants - with drive-through facilities S S
Restaurants - with the serving of alcoholic beverages S S
Restaurants - without the serving of alcoholic beverages P P P
Retail - general sales P P P S S
Roadside stands, commercial S S S
Schools S S S S S P P P P S S
Single-family - attached dwellings P P
Single-family - detached dwellings P P P P P P
Steel fabricating S P
Swim clubs, swimming pools and buildings for indoor pools S S S S S S S S S S S
Swimming pool sales and service P S S
Taverns S S
Tennis clubs, tennis courts and buildings for indoor tennis S S S S S P S S S
Theaters, indoor P S S
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=392 498/498
Ticket agencies; amusement P S S
Towing services S
Townhomes P P
Trailer sales and rentals S S S
Veterinary clinics S P P S S
Warehouses and distribution facilities S P
Yard waste transfer station S S
(Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-14-2: APPENDIX II, BULK REGULATIONS:
District
Descriptive
Use
Min.
Lot Size Min. Lot Width Max. Lot Coverage
Min.
FY
Min.
SY
Min.
CSY
Min.
RY Max. Height
R-0 Single-family 40,000
sq. ft.
150 35% 50 20 50 50 40
R-1 Single-family 20,000
sq. ft.
100 35% 35 15 35 40 40
R-2 Single-family 9,600
sq. ft.
75 35% 30 10 30 30 35
R-3 Single-family 7,800
sq. ft.1
60 35% 25 8 25 302 35
R-4 Residential transition 7,500
sq. ft.
By ord. By use 25 8 25 30 35
R-5 General residential By ord. By ord. 75% 25 10 25 25 35
C-1 Limited commercial n/a n/a 35% 50 10 15 25 35
C-2 Neighborhood commercial n/a n/a NR 75 10 50 20 40
C-3 Highway commercial n/a n/a NR 100 NR 50 40 45
I-1 Office/research 10,000
sq. ft.
70 35% 50 153 25 203 40
I-2 General industrial 20,000
sq. ft.
75 40% 50 20 25 20 45
Notes:
1. For lots platted prior to 1991, a 6,000 square foot minimum lot size may be permitted.
2. For lots platted prior to 1991, a rear yard of 25 feet may be permitted.
3. Yards adjoining residential shall be a minimum of 30 feet.
(Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
11-14-3: APPENDIX III, GUIDELINES FOR OFF STREET PARKING1:
General guidelines for off street parking (minimum parking lot dimensions) shall be as follows:
Angle Of
Parking
Stall Width
(A)
Stall Length
Perpendicular
To Aisle (B)
Driveway
Width
90° 9' 18' 24'
75° 9' 17.4' 22'
60° 9' 15.6' 18'
45° 9' 13' 15'
(Ord. 2009-34, 12-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)