THE CITY OF WEST PEORIA
TABLE OF CONTENTS
TITLE 1: ADMINISTRATION
CHAPTER 1 - CITY COUNCIL
CHAPTER 2 - CITY GOVERNMENT
CHAPTER 3 - OFFICE OF MAYOR
CHAPTER 4 - LIQUOR COMMISSION
CHAPTER 5 - PERSONNEL
CHAPTER 6 - ETHICS
CHAPTER 7 - BUDGET OFFICER
CHAPTER 8 - IMPOSING AND ADMINISTERING TAX RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES
CHAPTER 9 - COMPENSATION OF OFFICERS
CHAPTER 10 - RESPONSIBLE BIDDER
TITLE 1 ADMINISTRATION
CHAPTER 1 CITY COUNCIL
1-1-1 Regular Meeting
1-1-2 Special Meetings
1-1-3 Order of Business
1-1-4 Procedures and Rules
1-1-5 City Council Term
1-1-6 City Council Oath
1-1-7 City Council Compensation
1-1-8 City Council Wards
1-1-9 Addressing City Council
SECTION 1-1-1 REGULAR MEETINGS
The regular meetings of the City Council shall be held on the second (2nd) and fourth (4th) Tuesday of
each month at 7:00 p.m. at a location determined by motion of the corporate authorities. No meeting of the
City Council or any other meeting required to be open to the public shall be held on a legal holiday unless
the regular meeting day falls on that holiday. If there is no quorum present, the meeting shall be held on
the next business day at the same hour and place, unless the members present shall adjourn to another time.
SECTION 1-1-2 SPECIAL MEETINGS
Special meetings may be called by the Mayor or by any three (3) aldermen by written notice. At least
twenty-four hours (24) written notice shall specify the time and purpose of such meeting and shall be
delivered to each member of the City Council and the City Clerk, and notice shall be given to the public
pursuant to the Open Meetings Act.
SECTION 1-1-3 ORDER OF BUSINESS
The Order of Business shall be determined from time to time by motion of the City Council.
SECTION 1-1-4 PROCEDURES AND RULES
The procedures and rules of the City Council shall be determined in accordance with the most recent edition
of Robert’s Rules of Order, Revised. The City Council shall have the right to amend these rules and set
additional rules by ordinances and motion as the council deems necessary from time to time. (Ord. 1993-01)
SECTION 1-1-5 CITY COUNCIL TERM
The City council shall consist of eight (8) aldermen who shall be elected to office for a four- year term and
until their successors are elected and qualified except that pursuant to 65 ILCS 5/3.1.-20-35, after the first
municipal election, aldermen so elected shall draw lots to determine which aldermen in each ward shall
hold office for two (2) years and which for four (4) years. Thereafter, all aldermen elected shall hold this
office for four (4) years. The Aldermen shall take office at the second regular meeting of the City council
held in the month of April following the general municipal election. (Ord. 1995-10)
SECTION 1-1-6 CITY COUNCIL OATH
Before entering upon the duties of aldermen, all persons shall take and subscribe the oath of office as
prescribed by statute. This oath so subscribed shall be filed in the Office of the City Clerk. The oath shall
be in substantially the following form.
Each prospective holder of a State office or other State position created by this Constitution, before taking
office, shall take and subscribe to the following oath or affirmation:
I do solemnly swear (affirm) that I will support the Constitution of the United States, and the Constitution
of the State of Illinois, and that I will faithfully discharge the duties of the office of ___________ to the
best of my ability.
(Source: Illinois Constitution)
Ill. CONST. 1970 ART. XIII-SECTION 3
SECTION 1-1-7 CITY COUNCIL COMPENSATION
Compensation for each alderman shall be set by ordinance by the corporate authorities. Compensation for
aldermen shall not be increased nor decreased during his or her term. Any increases or decreases for
subsequent terms shall be adopted no less number of days prior to the general election than specified by
State law. (Ord. 1993-01 and 1995-10)
SECTION 1-1-8 CITY COUNCIL WARDS
The City of West Peoria is hereby divided into four (4) wards as shown on Exhibit A attached hereto and
made a part hereof
Pursuant to State law, 65 ILCS 5/3.1-20-35, two (2) aldermen shall be elected from each ward in the City
election. After the first such election to be held in April, 1995, as provided by the General Election Law,
aldermen elected shall draw lots to determine which aldermen shall hold office for a four (4) year term and
until a successor is elected and has qualified and which shall hold office for a two (2) year term and until a
successor is elected and qualified. All aldermen thereafter elected shall hold office for a term of four (4)
years and until their successors have been elected and qualified. (Ord. 1994-33)
SECTION 1-1-9 ADDRESSING CITY COUNCIL
Any person shall be permitted an opportunity to address the City Council at any open meeting of the City
Council of the City of West Peoria or address any committee of the City Council at any of its open meetings
or to address any open meeting of any City of West Peoria board or commission for a period not to exceed
five (5) minutes. (Ord. 1993-01, 1995-10, 2011-01)
Exhibit A
TITLE 1 ADMINISTRATION
CHAPTER 2 CITY GOVERNMENT
1-2-1 Corporate Seal
1-2-2 Fiscal Year
1-2-3 Copies of City Records
1-2-4 Elected Officers
SECTION 1-2-1 CORPORATE SEAL
This seal hereto provided and used by the City of West Peoria, circular in form the impression on which
are the words "City of West Peoria, Illinois Corporate Seal" shall be and is hereby established and declared
to be the corporate seal of the City. The seal shall remain in the custody of the City Clerk to be used by the
City Clerk as required by law.
SECTION 1-2-2 FISCAL YEAR
The first fiscal year of the City shall commence on the date of incorporation, November 8, 1993, and close
on April 30, 1994. Subsequently, the fiscal year of the City shall commence on the 1st day of May of each
and every year and close on the 30th day of April of the year following.
SECTION 1-2-3 COPIES OF CITY RECORDS
Except as otherwise provided by law the charge for copies of City ordinances, resolutions, and other records
of the City shall be such amount as established from time to time by motion of the City Council in an
amount to compensate the City for its cost to reproduce such material. Copies of all records and inspections
of records shall be available as provided in the Freedom of Information Act upon written request to the City
Clerk.
SECTION 1-2-4 ELECTED OFFICERS
The elected officers of the City of West Peoria shall be as follows: Mayor, City Clerk, Treasurer, and eight
(8) Aldermen. (Ord. 1993-01)
TITLE 1 ADMINISTRATION
CHAPTER 3 OFFICE OF MAYOR
1-3-1 Term
1-3-2 Oath
1-3-3 Bond
1-3-4 Compensation
1-3-5 Powers and Duties
SECTION 1-3-1 TERM
The Mayor shall be elected by the electors of the City for a term of four (4) years and until a successor is
elected and qualified. The Mayor shall take office at the second regular meeting of the City Council held
in the month of April following the general municipal election.
SECTION 1-3-2 OATH
Before entering upon the duties of the office of Mayor, the Mayor shall take and subscribe the oath of office
as prescribed by statute. This oath so subscribed shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk.
SECTION 1-3-3 BOND
The Mayor before entering upon the duties of Mayor shall execute a bond in the amount of $3,000
conditioned upon the faithful performance of the Mayor’s duties. Such bond shall be approved by the
corporate authorities and filed with the City Clerk. The premium of such bond shall be paid by the City.
SECTION 1-3-4 COMPENSATION
The Mayor shall receive such compensation as set by ordinance by the corporate authorities. The
compensation set shall not be increased or decreased during the term for which the Mayor is elected. Any
increases or decreases for succeeding terms shall be adopted no less number of days prior to the general
election than specified by State law.
SECTION 1-3-5 POWERS AND DUTIES
The Mayor shall be the official head of the City for all legal purposes. The Mayor shall have the power
and authority to examine all books and records relating to City business kept by any City agent, employee,
or officer. The Mayor shall sign all proclamations, commissions, resolutions, and ordinances except as
otherwise provided by law. The Mayor shall appoint with the advice and consent of the City Council all
members of boards, commissions, and committees as may be authorized by ordinance or resolution of the
City Council. The Mayor shall preside at all meetings of the City Council. The Mayor shall not vote on
any ordinance, resolution, or motion except:
A. Where the vote of the City Council has resulted in a tie,
B. Where a majority of the City Council has voted in favor of an ordinance, resolution, or motion even
if there is no tie, or
C. Where a vote greater than the majority of the corporate authorities is required by statute.
D. In addition to the foregoing, the Mayor shall perform all other duties and acts and have all additional
powers that may be prescribed by the laws of the State of Illinois or ordinances of the City of West
Peoria. (Ord. 1993-01 and 1995-10)
TITLE 1 ADMINISTRATION
CHAPTER 4 LIQUOR COMMISSION
1-4-1 Liquor Commission
SECTION 1-4-1 LIQUOR COMMISSION
A three (3) member board established and appointed by the local Liquor Commissioner (Mayor). Hears
cases regarding liquor infractions and denials, revocations and nonrenewal of license and makes
recommendations to the local Liquor Commissioner for final action.
TITLE 1 ADMINISTRATION
CHAPTER 5 PERSONNEL
1-5-1 Code Enforcement Officer
1-5-2 Deputy Code Enforcement Officer
1-5-3 Street Department and Manager of Streets
1-5-4 City Administrator
1-5-5 City Clerk
1-5-6 Deputy Clerk
1-5-7 City Treasurer
1-5-8 City Attorney
1-5-9 City Finances Regarding Bill Paying and Purchase Orders
SECTION 1-5-1 CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER
The Office of Code Enforcement Officer shall be filled by City Administrator with the consent of the
Mayor. The Code Enforcement Officer shall be an at-will employee and shall not be appointed for any
specific term. Before entering upon the duties of the office of Code Enforcement Officer, the Code
Enforcement officer shall execute a bond as provided by law in the penal sum of not less than $1,000. The
bond shall be filed with the City Clerk. The Code Enforcement Officer shall receive the compensation set
by the City Council in the personnel manual of the City of West Peoria.
The duties of the Code Enforcement Officer shall be to inspect properties in the City and to send Notices
and Citations of non-compliance with City Ordinances 1994-03, 1994-07, 1994-13, 1994-15, 1994-16 and
1994-21, as provided in those ordinances, amendments to those ordinances as made from time-to-time and
such other ordinances of the City as may hereafter be adopted in which the Code Enforcement Officer is
authorized to take action. The Code Enforcement Officer is further vested by the Mayor and Council to
take whatever action the Mayor and City Council are authorized to take in the ordinances set forth in this
paragraph or as set forth in applicable law. For purposes of enforcing the ordinances of the City of West
Peoria, the Code Enforcement Officer shall be vested with police power in the enforcement of Code
compliance and issuance of citations for ordinance violations. The Mayor and the City Council shall have
the power to establish additional duties as they deem necessary from time to time. (Ord. 1994-25 and 1995-04)
SECTION 1-5-2 DEPUTY CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER
The duties of the Deputy Code Enforcement Officer shall be as follows:
A. To act as Assistant to the Code Enforcement Officer.
B. To perform the duties, functions, and responsibilities of the Code Enforcement Officer in the
absence of the Code Enforcement Officer.
C. To perform other duties as may be assigned by the Code Enforcement Officer or created by the
City Council.
The Deputy Code Enforcement Officer shall have the same powers as those granted to the Code
Enforcement Officer. The Deputy Code Enforcement Officer shall be an at-will employee and shall not be
appointed for any specific term. Before entering upon the duties of the office of Deputy Code Enforcement
Officer, the Deputy Code Enforcement officer shall execute a bond as provided by law in the penal sum of
not less than $1,000. The bond shall be filed with the City Clerk. The Deputy Code Enforcement Officer
shall receive the compensation set by the City Council in the personnel manual of the City of West Peoria.
(Ord. 1997-20)
SECTION 1-5-3 STREET DEPARTMENT AND MANAGER OF STREETS
Street Department Created: There is hereby created a Street Department for the City which shall consist of
a Manager who shall be in charge of the Department and such other employees as may be provided for from
time to time by the City Council. The Manager shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent
of the City Council. Termination shall be in the same manner. The compensation of the Manager and
employees shall be fixed by the City Council.
Manager of Street Department
General Powers and Duties:
A. Streets, sidewalks, and storm sewers. Have charge of the construction and maintenance of public
streets, alleys, and sidewalks, storm sewers, and drainage systems.
B. Employees. All employees assigned to the Street Department shall perform their duties
subject to the orders and supervision of the Manager of Streets.
C. City Property. Be the custodian of all equipment and real estate owned or leased by the City which
is used by the Street Department and keep such equipment and property in good condition.
D. Budget. Prepare department budget, determine department equipment and material needs, and
establish project priorities.
E. Resident Requests. Responds to technical calls, requests, or complaints from residents.
F. Other Duties. Performs such other duties as provided in a detailed job description adopted by
motion of the City Council and as amended from time to time.
Length of Appointment. The Manager shall be an at-will employee and shall not be appointed for any
specific term. (Ord. 1994-08)
SECTION 1-5-4 CITY ADMINISTRATOR
The position of City Administrator is hereby created.
The City Administrator shall be appointed and removed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the
City Council and shall be selected on the basis of qualification for the position without regard to political
activity, affiliation, or belief and shall not be required to be a resident of the City. The City Administrator
shall at all times be under the sole direction of the Mayor. The City Council shall determine the
remuneration to be provided to the City Administrator.
The primary duties, functions, and responsibilities of the City Administrator shall be to act as the Assistant
to the Mayor and as the Chief Administrative Officer of the City.
The secondary duties, functions, and responsibilities of the City Administrator shall be as follows:
A. To assist in the execution and administration of the directives, policies, practices, procedures, and
programs established by the City Council;
B. To assist in the preparation of the appropriation ordinance and the budget;
C. To act as liaison between the City and the organizations of which the City is a member and other
units of government;
D. To assist the City Officials, both elected and appointed, and the Heads of the Departments in the
performance of the duties, functions, and responsibilities of their respective offices or positions;
and,
E. Those duties, functions, and responsibilities that may be assigned by the Mayor or created by the
City Council.
F. Detailed job description in Employee Handbook. (Ord. 1994-34)
SECTION 1-5-5 CITY CLERK
TERM: The City Clerk shall be elected to office for a four (4) year term and until a successor is elected and
qualified as provided by statute. The Clerk shall take office at the second regular meeting of the City
Council held in the month of April following the general municipal election.
OATH: Before entering upon the duties of office, the City Clerk shall take and subscribe the oath of office
and shall execute a bond in the amount of $1,000 conditioned upon the faithful performance of the Clerk’s
duties. Premium of such bond shall be paid by the City. The Bond shall be filed with the City Clerk.
COMPENSATION: The City Clerk shall receive such compensation as set by ordinance of the Corporate
Authorities. The compensation set shall not be increased nor decreased during the term for which the clerk
is elected. Any increases or decreases for subsequent terms shall be adopted no less number of days prior
to the general election than specified by State law
POWERS AND DUTIES: The City Clerk shall keep all records and reports as required by statute or
ordinance from time to time. The Clerk shall keep on file bonds required of any officers and the oath of
office of all officers. The Clerk shall be the custodian of the City seal and shall affix its impression on
documents whenever required. The Clerk shall attend all regular and special meetings of the City Council
and keep a full record of its proceedings. The Clerk shall give notice of all special meetings of the City
Council. The Clerk shall also be the collector and will have the authority to collect money on behalf of the
City. The Clerk shall turn over all money collected to the City Treasurer. The Clerk shall keep and maintain
a proper index to all documents and records, shall publish in pamphlet form all ordinances provided by
statute, shall carry out all duties relating to City elections as may be authorized by the state statute.
(Ord. 1993-01 and 1995-10)
SECTION 1-5-6 DEPUTY CLERK
The Clerk shall appoint a Deputy Clerk to work in the absence of the City Clerk.
OATH: Before entering upon the duties of office, the Deputy Clerk shall take and subscribe the oath of
office and shall execute under the bond of the City Clerk conditioned upon faithful performance of the
Clerk's duties by the Deputy Clerk.
COMPENSATION: The Deputy Clerk's hours and rate per hour shall not exceed that of the City Clerk.
POWERS AND DUTIES: The Deputy Clerk shall be responsible for the Clerk's duties and power to affix
the seal of the City. (Ord. 1994-05)
SECTION 1-5-7 CITY TREASURER
TERM: The City Treasurer shall be elected by the electors of the City for a term of four (4) years and until
a successor is elected and qualified. The Treasurer shall take office at the second regular meeting of the
City Council held in the month of April following the general municipal election.
OATH: Before entering upon the duties of the office of Treasurer, the Treasurer shall take and subscribe
the oath of Office as prescribed by statute. This oath shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk.
BOND: Before entering upon the duties of the office of Treasurer, the Treasurer shall execute a bond in
the amount not less than that required by statute, an amount set by City Council. Such bond shall be
approved by the Corporate Authorities and filed with the City Clerk. The premium of such bond shall be
paid by the City.
COMPENSATION: The Treasurer shall receive such compensation as set by ordinance of the Corporate
Authorities. The compensation set shall not be increased or decreased during the term for which the
Treasurer is elected. Any increases or decreases for subsequent terms shall be adopted no less number of
days prior to the general election than specified by State law.
POWERS AND DUTIES: The City Treasurer shall receive all money collected by other officers or
employees. The City Treasurer shall deposit the municipal funds in such depositories as may be selected
from time to time by ordinance by the Corporate Authorities in accordance with statutes. The Treasurer
shall keep the deposit of the municipal monies separate and distinct from the Treasurer’s own funds and
shall not make private or personal use of any municipal money. The City Treasurer shall keep records
showing all money received showing the source from which it is received and the purpose for which it is
paid. The Treasurer shall keep records at all times showing the financial status of the City. The Treasurer
shall keep such books and accounts, and in such manner, as required by statute or ordinance. The Treasurer
shall render an account to the City Council monthly showing the state of the Treasury at the date of the
account and balance of the money in the treasury and showing all monies received into the treasury with
bonds and vouchers paid by the City. Prior to the end of the first six (6) months of each fiscal year, the
Treasurer shall prepare and file with the City Clerk an account of all monies received and expenditures
incurred during the preceding fiscal year as prescribed by statute. A copy of the annual account of the
Treasurer shall also be filed with the county collector together with an affidavit of the City Clerk certifying
its publication. In addition to the duties herein provided, the Treasurer shall perform other duties and
functions as may be required by statutes or ordinance. (Ord. 1993-01)
SECTION 1-5-8 ATTORNEY FOR THE CITY
The Attorney for the City shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the City Council
on such contract terms as shall be approved. The City Attorney shall receive such compensation as may
from time to time be provided by contract, motion, or ordinance. The Attorney for the City shall perform
the following duties:
A. Prosecute or defend any and all suits or actions at law or equity to which the City may be a party
or in which the City may be interested.
B. Advise the Mayor and City Council in all matters of law in which the interest of the corporation
are involved.
C. At the request of the Mayor or City Council, prepare all ordinances and resolutions, contracts,
leases, and other documents to which the City may be a party.
D. The Attorney for the City shall attend all regular and special meetings of the City Council and such
other meetings when requested by the Mayor or City Council. The Corporate Authorities may from
time to time employ additional lawyers to perform specialized consulting or advisory services to
the Attorney for the City. (Ord. 1993-01)
SECTION 1-5-9 CITY FINANCES REGARDING BILL PAYING AND PURCHASE ORDERS
A. Payment of Bills
1. All bills payable by the City, other than for the payment of salaries and related payroll taxes
established by the Mayor and City Council, for monthly utilities, and for rent or installment
payable under leases or installment contracts which have been approved by the Mayor and
City Council, shall be submitted to the Finance Committee appointed by the Mayor. A list
of all bills paid or to be paid shall be submitted by the Finance Committee and City Council
for approval. (Ord. 1994-19)
2. The Treasurer shall disburse funds in accordance with the bill list previously approved by
the Mayor and Council for items listed in Paragraph 1 above and for purchase orders in
accordance with Section B.
(Ord. 1994-19)
B. Purchase Orders
1. All purchase orders shall be pre-numbered. Purchase orders may be approved and signed
by the following individuals up to the respective expenditure amount without further
approval by the City Council:
a) Mayor $ 3,000.00
b) City Clerk $ 250.00
c) Street Department Manager $ 1,500.00
d) Other purchases, including any purchases over $3,000, lease commitments, or
purchase installments with a term greater than six (6) months, must be approved
by the City Council. (Ord. 2007-01)
2. Purchase orders must be used for all purchases, other than those explicitly exempt by
ordinance or be action of the City Council. Exempt by ordinance may include regular
installments on agreed upon contracts, which have been authorized by the City Council.
(Ord. 1994-19)
3. Purchase orders shall show the line item of the budget from which the expenditure is to be
made. For items purchased where payment is required at time of purchase, the Treasurer
shall issue a check presented with a signed and approved purchase order. (Ord. 1994-19)
4. Purchase order copies and unused forms shall be maintained by the City Clerk
(Ord. 1994-19)
5. Procedure to request a purchase order. An authorized party (Section 1.01) shall make a
request to the appropriate party based on the expected dollar value of the expenditure. If
approved by the respective party, it is that party’s responsibility to draft a purchase order.
The Clerk shall log the purchase order. The log shall maintain the purchase order number,
date of issuance, amount of request, payee, person requesting the purchase order and
documented approval notification. (Ord. 1994-19)
6. Purchase order requests denied may be resubmitted for approval. (Ord. 1994-19)
7. The City Clerk shall have the following responsibilities with respect to the purchase order
process:
a) To ensure the timely resolution of outstanding purchase orders.
To compare and match all pertinent information (including payee, amount, related
descriptions) on the purchase order to the respective bill. Note: For the purposes
of comparing amounts, differences of five percent (5%) of the purchase order
amount when the differences is less than $100 is considered “matched”. All other
differences should be forwarded to the finance committee for resolution.
b) To ensure the receipt of the good or service is documented. For the purposes of
this section acknowledgement of receipt shall be constituted by signature of the
respective authorizing individual on the bill or purchase order. (Ord. 1994-19)
C. Finance Committee
1. Responsibilities of the Finance Committee. The Finance Committee for each fiscal year
shall prepare an annual working budget and an Appropriation Ordinance to be submitted
to the City Council for approval. The working budget shall be in detail and shall show all
anticipated expenditures and revenues by line item. The appropriation ordinance shall be
in the form required by Statute. The budget shall be prepared prior to May 1 of each year.
The appropriation ordinance shall be prepared as required by Statute. (Ord. 1994-19)
2. Bill approval. The Finance Committee shall review all bills and present a bill list for
approval to the City Council. (Ord. 1994-19)
3. The Finance Committee shall keep track of the amounts remaining in each budget account,
report to the City Council, and shall recommend amendments to the budget as deemed
desirable to the committee to the City Council. (Ord. 1994-19)
4. The Finance Committee shall consist of three (3) City councilpersons. The Treasurer shall
be an ex-officio member. The Committee shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice
and consent of the City Council. (Ord. 1994-19)
TITLE 1 ADMINISTRATION
CHAPTER 6 ETHICS
1-6-1 Definitions
1-6-2 Prohibited Political Activities
1-6-3 Gift Ban
1-6-4 Exceptions
1-6-5 Disposition of Gifts
1-6-6 Ethics Advisor, Appointment
1-6-7 Ethics Advisor, Duties
SECTION 1-6-1 DEFINITIONS
For purposes of this ordinance, the following terms shall be given these definitions:
Campaign for elective office: means any activity in furtherance of an effort to influence the selection,
nomination, election, or appointment of any individual to any federal, State, or local public office or office
in a political organization, or the selection, nomination, or election of Presidential or Vice-Presidential
electors, but does not include activities (i) relating to the support or opposition of any executive, legislative,
or administrative action, (ii) relating to collective bargaining, or (iii) that are otherwise in furtherance of the
person's official duties.
Candidate: means a person who has filed nominating papers or petitions for nomination or election to an
elected office, or who has been appointed to fill a vacancy in nomination, and who remains eligible for
placement on the ballot at a regular election, as defined in Section 1-3 of the Election Code (10 ILCS 5/1-3).
Collective bargaining: has the same meaning as that term is defined in Section 3 of the Illinois Public
Labor Relations Act (5 ILCS 315/3).
Compensated time: means, with respect to an employee, any time worked by or credited to the employee
that counts toward any minimum work time requirement imposed as a condition of his or her employment,
but for purposes of this Ordinance, does not include any designated holidays, vacation periods, personal
time, compensatory time off or any period when the employee is on a leave of absence. With respect to
officers or employees whose hours are not fixed, "compensated time" includes any period of time when the
officer is on premises under the control of the employer and any other time when the officer or employee
is executing his or her official duties, regardless of location.
Compensatory time off: means authorized time off earned by or awarded to an employee to compensate
in whole or in part for time worked in excess of the minimum work time required of that employee as a
condition of his or her employment.
Contribution: has the same meaning as that term is defined in Section 9-1.4 of the Election Code (10 ILCS
5/9-1.4).
Employee: means a person employed by the City of West Peoria, whether on a full-time or part-time basis
or pursuant to a contract, whose duties are subject to the direction and control of an employer with regard
to the material details of how the work is to be performed but does not include an independent contractor.
Employer: means the City of West Peoria.
Gift: means any gratuity, discount, entertainment, hospitality, loan, forbearance, or other tangible or
intangible item having monetary value including, but not limited to, cash, food and drink, and honoraria for
speaking engagements related to or attributable to government employment or the official position of an
officer or employee.
Leave of absence: means any period during which an employee does not receive (i) compensation for
employment, (ii) service credit towards pension benefits, and (iii) health insurance benefits paid for by the
employer.
Officer: means a person who holds, by election or appointment, an office created by statute or ordinance,
regardless of whether the officer is compensated for service in his or her official capacity.
Political activity: means any activity in support of or in connection with any campaign for elective office
or any political organization but does not include activities (i) relating to the support or opposition of any
executive, legislative, or administrative action, (ii) relating to collective bargaining, or (iii) that are
otherwise in furtherance of the person's official duties.
Political organization: means a party, committee, association, fund, or other organization (whether or not
incorporated) that is required to file a statement of organization with the State Board of Elections or a
county clerk under Section 9-3 of the Election Code (10 ILCS 5/9-3), but only with regard to those activities
that require filing with the State Board of Elections or a county clerk.
Prohibited political activity: means:
A. Preparing for, organizing, or participating in any political meeting, political rally, political
demonstration, or other political event.
B. Soliciting contributions, including but not limited to the purchase of, selling, distributing, or
receiving payment for tickets for any political fundraiser, political meeting, or other political event.
C. Soliciting, planning the solicitation of, or preparing any document or report regarding anything of
value intended as a campaign contribution.
D. Planning, conducting, or participating in a public opinion poll in connection with a campaign for
elective office or on behalf of a political organization for political purposes or for or against any
referendum question.
E. Surveying or gathering information from potential or actual voters in an election to determine
probable vote outcome in connection with a campaign for elective office or on behalf of a political
organization for political purposes or for or against any referendum question.
F. Assisting at the polls on election day on behalf of any political organization or candidate for elective
office or for or against any referendum question.
G. Soliciting votes on behalf of a candidate for elective office or a political organization or for or
against any referendum question or helping in an effort to get voters to the polls.
H. Initiating for circulation, preparing, circulating, reviewing, or filing any petition on behalf of a
candidate for elective office or for or against any referendum question.
I. Making contributions on behalf of any candidate for elective office in that capacity or in connection
with a campaign for elective office.
J. Preparing or reviewing responses to candidate questionnaires.
K. Distributing, preparing for distribution, or mailing campaign literature, campaign signs, or other
campaign material on behalf of any candidate for elective office or for or against any referendum
question.
L. Campaigning for any elective office or for or against any referendum question.
M. Managing or working on a campaign for elective office or for or against any referendum question.
N. Serving as a delegate, alternate, or proxy to a political party convention.
O. Participating in any recount or challenge to the outcome of any election.
Prohibited source: means any person or entity who:
A. Is seeking official action (i) by an officer or (ii) by an employee, or by the officer or another
employee directing that employee;
B. Does business or seeks to do business (i) with the officer or (ii) with an employee, or with the
officer or another employee directing that employee;
C. Conducts activities regulated (i) by the officer or (ii) by an employee, or by the officer or another
employee directing that employee; or
D. Has interests that may be substantially affected by the performance or non-performance of the
official duties of the officer or employee.
SECTION 1-6-2 PROHIBITED POLITICAL ACTIVITIES
A. No officer or employee shall intentionally perform any prohibited political activity during any
compensated time, as defined herein. No officer or employee shall intentionally use any property
or resources of the City of West Peoria in connection with any prohibited political activity.
B. At no time shall any officer or employee intentionally require any other officer or employee to
perform any prohibited political activity (i) as part of that officer or employee's duties, (ii) as a
condition of employment, or (iii) during any compensated time off (such as holidays, vacation or
personal time off).
C. No officer or employee shall be required at any time to participate in any prohibited political
activity in consideration for that officer or employee being awarded additional compensation or
any benefit, whether in the form of a salary adjustment, bonus, compensatory time off, continued
employment or otherwise, nor shall any officer or employee be awarded additional compensation
or any benefit in consideration for his or her participation in any prohibited political activity.
D. Nothing in this Section prohibits activities that are permissible for an officer or employee to engage
in as part of his or her official duties, or activities that are undertaken by an officer or employee on
a voluntary basis which are not prohibited by this Ordinance.
E. No person either (i) in a position that is subject to recognized merit principles of public employment
or (ii) in a position the salary for which is paid in whole or in part by federal funds and that is
subject to the Federal Standards for a Merit System of Personnel Administration applicable to
grant-in-aid programs, shall be denied or deprived of employment or tenure solely because he or
she is a member or an officer of a political committee, of a political party, or of a political
organization or club.
SECTION 1-6-3 GIFT BAN
Except as permitted by this Article, no officer or employee, and no spouse of or immediate family member
living with any officer or employee (collectively referred to herein as "recipients"), shall intentionally solicit
or accept any gift from any prohibited source, as defined herein, or which is otherwise prohibited by law or
ordinance. No prohibited source shall intentionally offer or make a gift that violates this Section.
SECTION 1-6-4 EXCEPTIONS
Section 1-6-3 is not applicable to the following:
A. Opportunities, benefits, and services that are available on the same conditions as for the general
public.
B. Anything for which the officer or employee, or his or her spouse or immediate family member,
pays the fair market value.
C. Any (i) contribution that is lawfully made under the Election Code or (ii) activities associated with
a fundraising event in support of a political organization or candidate.
D. Educational materials and missions.
E. Travel expenses for a meeting to discuss business.
F. A gift from a relative, meaning those people related to the individual as father, mother, son,
daughter, brother, sister, uncle, aunt, great aunt, great uncle, first cousin, nephew, niece, husband,
wife, grandfather, grandmother, grandson, granddaughter, father-in-law, mother-in-law, son-inlaw,
daughter-in-law, brother-in-law, sister-in-law, stepfather, stepmother, stepson, stepdaughter,
stepbrother, stepsister, half-brother, half-sister, and including the father, mother, grandfather, or
grandmother of the individual's spouse and the individual's fiancé or fiancée.
G. Anything provided by an individual on the basis of a personal friendship unless the recipient has
reason to believe that, under the circumstances, the gift was provided because of the official
position or employment of the recipient or his or her spouse or immediate family member and not
because of the personal friendship. In determining whether a gift is provided on the basis of
personal friendship, the recipient shall consider the circumstances under which the gift was offered,
such as: (i) the history of the relationship between the individual giving the gift and the recipient
of the gift, including any previous exchange of gifts between those individuals; (ii) whether to the
actual knowledge of the recipient the individual who gave the gift personally paid for the gift or
sought a tax deduction or business reimbursement for the gift; and (iii) whether to the actual
knowledge of the recipient the individual who gave the gift also at the same time gave the same or
similar gifts to other officers or employees, or their spouses or immediate family members.
H. Food or refreshments not exceeding $75 per person in value on a single calendar day; provided that
the food or refreshments are (i) consumed on the premises from which they were purchased or
prepared or (ii) catered. For the purposes of this Section, "catered" means food or refreshments that
are purchased ready to consume which are delivered by any means.
I. Food, refreshments, lodging, transportation, and other benefits resulting from outside business or
employment activities (or outside activities that are not connected to the official duties of an officer
or employee), if the benefits have not been offered or enhanced because of the official position or
employment of the officer or employee and are customarily provided to others in similar
circumstances.
J. Intra-governmental and inter-governmental gifts. For the purpose of this Act, "intra-governmental
gift" means any gift given to an officer or employee from another officer or employee, and "intergovernmental
gift" means any gift given to an officer or employee by an officer or employee of
another governmental entity.
K. Bequests, inheritances, and other transfers at death.
L. Any item or items from any one prohibited source during any calendar year having a cumulative
total value of less than $100.
Each of the exceptions listed in this Section is mutually exclusive and independent of every other.
(Ord. 2004-11)
SECTION 1-6-5 DISPOSITION OF GIFTS
An officer or employee, his or her spouse or an immediate family member living with the officer or
employee, does not violate this Ordinance if the recipient promptly takes reasonable action to return a gift
from a prohibited source to its source or gives the gift or an amount equal to its value to an appropriate
charity that is exempt from income taxation under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986,
as now or hereafter amended, renumbered, or succeeded.
SECTION 1-6-6 ETHICS ADVISOR, APPOINTMENT
The Mayor, with the advice and consent of the City Council shall designate an Ethics Advisor for the City
of West Peoria. The duties of the Ethics Advisor may be delegated to an officer or employee of the City of
West Peoria unless the position has been created as an office by the City of West Peoria.
SECTION 1-6-7 ETHICS ADVISOR, DUTIES
The Ethics Advisor shall provide guidance to the officers and employees of the City of West Peoria
concerning the interpretation of and compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance and State ethics laws.
The Ethics Advisor shall perform such other duties as may be delegated by the City Council.
SECTION 1-6-8 PENALTIES
A. A person who intentionally violates any provision of Article 5 of this Ordinance may be punished
by a term of incarceration in a penal institution other than a penitentiary for a period of not more
than three hundred sixty-four (364) days and may be fined in an amount not to exceed $2,500.
B. A person who intentionally violates any provision of Article 3 of this Ordinance is subject to a fine
in an amount of not less than $1,001 and not more than $5,000.
C. Any person who intentionally makes a false report alleging a violation of any provision of this
Ordinance to the local enforcement authorities, the State's Attorney or any other law enforcement
official may be punished by a term of incarceration in a penal institution other than a penitentiary
for a period of not more than three hundred sixty-four (364) days and may be fined in an amount
not to exceed $2,500.
D. A violation of Article 5 of this Ordinance shall be prosecuted as a criminal offense by an attorney
for the City of West Peoria by filing in the circuit court an information, or sworn complaint,
charging such offense. The prosecution shall be under and conform to the rules of criminal
procedure. Conviction shall require the establishment of the guilt of the defendant beyond a
reasonable doubt. A violation of Article 10 of this Ordinance may be prosecuted as a quasi-criminal
offense by an attorney for the City of West Peoria, or, if an Ethics Commission has been created,
by the Commission through the designated administrative procedure.
E. In addition to any other penalty that may be applicable, whether criminal or civil, an officer or
employee who intentionally violates any provision of Article 5 or Article 10 of this Ordinance is
subject to discipline or discharge.
TITLE 1 ADMINISTRATION
CHAPTER 7 BUDGET OFFICER
1-7-1 Adoption of Budget Officer System
1-7-2 Budget Officer
1-7-3 Powers and Duties of Budget Officer
1-7-4 Compilation and contents of budget
1-7-5 Passage of annual budget – Effect
1-7-6 Capital improvement, repair, or replacement fund
1-7-7 Revision of annual budget
1-7-8 Funds for contingency purposes
1-7-9 Public inspection, notice, and hearing on budget
SECTION 1-7-1 ADOPTION OF BUDGET OFFICER SYSTEM
Sections 8-2-9.1 through 8-2-9.10 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-2-9.1 through 65 ILCS 5/8-
2-9.10) are hereby adopted.
SECTION 1-7-2 BUDGET OFFICER
The office of Budget Officer is hereby created.
The Budget officer shall be designated by the Mayor, with the approval of the Corporate Authorities. The
Budget Officer shall take an oath and post a bond as provided by law. The Budget Officer may hold another
municipal office, either elected or appointed, and may receive compensation for both offices.
The Budget Officer shall serve at the pleasure of the Mayor.
SECTION 1-7-3 POWERS AND DUTIES OF BUDGET OFFICER
A. Permit and encourage and establish the use of efficient planning, budgeting, auditing, reporting,
accounting, and other fiscal management procedures in all City departments, commissions, and
boards.
B. Compile an annual budget in accordance with Section Four (4) of this Ordinance.
C. Examine all books and records of all City departments, commissions, and boards which relate to
monies received by the City, City departments, commissions, and boards, and paid out by the City,
City departments, commissions, and boards, debts and accounts receivable, amounts owed by or to
the City, City departments, commissions, and boards.
D. Obtain such additional information from the City, City departments, commissions, and boards as
may be useful to the Budget Officer for purposes of compiling a City budget, such information to
be furnished by the City, City departments, commissions, and boards in the form required by the
Budget Officer. Any department, commission or board which refuses to make such information as
is requested of it available to the Budget Officer shall not be permitted to make expenditures under
any subsequent budget for the City until such City department, commission, or board shall comply
in full with the request of the Budget Officer.
E. Establish and maintain such procedures as shall insure that no expenditures are made by the City,
City departments, commissions, or boards except as authorized by the budget.
SECTION 1-7-4 COMPILATION AND CONTENTS OF BUDGET
A. The Budget Officer shall compile a budget, such budget to contain estimates of revenues available
to the City for the fiscal year for which the budget is drafted, together with recommended
expenditures for the City and all of the City’s departments, commissions, and boards.
B. Revenue estimates and expenditure recommendations shall be presented in a manner which is in
conformity with good fiscal management practices. Substantial conformity to a chart of accounts,
now or in the future, recommended by the National Committee on Governmental Accounting, the
Auditor of Public Accounts of the State of Illinois, or the Division of Local Governmental Affairs
and Property Taxes of the Department of Revenue of the State of Illinois or successor agencies
shall be deemed proof of such conformity.
C. The budget shall contain actual or estimated revenues and expenditures for the two (2) years
immediately preceding the fiscal year for which the budget is prepared. So far as is possible, the
fiscal data for such two (2) preceding fiscal years shall be itemized in a manner which is in
conformity with the chart of accounts approved above.
D. Each budget shall show the specific fund from which each anticipated expenditure shall be made.
SECTION 1-7-5 PASSAGE OF ANNUAL BUDGET – EFFECT
A. Passage of the annual budget by the Corporate Authorities shall be in lieu of passage of the
appropriation ordinance as required by law.
B. The annual budget need not be published except in a manner provided for in Section 1-7-8 of this
Code but shall be available for public review as required by State law.
C. The annual budget shall be adopted by the Corporate Authorities before the beginning of the fiscal
year to which it applies.
SECTION 1-7-6 CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT, REPAIR, OR REPLACEMENT FUND
A. In the preparation by the Budget Officer of the annual budget, an amount may be accumulated in a
separate fund for the purpose or purposes of specific capital improvements, repairs, and/or
replacements of specific types of municipal equipment or other tangible property, both real and
personal, to be designated as the “Capital Improvement, Repair, or Replacement Fund”.
B. Expenditures from the Capital Improvement, Repair, or Replacement Fund shall be budgeted in the
fiscal year in which the capital improvement, repair, or replacement will occur.
C. Upon the completion or abandonment of any object for which the Capital Improvement, Repair, or
Replacement Fund, or should any surplus monies remain after the completion or abandonment of
any object for which the Capital Improvement, Repair, or Replacement Fund was inaugurated, then
such funds no longer necessary for capital improvement, repair, or replacement shall be transferred
into the general corporate fund of the City on the first day of the fiscal year following such
abandonment, completion, or discovery of surplus funds.
SECTION 1-7-7 REVISION OF ANNUAL BUDGET
A. The Corporate Authorities may delegate authority to heads of City departments, boards, or
commissions to delete, add to, change, or create sub-classes within object classes budgeted
previously to the department, board, or commission, subject to such limitation or requirement for
prior approval by the Budget Officer or Mayor of the City as the City Council, upon a two-thirds
(2/3) vote of the Corporate Authorities then holding office, may establish.
B. By a vote of two-thirds (2/3) of the members of the Corporate Authorities then holding office, the
annual budget for the City may be revised by deleting, adding to, changing, or creating sub-classes
within object classes and object classes themselves.
C. No revision of the budget shall be made increasing the budget in the event funds are not available
to effectuate the purpose of the revision.
SECTION 1-7-8 FUNDS FOR CONTINGENCY PURPOSES
The annual budget may contain money set aside for contingency purposes not to exceed ten percent (10%)
of the total budget, less the amount set aside for contingency purposes, which monies may be expended for
contingencies upon a majority vote of the Corporate Authorities then holding office.
SECTION 1-7-9 PUBLIC INSPECTION, NOTICE, AND HEARING ON BUDGET
A. The Corporate Authorities shall make the tentative annual budget conveniently available to public
inspection for at least ten (10) days prior to the passage of the annual budget, by publication in the
journal of the proceedings of the Corporate Authorities or in such other form as the Corporate
Authorities may prescribe.
B. Not less than one (1) week after the publication of the tentative annual budget, and prior to final
action on the budget, the Corporate Authorities shall hold at least one (1) public hearing on the
tentative annual budget, after which hearing or hearings the tentative budget may be further revised
and passed without any further inspection, notice or hearing.
C. Notice of this hearing shall be given by publication in a newspaper having a general circulation in
the City at least one (1) week prior to the time of the hearing. (Ord. 1998-07)
TITLE 1 ADMINISTRATION
CHAPTER 8 IMPOSING AND ADMINISTERING TAX RIGHTS AND
RESPONSIBILITIES
1-8-1 Title
1-8-2 Scope
1-8-3 Definitions
1-8-4 Notices
1-8-5 Late Payment
1-8-6 Payment
1-8-7 Certain Credits and Refunds
1-8-8 Audit Procedure
1-8-9 Appeal
1-8-10 Hearing
1-8-11 Interest and Penalties
1-8-12 Abatement
1-8-13 Installment Contract
1-8-14 Statute of Limitation
1-8-15 Voluntary Disclosure
1-8-16 Publication of Tax Ordinances
1-8-17 Internal Review Procedure of Liens
1-8-18 Application
SECTION 1-8-1 TITLE
This ordinance shall be known as, and may be cited as, the "Locally Imposed and Administered Tax Rights
and Responsibility Ordinance."
SECTION 1-8-2 SCOPE
The provisions of this ordinance shall apply to the City's procedures in connection with all of the City's
locally imposed and administered taxes.
SECTION 1-8-3 DEFINITIONS
Certain words or terms herein shall have the meaning ascribed to them as follows:
Act: means the "Local Government Taxpayers' Bill of Rights Act."
Corporate Authorities: means the City's Mayor and City Council.
Locally imposed and administered tax or tax: means each tax imposed by the City that is collected or
administered by the City not an agency or department of the State. It does not include any taxes imposed
upon real property under the Property Tax Code or fee collected by the City other than infrastructure
maintenance fees.
Local tax administrator: means the City Administrator who is charged with the administration and
collection of the locally imposed and administered taxes, including staff, employees or agents to the extent
they are authorized by the local tax administrator to act in the local tax administrator's stead. The local tax
administrator shall have the authority to implement the terms of this ordinance to give full effect to this
ordinance. This exercise of such authority by the local tax administrator shall not be inconsistent with this
ordinance and the Act. In the event the City Administrator cannot fulfill these duties, the City Treasurer
may temporarily fulfill the local tax administrator's duties.
City: means the City of West Peoria, Illinois.
Notice: means each audit notice, collection notice or other similar notice or communication in connection
with each of the City's locally imposed and administered taxes.
Tax Ordinance: means each ordinance adopted by the City that imposes any locally imposed and
administered tax.
Taxpayer: means any person required to pay any locally imposed and administered tax and generally
includes the person upon whom the legal incidence of such tax is placed and with respect to consumer taxes
includes the business or entity required to collect and pay the locally imposed and administered tax to the
City.
SECTION 1-8-4 NOTICES
Unless otherwise provided, whenever notice is required to be given, the notice is to be in writing mailed
not less than seven (7) calendar days prior to the day fixed for any applicable hearing, audit or other
scheduled act of the local tax administrator. The notice shall be sent by the local tax administrator as
follows:
A. First class or express mail, or overnight mail, addressed to the persons concerned at the persons'
last known address, or
B. Personal service or delivery.
SECTION 1-8-5 LATE PAYMENT
Any notice, payment, remittance or other filing required to be made to the City pursuant to any tax ordinance
shall be considered late unless it is (a) physically received by the City on or before the due date, or (b)
received in an envelope or other container displaying a valid, readable U.S. Postmark dated on or before
the due date, properly addressed to the City, with adequate postage prepaid.
SECTION 1-8-6 PAYMENT
Any payment or remittance received for a tax period shall be applied in the following order:
A. First to the tax due for the applicable period;
B. Second to the interest due for the applicable period; and
C. Third to the penalty for the applicable period.
SECTION 1-8-7 CERTAIN CREDITS AND REFUNDS
A. The City shall not refund or credit taxes voluntarily paid without written protest at the time of
payment in the event that a locally imposed and administered tax is declared invalidly enacted or
unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction. However, a taxpayer shall not be deemed to
have paid the tax voluntarily if the taxpayer lacked knowledge of the facts upon which to protest
the taxes at the time of payment or if the taxpayer paid the taxes under duress.
B. The statute of limitations on a claim for credit or refund shall be four (4) years after the end of the
calendar year in which payment in error was made. The City shall not grant a credit or refund of
locally imposed and administered taxes, interest or penalties to a person who has not paid the
amounts directly to the City.
C. The procedure for claiming a credit or refund of locally imposed and administered taxes, interest
or penalties paid in error shall be as follows:
D. The taxpayer shall submit to the local tax administrator in writing a claim for credit or refund
together with a statement specifying:
E. The name of the locally imposed and administered tax subject to the claim;
F. The tax period for the locally imposed and administered tax subject to the claim;
G. The date of the tax payment subject to the claim and the cancelled check or receipt for the payment;
H. The taxpayer's recalculation, accompanied by an amended or revised tax return, in connection with
the claim; and
I. A request for either a refund or a credit in connection with the claim to be applied to the amount of
tax, interest and penalties overpaid, and, as applicable, related interest on the amount overpaid;
provided, however, that there shall be no refund and only a credit given in the event the taxpayer
owes any monies to the City.
J. Within ten (10) days of the receipt of the local tax administrator of any claim for a refund or credit,
the local tax administrator shall either:
K. Grant the claim, or
L. Deny the claim, in whole or in part, together with a statement as to there reason for the denial or
the partial grant and denial.
M. In the event the local tax administrator grants, in whole or in part, a claim for refund or credit, the
amount of the grant for refund or credit shall bear interest at the rate of five percent (5%) per annum,
based on a year of three hundred sixty-five (365) days and the number of days elapsed, from the
date of the overpayment to the date of mailing of a refund check or the grant of a credit.
SECTION 1-8-8 AUDIT PROCEDURE
Any request for proposed audit pursuant to any local administered tax shall comply with the notice
requirements of this ordinance.
A. Each notice of audit shall contain the following information:
B. The tax;
C. The time period of the audit; and
D. A brief description of the books and records to be made for the auditor.
E. Any audit shall be conducted during normal business hours and if the date and time selected by the
local tax administrator is not agreeable to the taxpayer, another date and time may be requested by
the taxpayer within thirty (30) days after the originally designated audit and during normal business
hours.
F. The taxpayer may request an extension of time to have an audit conducted. The audit shall be
conducted not less than seven (7) days nor more than thirty (30) days from the date the notice was
given, unless the taxpayer and the local tax administrator agreed to some other convenient time. In
the event taxpayer is unable to comply with the audit on the date in question, the taxpayer may
request another date within the thirty (30) days, approved in writing, that is convenient to the
taxpayer and the local tax administrator.
G. Every taxpayer shall keep accurate books and records of the taxpayer's business or activities,
including original source documents and books of entry denoting the transaction which had given
rise or may have given rise to any tax liability, exemption or deduction. All books shall be kept in
the English language and shall be subject to and available for inspection by the City.
H. It is the duty and responsibility of every taxpayer to make available its books and records for
inspection by the City. If the taxpayer or tax collector fails to provide the documents necessary for
audit within the time provided, the local tax administrator may issue a tax determination and
assessment based on the tax administrator's determination of the best estimate of the taxpayer's tax
liability.
I. If an audit determines there has been an overpayment of a locally imposed and administered tax as
a result of the audit, written notice of the amount of overpayment shall be given to the taxpayer
within thirty (30) days of the City's determination of the amount of overpayment.
J. In the event a tax payment was submitted to the incorrect local government entity, the local tax
administrator shall notify the local government entity imposing such tax.
SECTION 1-8-9 APPEAL
A. The local tax administrator shall send written notice to a taxpayer upon the local tax administrator's
issuance of a protestable notice of tax due, a bill, a claim denial, or a notice of claim reduction
regarding any tax. The notice shall include the following information:
B. The reason for the assessment;
C. The amount of the tax liability proposed;
D. The procedure for appealing the assessment; and
E. The obligations of the City during the audit, appeal, refund and collection.
F. A taxpayer who receives written notice from the local tax administrator of a determination of tax
due or assessment may file with the local tax administrator a written protest and petition for hearing,
setting forth the basis of the taxpayer's request for a hearing. The written protest and petition for
hearing must be filed with the local tax administrator within forty-five (45) days of receipt of the
written notice of the determination and assessment.
G. If a timely written notice and petition for hearing is filed, the local tax administrator shall fix the
time and place for hearing and shall give written notice to the taxpayer. The hearing shall be
scheduled for a date within fourteen (14) days of receipt of the written protest and petition for
hearing, unless the taxpayer requests a later date convenient to all parties.
H. If a written protest and petition for hearing is not filed within the forty-five (45) day period, the tax
determination, audit or assessment shall become a final bill and owing without further notice.
I. Upon the showing of reasonable cause by the taxpayer and the full payment of the contested tax
liability along with interest accrued as of the date of the tax, the local tax administrator may reopen
or extend the time for filing a written protest and petition for hearing. In no event shall the time for
filing a written protest and petition for hearing be reopened or extended for more than ninety (90)
days after the expiration of the forty-five (45) day period.
SECTION 1-8-10 HEARING
A. Whenever a taxpayer or a tax collector has filed a timely written protest and petition for hearing
under section nine, above, the local tax administrator shall conduct a hearing regarding any appeal.
B. No continuances shall be granted except in cases where a continuance is absolutely necessary to
protect the rights of the taxpayer. Lack of preparation shall not be grounds for a continuance. Any
continuance granted shall not exceed fourteen (14) days.
C. At the hearing the local tax administrator shall preside and shall hear testimony and accept any
evidence relevant to the tax determination, audit or assessment. The strict rules of evidence
applicable to judicial proceedings shall not apply.
D. At the conclusion of the hearing, the local tax administrator shall make a written determination on
the basis of the evidence presented at the hearing. The taxpayer or tax collector shall be provided
with a copy of the written decision.
SECTION 1-8-11 INTEREST AND PENALTIES
In the event a determination has been made that a tax is due and owing, through audit, assessment or other
bill sent, the tax must be paid within the time frame otherwise indicated.
A. Interest. The City hereby provides for the amount of interest to be assessed on a late payment,
underpayment, or nonpayment of the tax, to be ten percent (10%) per annum, based on a year of
three hundred sixty-five (365) days and the number of days elapsed.
B. Late Filing and Payment Penalties. If a tax return is not filed within the time and manner provided
by the controlling tax ordinance, a late filing penalty, of five percent (5%) of the amount of tax
required to be shown as due on a return shall be imposed; and a late payment penalty of five percent
(5%) of the tax due shall be imposed. If no return is filed within the time or manner provided by
the controlling tax ordinance and prior to the City issuing a notice of tax delinquency or notice of
tax liability, then a failure to file penalty shall be assessed equal to twenty-five percent (25%) of
the total tax due for the applicable reporting period for which the return was required to be filed.
A late filing or payment penalty shall not apply if a failure to file penalty is imposed by the
controlling ordinance.
SECTION 1-8-12 ABATEMENT
The local tax administrator shall have the authority to waive or abate any late filing penalty, late payment
penalty or failure to file penalty if the local tax administrator shall determine reasonable cause exists for
delay or failure to make a filing.
SECTION 1-8-13 INSTALLMENT CONTRACT
If allowed by then current State law, the City may enter into an installment contract with the taxpayer for
the payment of taxes under the controlling tax ordinance. The local tax administrator may not cancel any
installment contract so entered. Unless the taxpayer fails to pay any amount due and owing. Upon written
notice by the local tax administrator that the payment is thirty (30) days delinquent, the taxpayer shall have
fourteen (14) working days to cure any delinquency. If the taxpayer fails to cure the delinquency within the
fourteen (14) day period or fails to demonstrate good faith in restructuring the installment contract with the
local tax administrator, the installment contract shall be cancelled without further notice to the taxpayer.
SECTION 1-8-14 STATUTE OF LIMITATION
The City, through the local tax administrator, shall review all returns in a prompt and timely manner and
inform taxpayers of any amounts due and owing. The taxpayer shall have forty-five (45) days after receiving
notice of the reviewed tax returns to make any request for refunds or provide any tax still due and owing.
A. No determination of tax due and owing may be issued more than four (4) years after the end of the
calendar year for which the return for the applicable period was filed or for the calendar year in
which the return for the applicable period was due, whichever occurs later.
B. If any tax return is not filed or if during any four (4) year period for which a notice of tax
determination or assessment may be issued by the City, the tax paid was less than seventy-five
percent (75%) of the tax due, the statute of limitations shall be six (6) years maximum after the end
of the calendar year in which return for the applicable period was due or end of the calendar year
in which the return for the applicable period was filed.
C. No statute of limitations shall apply if a fraudulent tax return was filed by the taxpayer.
SECTION 1-8-15 VOLUNTARY DISCLOSURE
For any locally imposed and administered tax for which a taxpayer has not received a written notice of an
audit, investigation, or assessment from the local tax administrator, a taxpayer is entitled to file an
application with the local tax administrator for a voluntary disclosure of the tax due. A taxpayer filing a
voluntary disclosure application must agree to pay the amount of tax due, along with interest of one percent
(1%) per month, for all periods prior to the filing of the application but not more than four (4) years before
the date of filing the application. A taxpayer filing a valid voluntary disclosure application may not be liable
for any additional tax, interest, or penalty for any period before the date the application was filed. However,
if the taxpayer incorrectly determined and underpaid the amount of tax due, the taxpayer is liable for the
underpaid tax along with applicable interest on the underpaid tax, unless the underpayment was the result
of fraud on the part of the taxpayer, in which case the application shall be deemed invalid and void. The
payment of tax and interest must be made by no later than ninety (90) days after the filing of the voluntary
disclosure application or the date agreed to by the local tax administrator. However, any additional amounts
owed as a result of an underpayment of tax and interest previously paid under this Section must be paid
within ninety (90) days after a final determination and the exhaustion of all appeals of the additional amount
owed or the date agreed to by the local tax administrator, whichever is longer.
SECTION 1-8-16 PUBLICATION OF TAX ORDINANCES
Any locally administered tax ordinance shall be published via normal or standard publishing requirements.
The posting of a tax ordinance on the Internet shall also satisfy the publication requirements. Copies of all
tax ordinances shall be made available to the public upon request at the City Clerk's office.
SECTION 1-8-17 INTERNAL REVIEW PROCEDURE OF LIENS
The local tax administrator shall establish an internal review procedure regarding any liens filed against
any taxpayers for unpaid taxes. Upon a determination by the local tax administrator that the lien is valid,
the lien shall remain in full force and effect. If the lien is determined to be improper, the local tax
administrator shall:
A. Timely remove the lien at the City's expense;
B. Correct the taxpayer's credit record; and
C. Correct any public disclosure of the improperly imposed lien.
SECTION 1-8-18 APPLICATION
This ordinance shall be liberally construed and administered to supplement all of the City's tax ordinances.
To the extent that any tax ordinance is in conflict with or inconsistent with this ordinance, this ordinance
shall be controlling. (Ord. 2001-01)
TITLE 1 ADMINISTRATION
CHAPTER 9 COMPENSATION OF OFFICERS
1-9-1 Annual Compensation
SECTION 1-9-1 ANNUAL COMPENSATION
Annual compensation for each fiscal year for the following West Peoria Officers shall be set as follows:
Mayor & Liquor Commissioner: $ 9,000.00 (Ord. 2002-17)
City Clerk: $ 12,500.00
Treasurer: $ 3,600.00 (Ord. 1995-05)
Alderman: $ 1,200.00 (Ord. 2002-17)
TITLE 1 ADMINISTRATION
CHAPTER 10 BIDDERS
1-10-1 RESPONSIBLE BIDDER
SECTION 1-10-1 DEFINITION
Responsible bidder: for construction contracts means a bidder who meets all of the job specifications, the
following applicable criteria, and can submit evidence of such compliance:
A. All applicable laws prerequisite to doing business in Illinois.
B. Evidence of compliance with
C. Federal Employer Tax Identification Number or Social Security Number (for individuals).
D. Provisions of Section 2000 (e) of Chapter 21, Title 42 of the United States Code and Federal
Executive Order No. 11246 as amended by Executive Order No. 11375 (known as the Equal
Opportunity Employer provisions).
E. Certificates of insurance indicating the following coverage: general, liability, worker’s
compensation, completed operations, automobile, hazardous occupation, products liability and
professional liability.
F. Compliance with all provisions of the Illinois Prevailing Wage Act for those trades covered in the
Act.
G. Participation in apprenticeship or training programs approved and registered with the United States
Department of Labor’s Bureau of Apprenticeship and Training. (Ord. 2011-11)
H. Agrees it will and also require its sub-contractors to turn in certified payroll on a weekly basis.
TITLE 2 – ZONING
TITLE 2: ZONING
CHAPTER 1 - TITLE, INTENT, STANDARDS AND OBJECTIVES
CHAPTER 2 - GENERAL PROVISIONS
CHAPTER 3 - ZONING DISTRICTS
CHAPTER 4 - CONSERVATION OVERLAY DISTRICT
CHAPTER 5 - RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
CHAPTER 6 - BUSINESS DISTRICTS
CHAPTER 7 - INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
CHAPTER 8 - NONCONFORMING USES
CHAPTER 9 - SIGN TITLES
CHAPTER 10 - OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING
CHAPTER 11 - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
CHAPTER 12 - DEFINITIONS
CHAPTER 13 - PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT [SPECIAL USE]
TITLE 2 – ZONING
Page 1
TITLE 2 ZONING
CHAPTER 1 TITLE, INTENT, STANDARDS AND OBJECTIVES
2-1-1 Title
2-1-2 Intent and Purpose
SECTION 2-1-1 TITLE
This Title shall be known, cited and referred to as “The Zoning Ordinance for the City of West Peoria,
Illinois.”
SECTION 2-1-2 INTENT AND PURPOSE
Purpose of this Title
Promoting and protecting the public health, safety, comfort, convenience, prosperity,
morals and general welfare of the people.
Securing adequate light, pure air, safety from fire and other dangers.
Conserving the taxable value of land and buildings throughout the City.
Avoiding or lessening the hazard to persons and damage to property resulting from the
accumulation or runoff of storm or floodwaters.
Insuring the preservation of sites, areas, and structures of historical, architectural, and
aesthetic importance.
Standards and Objectives to be Accomplished by this Title:
Organizing the City into districts regulating and restricting therein the location,
construction, reconstruction, alteration and use of any buildings, structures or land, whether
for residence, office, business, manufacturing or other specific uses.
Regulating and limiting the height and bulk of buildings and other structures.
Establishing, regulating and limiting the building or setback lines along streets, alleys,
property lines, storm or floodwater runoff channel.
Regulating and limiting the intensity of the use of the lot area and determining the area of
open spaces within and surrounding such buildings.
Regulating the size, type and location of signs.
Requiring accessory off-street parking and loading facilities.
Defining and limiting the powers and duties of the administrative officers and bodies as
provided herein.
Providing for the change and amendment of such Titles and boundaries of the respective
districts.
Prescribing penalties for the violation of the provisions of this Title or of any amendment
thereto.
TITLE 2 – ZONING
Page 2
TITLE 2 ZONING
CHAPTER 2 GENERAL PROVISIONS
2-2-1 Allowable Use of Land or Buildings
2-2-2 Control Over Use
2-2-3 Control Over Bulk
2-2-4 Accessory Buildings, Structures and use
2-2-5 Yards, General
2-2-6 Obstructions to Sight Visibility Near Street intersections
2-2-7 Permitted Obstructions in Required yards
2-2-8 Required Yards for Lots Adjoining Residential Districts
2-2-9 Landscaped Buffers or Screening Required for Lots Between Certain Zoning Districts
2-2-10 Fences
2-2-11 Satellite Dish Antennas
2-2-12 Flood Plain Area
2-2-13 Annexation; Procedure for Zoning
2-2-14 Exceptions
2-2-15 Incorporation of Zoning Map
2-2-16 Separability
SECTION 2-2-1 ALLOWABLE USE OF LAND OR BUILDINGS
The following uses of land or buildings listed below are allowable in the district indicated hereinafter of
this Title under the conditions specified.
A. Uses lawfully established on the effective date hereof.
B. Permitted uses as designated in the Titles for each district.
C. Special uses as designated in the Titles for each district.
Uses for which application for development approval has been applied for under the Peoria County
Zoning Ordinance prior to the adoption of this ordinance providing that the permit, variances, or
special uses are approved, and that such construction is initiated within six (6) months of such
approval and is diligently pursued to completion. See Title 11, Fee Schedule.
SECTION 2-2-2 INTENT AND PURPOSE
In all districts, after the effective date hereof, and subject to the provisions as set out in Chapter 8 of this
Title on non-conforming uses:
A. Any tract of land may be used.
B. Any lawfully existing or new building or other structure may be used; relocated, enlarged,
converted, extended, reconstructed, or altered within the limits set forth below.
C. The use of any lawfully established existing building or other structure, or tract of land may be
continued, changed, extended, or enlarged.
The above shall apply for any use or special use allowed by the Titles for the district in which such building
or other structure, or tract of land is located, and for no other purpose, and shall conform to all other Titles
set forth in the Titles for the district, and in all other applicable Titles contained herein.
TITLE 2 – ZONING
Page 3
SECTION 2-2-3 CONTROL OVER BULK
All new buildings shall conform to the Titles established herein for the district in which each building is
located. Further, no existing buildings shall be enlarged, reconstructed, structurally altered, converted or
relocated in such manner as to conflict, or further conflict, with the bulk Titles of this Title for the district
in which such building shall be located.
SECTION 2-2-4 ACCESSORY BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES AND USES
Accessory buildings, structures and uses shall be compatible with the principal uses and shall not be
established prior to the establishment of the principal use.
SECTION 2-2-5 YARDS, GENERAL
A. All yards and other open spaces allocated to a building (or group of buildings comprising one
principal use) shall be located on the same lot as such building or buildings). Maintaining the
required spaces for yards, other open space and minimum lot area legally required for a building
shall be a continuing obligation of the owner of such building or of the property on which it is
located, as long as the building is in existence. Furthermore, no legally required yards, other open
space, or minimum lot area allocated to any building shall, by virtue of change of ownership or for
any other reason, be used to satisfy yard, other open space or minimum lot area requirements for
any other building.
B. No improved lot shall hereafter be divided into two (2) or more lots and no portion of any improved
lot shall be sold, unless all improved lots resulting from each such subdivision or sale shall conform
with all the applicable bulk Titles of the zoning district in which the property is located.
C. No yards, now or hereafter provided for a building existing on the effective date of this Title, shall
subsequently be reduced below, or further reduced if already less than minimum yard requirements
of this Title for equivalent new construction.
SECTION 2-2-6 OBSTRUCTIONS TO SIGHT VISIBILITY NEAR STREET INTERSECTIONS
No obstructions to sight visibility shall be permitted within twenty (20) feet of a zoning lot corner formed
by the intersection of any two (2) street lines except for obstructions of less than three (3) feet in height or
for those obstructions greater than three (3) feet in height, that portion of the obstruction between three (3)
feet and ten (10) feet in height shall be no greater than fourteen (14) inches in diameter.
SECTION 2-2-7 PERMITTED OBSTRUCTIONS IN REQUIRED YARDS
The following shall not be considered obstructions when located within a required yard. In no case shall
the following list of permitted obstructions in yards validate permanent construction where otherwise
prohibited:
A. In any yard.
Air conditioning unit.
Arbor or trellises.
Chimneys projecting not more than two (2) feet into the yards.
Decorative lawn ornaments and garden furniture.
Fences complying with Chapter 2, Section 2-2-10.
Flagpoles, not exceeding thirty-five (35) feet in height.
Open porches and decks, not roofed (including railings not more than thirty-eight (38)
inches in height) provided no closer than ten (10) feet to the front lot line, eight (8) feet to
the side lot line or ten (10) feet to the rear lot line where no rear alley exists or no closer
than three (3) feet to the rear lot line where a rear alley exists.
TITLE 2 – ZONING
Page 4
Ornamental light standards not over nine (9) feet in height.
Outdoor coin telephones and telephone booths (where permitted).
Signs in conformance with Chapter 9 of this Title.
Steps.
Terraces.
Trees and shrubs.
Accent walls as an extension of a building, not exceeding three (3) feet in height.
B. In any rear yard.
Accessory non-commercial greenhouses, provided not over one hundred fifty (150) square
feet.
Accessory off-street parking space or open or enclosed garage. (Ord. 1997-11)
Single accessory shed, tool room, or other similar building or structure for domestic or
agricultural storage provided not over one hundred fifty (150) square feet and not more
than fifteen (15) feet in height and no closer than five (5) feet to the rear lot line where no
alley exists or three (3) feet to the rear lot line where a rear alley exists. Nothing in the
West Peoria Zoning regulations, as amended from time to time, is intended to apply to
buildings or structures that are less than twenty-five (25) square feet in floor area and less
than five (5) feet in height. (Ord. 2000-22)
Children’s play equipment.
Recreational or drying clothes yard equipment.
Satellite dish antennas meeting the requirements of Chapter 2, Section 11 of this Title.
Swimming pools, private.
Television antennas.
(Ord. 1996-3, 1997-11, 2000-22)
C. In any front yard.
Driveways leading to garages or accessory off-street parking spaces located beyond the
required front yard.
Parking for single family or duplex residence on a driveway leading directly to a garage or
other approved accessory off-street parking spaces.
D. In any side yards.
Non-commercial radio and television towers and antennas.
Open accessory off-street parking spaces, not including garages or carports.
Satellite dish antennas meeting the requirements of Chapter 2, Section 2-2-11 of this Title.
SECTION 2-2-8 REQUIRED YARDS FOR LOTS ADJOINING RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
A. In any commercial or industrial district, where a side lot line coincides with a side lot line or rear
lot in an adjacent residential district, a side yard shall be provided with at least the width set forth
in the following table, and in any commercial or industrial district where a rear lot line coincides
with a side lot line or rear lot line in an adjacent residential district, a rear yard shall be provided
with at least the depth set forth in the following table:
District Minimum Width of Side Yard (in feet) Minimum Depth of Rear Yard (in feet)
B-1 10 25
B-2 10 25
I-1 20 30
I-2 20 30
B. No yard required by this section shall be used for storage or processing of any kind. No side yard
required by this section shall be used for accessory off-street loading.
TITLE 2 – ZONING
Page 5
SECTION 2-2-9 LANDSCAPED BUFFERS OR SCREENING REQUIRED FOR LOTS
BETWEEN CERTAIN ZONING DISTRICTS
Newly established industrial uses adjacent or backing on residential or business districts, or newly
established business uses adjacent or backing on residential districts, or newly established multi-family uses
adjacent or backing on single-family uses, shall provide and continuously maintain parallel to and the
following distance within that property line a dense hedge, tree row or other similar landscape device
suitable to visually screen the differing types of adjacent uses from one another. Failure to maintain
landscaped buffers or screening shall be considered a violation of this ordinance.
Plant materials for landscaped screening shall be of general type and size at the time of planting as follows.
Where landscape screening is required, a plan shall be provided at the time of submission of the application
for zoning permit indicating the type, size, location and spacing of plant materials to form the landscape
screen.
Evergreen Trees: Juniper, Fir, Spruce, Pine, Douglas-Fir.
At time of planting, Evergreen trees shall be a minimum of five feet (5’) in height with twenty foot
(20’) spacing and planted ten feet (10’) within the property line.
Narrow Evergreen Trees: Columnar Hinoki Cypress, Pyramidal Red-Cedar, Pyramidal White Pine,
Douglas Arbor-Vitae, Columnar, Juniper, Swiss Stone Pine, Hatfield or Hicks Yews, Columnar
Giant, Arbor Vitae.
At time of planting, Narrow Evergreens shall be a minimum of three feet (3’) in height with six
foot (6’) spacing and planted three feet (3’) within the property line.
Small Trees: Flowering Crab, Redbud, Hornbeam, Magnolia, Dogwood, Hawthorn, Hop
Hornbeam.
At time of planting, Small Trees shall be a minimum of four feet (4’) in height with ten feet (10’)
spacing and planted five feet (5’) within the property line.
Large Deciduous Shrubs: Honeysuckle, Mock-Orange, Lilac, Cotton-Easter, Euonymus,
Viburnum, Forsythia, Rose of Sharon, Privet, Sumac.
At the time of planting, Large Deciduous Shrubs shall be a minimum of five feet (5’) in height with
five foot (5') spacing and planted two and one-half feet (2 ½’) within the property line.
Large Deciduous Trees: Oak, Hackberry, Planetree (Sycamore), Ginkgo, Linden, Hard Maple,
Birch, Beech, Honeylocust.
At the time of planting, Large Deciduous Trees shall be a minimum of eight feet (8’) in height with
thirty foot (30’) spacing and planted fifteen feet (15’) within the property line.
Privacy fences not exceeding six (6) feet in height are permitted in the required side and rear yards
as a buffer between certain zoning districts (Ord.2019-40)
SECTION 2-2-10 FENCE REQUIREMENTS
Fence Requirements in Residential Districts:
No person shall construct or erect a fence within the City without first having received a permit
from the Zoning Officer. Applications for a fence permit shall be submitted with the appropriate
fee to the Zoning Officer. No fence or fences may be constructed or erected which do not comply
with the following (see Exhibit A for more help):
Front yard fences on interior and corner lots: Ornamental fences at least fifty percent (50%)
open and not exceeding four (4) feet in height are permitted in front yards. Privacy fences
TITLE 2 – ZONING
Page 6
are not permitted in front yards. Chain link fences are prohibited in the front yard of any
lot. (Ord. 2001-04)
Side yard and rear yard fences on interior lots: Ornamental, chain link and privacy fences
not exceeding six (6) feet in height are permitted in the side and rear yards of interior lots.
Side yard fences on and fences at the rear of corner lots: Ornamental and privacy fences
are permitted on corner lots provided they meet the following criteria:
a) When the fence is adjacent to an intersection of a street and/or alley, the triangle
bounded on two (2) sides by the intersecting property lines, measured ten (10) feet
in each direction from their point of intersection and on the third side by the
diagonal line connecting the ends of the ten (10) foot sides must be maintained for
visibility purposes.
b) When the fence is next to an alley, it must be erected within the property
boundaries.
c) Privacy fences may not be constructed or erected beyond the front line of the
principal structure and /or of the adjacent property front line.
Fences to contain no dangerous materials: No fence may be constructed with or contain
barbed wire, metal spikes (not to include wrought iron), or any other sharp pointed
materials. Chain link fences shall be constructed with the barb portion of the fence at the
bottom of the fence. No fence may be electrified.
Miscellaneous:
a) The unfinished or rough side of all fences, as well as all posts, must face the interior
side of the lot.
b) Maintenance of fences is the responsibility of the property owner.
c) Fences must be constructed of standard commercial materials intended for fences.
Fence Requirements in Business and Industrial Districts:
No person shall construct or erect a fence within the City without first having received a permit
from the Zoning Officer. Applications for a fence permit shall be submitted with the appropriate
fee to the Zoning Officer. No fence or fences may be constructed or erected which do not comply
with the following (see Exhibit A for more help):
Front and side Yard Fences on Interior and Corner Lots, Rear Lot Fences: Ornamental
fences at least fifty percent (50%) open and no more than four (4) feet in height are
permitted in the required front yards of business and industrial lots. Privacy fences are
permitted on the side street side of a corner lot provided they comply with the required
yards or if no yards are required, the required street setback. Interior lot line side yard
fences and rear yard fences may be constructed within the required yards. Chain link fences
are prohibited in the front yard of any lot. (Ord. 2001-04)
Fence height: No fence may exceed eight (8) feet in height.
Sharp Materials on Fences to be Six (6) Feet Above Ground: No fence may be constructed
with barbed wire, metal spikes, or any other sharp pointed materials within the B-1 and B-
1-O District, or if within the B-2 or I-Industrial District, unless the sharp pointed materials
are at least six (6) feet, but not more than eight (8) feet above ground and permitted by
Variance. (Ord 2002-09)
When the fence is adjacent to an intersection of a street and/or alley, the triangle bounded
on two (2) sides by the intersecting property lines, measured ten (10) feet in each direction
from their point of intersection and on the third side by the diagonal line connecting the
ends of the ten (10) foot sides must be maintained for visibility purposes.
Variations of Fence Requirements: Application for a variation of the above provisions shall be
made in the same manner as provided for other variations of this Title.
Sports and Recreational Fencing: Fences erected for purposes of providing fencing around sports
or recreation facilities or areas as listed below shall be subject to the height limitations indicated
below provided the fence is seventy-five percent (75%) open and that the fence is not within twenty
TITLE 2 – ZONING
Page 7
(20) feet of a zoning lot corner formed by the intersection of any two (2) street lines.
(Ord. 1996-03, 2001-04, 2019-40)
Uses Maximum Height (feet)
Tennis Courts (public or private) 12
Baseball diamond Backstop (public or private 16
Swimming Pool (public) 8
School Recreation and Sports Areas (public or private) 8
EXHIBIT A.
SECTION 2-2-11 SATELLITE DISH ANTENNAS
A. Certain satellite dish antennas exempt from Title: Satellite dish antennas of less than thirty (30)
inches in diameter and attached to the primary structure are exempt from Title.
B. In any Residential Zoning district, ground-mounted satellite dish antennas up to twelve (12) feet in
diameter may be permitted subject to the following criteria:
All installations may be located within the buildable area of the lot, or as a permitted
obstruction in side or rear yards according to Chapter 2, Section 2-2-7 of this Title.
All possible effort shall be made in setting location of antennas to prevent obstruction of
the antenna’s reception window from potential permitted development on adjoining
properties.
(Ord.2019-40)
TITLE 2 – ZONING
Page 8
All installations shall employ (to the extent possible) materials and colors that blend with
the surroundings.
All installations shall include landscape screening treatments located along the antenna’s
non-reception window axes and low-level ornamental landscape treatments along the
reception window axes of the antenna’s base. Such treatments shall completely enclose
the antenna.
C. In any Residential zoning district, roof-mounted satellite dish antenna up to twelve (12) feet in
diameter may be permitted by special use, subject to the following criteria:
Demonstration by the applicant that compliance with Chapter 2, Section 2-2-11 (B) 1 and
2-2-11 (B) 2 of this Title would result in the obstruction of the antenna’s reception window;
furthermore, such obstruction involves factors beyond the control of the applicant.
The height of the proposed installation does not exceed the maximum height restriction
imposed upon primary uses within the district.
D. In any Business or Industrial zoning district, ground-mounted satellite dish antennas may be
permitted subject to the following criteria:
All installations shall comply with the maximum height restrictions imposed upon primary
uses.
All installations exceeding twelve (12) feet in diameter shall be screened with landscape
screening from any adjoining residentially zoned land. Such screening can be waived if
the antenna is set back a distance at least five (5) times its diameter from the residentially
zoned parcel.
All accessory-use installations may be located as a permitted obstruction to any required
yard as indicated in Chapter 2, Section 7 of this Title.
E. In any Business or Industrial zoning district, roof-mounted satellite dish antennas up to twelve (12)
feet in diameter may be permitted by special use subject to the following criteria:
Demonstration by the applicant that compliance with the applicable yard, setback, and
height restrictions would result in the obstruction of the antenna’s reception window;
furthermore, such obstruction involves factors beyond the applicant’s control.
The height of the proposed installation does not exceed the maximum height restriction
imposed for primary uses within the district.
Those criteria relating to all special uses listed in Chapter 11 of this Title shall apply.
SECTION 2-2-12 FLOOD PLAIN AREA
No building or structure shall be erected nor fill placed in locations which violates any flood plain-ordinance
restrictions for that area.
SECTION 2-2-13 ANNEXATIONS; PROCEDURE FOR ZONING
Any land which may hereafter become a part of the City of West Peoria as a result of annexation shall be
classified and placed in the R-1 Zoning District unless the petition for annexation is accompanied by a
petition for reclassification or a pre-annexation agreement in which case the regular procedures for public
hearing and approval of zoning amendments shall be followed.
SECTION 2-2-14 EXCEPTIONS TO USE AND HEIGHT TITLES
A. Exception to use Titles: The following uses are exempted by this Title and permitted by easement
in any district: Poles, wires, cables, conduits, vaults, laterals, pipes, mains, valves or any other
similar distributing equipment for telephone or other communication and electric power, gas, water
and sewer lines.
TITLE 2 – ZONING
Page 8-1
B. Exceptions to height Titles: The height limitations of this Title shall not apply to the following
structures: Cooling towers, church spires, belfries, cupolas, elevator bulkheads and domes not
intended for human occupancy; monuments, water towers, derricks, and conveyors.
SECTION 2-2-15 INCORPORATION OF ZONING MAP
The location and boundaries of the districts established by this Title are set forth on the map “City of West
Peoria Zoning Districts,” which is hereby incorporated as part of this Title by reference. The Zoning Map,
including all amendments thereto, shall be as much a part of this Title as if fully set forth and described
herein. Said Map shall be filed with the office of the City Clerk and shall be made available for public
reference at all times during which those offices are open.
SECTION 2-2-16 SEPARABILITY
It is hereby declared to be the legislative intent that, if any of the provisions of this Title, or the application
thereof to any lot, building or structure or tract of land, are declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to
be invalid or ineffective in whole or in part, or to be inapplicable to any person or situation, the effect of
such decision shall be limited to the provision or provisions which are expressly stated in the decision to be
invalid or ineffective, or to the lot, building or other structure or tract of land immediately involved in the
controversy. All other provisions of this Title shall continue to be separately and fully effective, and the
application of any such provision to other persons or situations shall not be affected.
TITLE 2 – ZONING
Page 9
TITLE 2 ZONING
CHAPTER 3 ZONING DISTRICTS
2-3-1 Establishment of Districts
2-3-2 Zoning Map
2-3-3 Zoning of Streets, Alleys, Public Ways
2-3-4 Interpretation of Zoning Boundaries
SECTION 2-3-1 ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS
In order to carry out the process of this title, the following zoning districts are hereby established:
C-O Conservation Overlay District
R-1 Medium Density Residential District
R-2 Multi-Family Residential District
A-1 Agricultural District
B-1 General Business District
B-1-O General Business Overlay District
B-2 Highway and Service Business District
I-1 Light Industrial District
I-2 Heavy Industrial District
SECTION 2-3-2 ZONING MAP
The location and boundaries of such districts established by this Title are shown on the City of West Peoria,
Illinois Zoning District Map, a copy of which is on file at the City Clerk’s office.
SECTION 2-3-3 ZONING OF STREETS, ALLEYS, PUBLIC WAYS
Unless otherwise specified, all streets, alleys, and public ways shall be considered as being in the same
zoning district as is abutting land. If a street, alley or public way which has served as the zoning line shall
be vacated, such zoning boundary shall remain in the center of the vacation.
SECTION 2-3-4 INTERPRETATION OF ZONING BOUNDARY LINES
Where uncertainty arises as to the location of zoning district lines, as indicated on the zoning maps, the
following shall apply:
A. Zoning district lines generally following streets, alleys or public ways shall be construed as being
on the centerline of such ways unless otherwise indicated.
B. Zoning lines generally following lot lines shall be construed as being located on lot lines.
C. Zoning district lines generally following City Limit lines shall be construed as the City Limit Line.
D. Zoning district lines generally following streams or watercourse shall be construed as the centerline
of that stream or watercourse.
E. When a subdivided lot held in single ownership and being a lot of record of the date of adoption of
this Title is indicated as being divided by a zoning boundary, the entirety of such lot shall be in the
district with the most intensive permitted types of uses. The order of intensity of types of permitted
uses from the least intensive to the most intensive shall be in the same order as indicated in Chapter
2-3-1 of this Title.
TITLE 2 – ZONING
Page 10
F. Where unsubdivided property is indicated as being divided by a zoning boundary, the actual
location of the boundary shall be determined by use of the scale contained on the map, or where
dimensions are indicated by such dimensions.
G. Where physical or natural features at the site are at variance with the zoning map, or in cases where
the location of the zoning district line is not clarified by the foregoing, the Board of Appeals shall
interpret the location of the zoning district line.
TITLE 2 – ZONING
Page 11
TITLE 2 ZONING
CHAPTER 4 CONSERVATION OVERLAY DISTRICT C-O
2-4-1: C-O Conservation Overlay District
SECTION 2-4-1: C-O CONSERVATION OVERLAY DISTRICT
The purpose of the C-O Conservation Overlay zone is designed to restrict development in areas of steep
slopes or floodways. A. Nature Woodland and Wildlife Preserve.
A. Permitted Uses:
Park and Recreational outdoor uses but not including permanent structures.
Accessory Uses.
B. Special Uses
Following are permitted as special uses subject to the public hearing and other special use procedure
requirements outlined in Chapter 11 of this Title.
Uses otherwise permitted in the underlying zoning districts as permitted uses or as special uses
subject to the public hearing and other special use procedures outlined in chapter 11 and the
following conditions.
Additional Standards For The Granting Of Special Use In The C-O Conservation Overlay Zone:
In addition to the standards for granting a special use outlined in Chapter 11 of this Title, the
following standards shall also be met and the applicant shall provide material demonstrating that:
The proposed use will not violate any existing flood plain ordinance;
That any proposed hillside use would be so designed to minimize erosion both during and after
construction. The applicant shall submit a detailed site development plan prepared by a
professional engineer showing proposed construction, grading plan, including walls and drainage
structures, and erosion control methods to be utilized, both during and after construction.
TITLE 2 – ZONING
Page 12
TITLE 2 ZONING
CHAPTER 5 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
2-5-1: R-1 Medium Density Residential District
2-5-2: R-2 Multi-Family Residential District
2-5-3: A-1 Agricultural District
SECTION 2-5-1: R-1 MEDIUM DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
The purpose of the R-1 Residential district is to accommodate single family and two (2) family residential
structures at a medium density.
A. Permitted Uses:
1. Single-family dwelling.
2. Two (2) family dwelling where one unit is occupied by the resident property owner.
3. Family care home.
4. Unrelated group family home.
5. Churches.
6. Day care center – resident occupied.
7. Day care home.
8. Governmental offices, police and fire stations, municipal buildings, and parking for these
facilities. (Ord. 1998-22)
9. Home occupation.
10. Public open space including customary public parks.
11. Schools, public, denominational, or private accommodating nursery, elementary, or high
school grades with adjacent playgrounds and athletic fields, dormitories, and other
accessory uses required for operations.
12. Temporary buildings or trailers at construction site but only during period of construction.
13. Temporary or off-seasonal outdoor storage of boats, campers, and other types of
recreational vehicles provided not in required side or front yard. Indoor storage of such
boats and recreational vehicles is unregulated provided other vehicles stored outdoors on
the lot do not exceed the maximum allowed per lot or dwelling unit as specified in Section
2-10-4 of this Title.
14. Accessory uses of buildings providing that where garages for one (1) and two (2) family
dwellings are separate from the residence structure the size of the accessory building is
limited to the floor area of the first floor of the residence structure of one thousand (1,000)
square feet, whichever is less.
Special Uses:
Following are permitted as special uses subject to the public hearing and other special use procedure
requirements outlined in Chapter 11 of this Title.
1. Bed and breakfast inns.
2. Boarding houses.
3. Colleges and universities.
4. Day care centers non-resident occupied.
5. Day care group homes.
6. Electric and telephone substations.
7. Filtration plants, sewage treatment plants, dumping stations, and water reservoirs.
8. Libraries.
9. Nurseries, not including greenhouses.
TITLE 2 – ZONING
Page 13
10. Public and private outdoor recreation centers including accessory buildings and structures
for administration, operation, and maintenance, and club house or pavilion facilities
including sale of food and soft drinks.
11. Seminaries, convents, monasteries, and similar religious institutions including dormitories
and other uses required for operation.
12. Offices of doctors, dentists, lawyers, accountants, and bookkeepers, tax preparers,
architects, engineers, and similar professionals.
13. Aluminum gutter and related products, assembly, sales and service; welding shops; indoor
storage; contractors’ offices; small engine repair shops or similar uses; provided that the
property was being used for one or more of the specified uses on and before March 1996.
(Ord. 2004-02)
14. Planned Unit Development, see Chapter 13 of this Title. (Ord. 2009-11)
Required Lot Area and Width:
All buildings erected or structurally enlarged in the R-1 Medium Density Residential District shall
have the following minimum lot areas and lot widths at the building line. Except, however, lots of
record as of the date of adoption of this ordinance may be utilized, although not meeting required
lot area and lot width.
1. Single-Family Dwellings on the Interior Lot – Lot area of not less than six thousand (6,000)
square feet and a minimum width at the building line of not less than sixty (60) feet.
2. Single-Family Dwelling on Corner Lot- Lot area of not less than eight thousand five
hundred (8,500) square feet and a minimum width at the building line of not less than
ninety (90) feet.
3. Two (2) Family Dwelling on Interior Lot –Lot area of not less than ten thousand (10,000)
square feet and a minimum width at the building line of not less than eighty (80) feet.
4. Two (2) Family Dwelling on Corner Lot – Lot area of not less than eleven thousand two
hundred fifty (11,250) square feet and a lot width of not less than one hundred (100) feet.
Required Yard Areas:
All buildings erected or structurally enlarged in the R-1 Medium Density Residential District shall
provide or maintain the following minimum yards.
For construction on developed lots:
1. Front yard - twenty-five (25) feet or the average setback of two (2) adjoining developed
lots.
2. Side yard.
a) Single-Family, Interior Lot –No single side yard less than three (3) feet.
b) Single-Family, Corner Lot –No single interior side yard less than three (3) feet.
For street side yard of a corner lot, a minimum side yard of twenty-five (25) feet.
c) Two (2) Family, Interior Lot –No single side yard less than three (3) feet.
d) Two (2) Family, Corner Lot –No single interior side yard less than three (3) feet.
For street side yard of a corner lot, a minimum side yard of twenty-five (25) feet.
3. Rear yard – three (3) feet. (Ord. 1997-10)
For construction on undeveloped lots:
1. Front yard: Twenty-five (25) feet.
2. Side yard:
a) Single-Family, Interior Lot –Combined total of both side yards of twenty (20) feet
and no single side yard less than eight (8) feet.
b) Single-Family, Corner Lot –Combined total of both interior side yards of twenty
(20) feet and no single interior side yard less than eight (8) feet. For street side
yard of a corner lot, a minimum side yard of twenty-five (25) feet.
c) Two-Family, Interior Lot –Combined total of both side yards of twenty (20) feet
and no single side yard less than eight (8) feet.
TITLE 2 – ZONING
Page 14
d) Two-Family, Corner Lot –Combined total of both interior side yards of twenty
(20) feet and no single interior side yard less than eight (8) feet. For street side yard
of a corner lot, a minimum side yard of twenty-five (25) feet.
3. Rear yard – three (3) feet (Ord. 1997-10)
Building Height:
No building hereafter erected or structurally enlarged shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height.
Required Off-Street Parking:
Required off-street parking shall be as provided in Chapter 10 of this Title.
SECTION 2-5-2: R-2 MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
The purpose of the R-2 Multi-Family Housing District is to accommodate a variety of housing types
including detached, duplex and multiple-family structures.
A. Permitted Uses:
Single-family detached structures.
Two (2) family dwelling.
Multiple-family dwelling.
Family care home.
Unrelated group family home.
Churches.
Day care center – resident occupied.
Day care home.
Governmental offices, police and fire stations.
Home occupation.
Libraries
Public open space including customary public parks.
Schools, public, denominational, or private accommodating nursery, elementary, or high
school grades with adjacent playgrounds and athletic fields, dormitories, and other
accessory uses required for operations.
Temporary buildings or trailers at construction site but only during period of construction.
Accessory uses of buildings providing that where garages for one (1) and two (2) family
dwellings are separate from the residence structure, the size of the garage is limited to the
habitable floor area of the first floor of the residence structure or one thousand (1,000)
square feet, whichever is less.
Special Uses:
Following are permitted as special uses subject to the public hearing and other special use procedure
requirements outlined in Chapter 11 of this Title.
Bed and breakfast inns.
Boarding houses.
a) Mobile homes and trailer parks
b) Retail sales of new and used mobile homes and trailers, provided such retail sales
are connected within a mobile home park or trailer park.
Colleges and universities.
Day care centers non-resident occupied.
Day care group homes.
Electric and telephone substations.
Filtration plants, sewage treatment plants, dumping stations, and water reservoirs.
Nursing homes and rest homes.
Public and private outdoor recreation centers including accessory buildings and structures
for administration, operation, and maintenance, and club house or pavilion facilities
including sale of food and soft drinks.
TITLE 2 – ZONING
Page 15
Seminaries, convents, monasteries, and similar religious institutions including dormitories
and other accessory uses required for operation.
Offices of doctors, dentists, lawyers, accountants, and bookkeepers, tax preparers,
architects, engineers, and similar professionals.
Aluminum gutter and related products, assembly, sales and service; welding shops; indoor
storage; contractors’ offices; small engine repair shops or similar uses; provided that the
property was being used for one or more of the specified uses on and before March 1996.
(Ord. 2004-02)
Planned Unit Development, see Chapter 13 of this Title. (Ord. 2009-11)
Required Lot Area and Width:
All buildings erected or structurally enlarged in the R-2 Multiple-Family Housing District shall
have the following minimum lot areas and lot widths at the building line.
Single-Family Dwellings on the Interior Lot – Lot area of not less than six thousand (6,000)
square feet and a minimum width at the building line of not less than sixty (60) feet.
Single-Family Dwelling on Corner Lot- Lot area of not less than eight thousand five
hundred (8,500) square feet and a minimum width at the building line of not less than
ninety (90) feet.
Two (2) Family Dwelling on Interior Lot –Lot area of not less than ten thousand (10,000)
square feet and a minimum width at the building line of not less than eighty (80) feet.
Two (2) Family Dwelling on Corner Lot – Lot area of not less than eleven thousand two
hundred fifty (11,250) square feet and a lot width of not less than one hundred (100) feet.
Multiple-Family Dwelling on Interior Lot – Lot area of not less than fifteen thousand
(15,000) square feet or three thousand (3,000) square feet per dwelling unit, whichever is
greater, and a minimum width at the building line of one hundred (100) feet. (Ord. 96-03)
Multiple-Family Dwelling on Corner Lot – Lot area of not less than eighteen thousand
(18,000) square feet or three thousand (3,000) square feet per dwelling unit, whichever is
greater, and a minimum width at the building line of one hundred twenty (120) feet. (Ord.
96-03)
Required Yard Areas:
All buildings erected or structurally enlarged in the R-2 Multiple-Family Housing District shall
provide or maintain the following minimum yards.
Front yard – twenty-five (25) feet or the average setback of two (2) adjoining developed
lots.
Side yard.
a) Single-Family, Interior Lot – No single side yard less than three (3) feet.
b) Single-Family, Corner Lot – No single interior side yard less than three (3) feet.
For street side yard of a corner lot, a minimum side yard of twenty-five (25) feet.
c) Two (2) family, Interior Lot-No single side yard less than three (3) feet.
d) Two (2) family, Corner Lot-No single interior side yard less than three (3) feet.
For street side yard of a corner lot, a minimum side yard of twenty-five (25) feet.
e) Multi-Family, Interior Lot – Combined total of both side yards of twenty-five (25)
feet and no single side yard less than ten (10) feet. (Ord. 1996-03)
f) Multi-Family, Corner Lot – Combined total of both interior side yards of twentyfive
(25) feet and no single interior side yard less than ten (10) feet. For street side
yard of a corner lot, a minimum side yard of twenty-five (25) feet. (Ord. 1996-03)
Rear yard - three (3) feet.
For construction on undeveloped lots:
Front yard - twenty-five (25) feet.
Side yard:
a) Single-family, Interior Lot-Combined total of both side yards of twenty (20 feet
and no single yard less than eight (8) feet.
TITLE 2 – ZONING
Page 16
b) Single-family, Corner Lot-combined total of both interior side yards of twenty (20)
feet and no single interior side yard less than eight (8) feet. For street side yard of
a corner lot, a minimum side yard of twenty-five (25) feet.
c) Two (2) family, Interior Lot-Combined total of both side yards of twenty (20) feet
and not single side yard less than eight (8) feet.
d) Two (2) family, Corner lot-Combined total of both interior side yards of twenty
(20) feet and no single interior side yard less than eight (8) feet. For street side
yard of a corner lot, a minimum side yard of twenty-five (25) feet.
Building Height:
No building hereafter erected or structurally enlarged shall exceed forty–five (45) feet in height.
Required Off-Street Parking:
Required off-street parking shall be as provided in Chapter 10 of this Title.
(Ord. 1996-3, 1996-21, 1997-10)
SECTION 2-5-3: A-1 AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT
The purpose of the A-1 Agricultural District is to accommodate a variety of housing types including
detached, duplex and multiple-family structures in an agricultural environment.
A. Permitted Uses:
Single-family detached structures.
Two (2) family dwelling.
Multiple-family dwelling.
Family care home.
Unrelated group family home.
Churches.
Day care center – resident occupied.
Day care home.
Governmental offices, police and fire stations.
Home occupation.
Libraries.
Public open space including customary public parks.
Schools, public, denominational, or private accommodating nursery, elementary, or high
school grades with adjacent playgrounds and athletic fields, dormitories, and other
accessory uses required for operations.
Temporary buildings or trailers at construction site but only during period of construction.
Accessory uses of buildings providing that where garages for one (1) and two (2) family
dwellings are separate from the residence structure, the size of the garage is limited to the
habitable floor area of the first floor of the residence structure, the size of the garage is
limited to the habitable floor area of the first floor of the residence structure or one thousand
(1,000) square feet, whichever is less.
Growing crops.
Special Uses:
Following are permitted as special uses subject to the public hearing and other special use procedure
requirements outlined in Chapter 11 of this Title.
Bed and breakfast inns.
Boarding houses.
a) Mobile homes and trailer parks
b) Retail sales of new and used mobile homes and trailers, provided such retail sales
are connected within a mobile home park or trailer park.
Colleges and universities.
Day care centers non-resident occupied.
TITLE 2 – ZONING
Page 17
Day care group homes.
Electric and telephone substations.
Nursing homes rest homes.
Public and private outdoor recreation centers including accessory buildings and structures
for administration, operation, and maintenance, and club house or pavilion facilities
including sale of food and soft drinks.
Seminaries, convents, monasteries, and similar religious institutions including dormitories
and other accessory uses required for operation.
Offices of doctors, dentists, lawyers, accountants, and bookkeepers, tax preparers,
architects, engineers, and similar professionals.
Aluminum gutter and related products, assembly, sales and service; welding shops; indoor
storage; contractors’ offices; small engine repair shops or similar uses; provided that the
property was being used for one or more of the specified uses on and before March 1996.
Filtration plants, sewage treatment plants, dumping stations, and water reservoirs.
Planned Unit Development, see Chapter 13 of this Title. (Ord. 2009-11)
Required Lot Area and Width:
All buildings erected or structurally enlarged in the A-1 District shall have the following minimum
lot areas and lot widths at the building line.
Single-Family dwellings on the Interior Lot- Lot area of not less than six thousand (6,000)
square feet and a minimum width at the building line of not less than sixty (60) feet.
Single-Family Dwelling on Corner Lot- Lot area of not less than eight thousand five
hundred (8,500) square feet and a minimum width at the building line of not less than
ninety (90) feet.
Two (2) Family Dwelling on Interior Lot – Lot area of not less than ten thousand (10,000)
square feet and a minimum width at the building line of not less than eighty (80) feet.
Two (2) Family Dwelling on Corner lot – Lot area of not less than eleven thousand two
hundred fifty (11,250) square feet and a lot width of not less than one hundred (100) feet.
Required Yard Areas:
All buildings erected or structurally enlarged in the A-1 District shall provide or maintain the
following minimum yards.
Front yard – twenty-five (25) feet or the average setback of two (2) adjoining developed
lots.
Side yard
a) Single Family, Interior Lot – No single side yard less than three (3) feet.
b) Single-Family, Corner Lot – No single interior side yard less than three (3) feet.
For street side yard of a corner lot, a minimum side yard of twenty-five (25) feet.
c) Two (2) family, Interior Lot – No single side yard less than three (3) feet.
d) Two (2) family, Corner Lot- No single interior side yard less than three (3) feet.
For street side yard of a corner lot, a minimum side yard of twenty-five (25) feet.
Rear yard - three (3) feet.
For construction on undeveloped lots:
Front yard - twenty-five (25) feet.
Side Yard:
a) Single-family, Interior Lot – Combined total of both side yards of twenty (20) feet
and no single yard less than eight (8) feet.
b) Single-family, Corner Lot – combined total of both interior side yards of twenty
(20) feet and no single interior side yard less than eight (8) feet. For street side
yard of a corner lot, a minimum side yard of twenty-five (25) feet.
c) Two (2) family, Interior Lot – Combined total of both side yards of twenty (20)
feet and not single side yard less than eight (8) feet.
TITLE 2 – ZONING
Page 18
d) Two (2) family, Corner lot – Combined total of both interior side yards of twenty
(20) feet and no single interior side yard less than eight (8) feet. For street side
yard of a corner lot, a minimum side yard of twenty-five (25) feet.
Building Height:
No building hereafter erected or structurally enlarged shall exceed forty-five (45) feet in height.
Required Off-Street Parking:
Required off-street parking shall be as provided in Chapter 10 of this Title.
TITLE 2 – ZONING
Page 19
TITLE 2 ZONING
CHAPTER 6 BUSINESS DISTRICTS
2-6-1:B-1 General Business District
2-6-2:B-1-O General Business Overlay District
2-6-3:B-2 Highway and Service Business District
SECTION 2-6-1: B-1 GENERAL BUSINESS DISTRICT
The purpose of the B-1 General Business District is to accommodate a wide range of retail stores, offices,
and service establishments compatible to a central location within the community as the community’s
primary business center.
A. Permitted Uses:
Residential uses as permitted in R-2; Special uses permitted in the R-2 district shall only
be permitted as special uses in the B-1 district.
Retail stores and shops including book and magazine, florist, gift, china and glassware
shops, jewelry, watch and clock stores, hobby stores, appliance, hardware, paint and
wallpaper stores, furniture stores, and similar uses.
Offices of doctors, dentists, lawyers, accountants and bookkeepers, tax preparers,
architects, engineers, and similar professions.
Art stores and studios, framing shops, auto parts stores, automobile parking lots.
Beer, wine and liquor stores, taverns, banks and financial institutions.
Barber and beauty shops and schools, nail and tanning salons.
Candy and ice cream stores, including stores making commodities for sale only on
premises.
Drug stores.
Governmental offices, police and fire stations.
Health food stores.
Hotels and Motels.
Libraries and reading rooms.
Laundromats with not more than three (3) employees on any one (1) shift.
Medical and dental clinics.
Musical instrument sales and repair, music and dance sales and studios.
Pet stores, pet grooming, but not including outdoor runways or kennels. (Ord. 2014-15)
Photography studios, camera and photo supply sales, including photo processing as part of
the retail business.
Post offices.
Public meeting halls, clubs, lodges.
Real estate and insurance sales offices.
Restaurants-general, specialty and fast food, sandwich shops, coffee houses, donut shops.
Supermarkets, grocery and dairy stores, meat markets, specialty food stores, bakeries
where goods produced are sold only on premises.
Swimming pools, public and semi-public as a principal use.
Tailor and dress making shops.
Telephone or other utility office.
Travel agencies.
Video rental and sales.
Massage Therapy Facility.
Catering. (Ord 2004-03)
TITLE 2 – ZONING
Page 20
Special Uses:
Following are permitted as special uses subject to the public hearing and other special use procedure
requirements outlined in Chapter 11 of this Title.
Automobile sales, service, and rental.
Day care center – non-resident occupied.
Drive-in restaurants where food is provided to customers in cars.
Funeral home, mortuaries, crematories.
Living quarters above or adjoining business.
Outdoor amusement enterprises, such as miniature golf, golf driving ranges and similar
activities.
Radio and television broadcasting studios excluding transmitting towers.
Service, cleaning, or repair shops for personal, household, or garden equipment.
Veterinarian or animal hospital, but not including outdoor runways or kennels.
Planned Unit Development, see Chapter 13 of this Title. (Ord. 2009-11)
Required Lot Area and Width:
All buildings erected or structurally altered in the B-1 General Business District shall provide or
maintain the following minimum yards and building setbacks except for certain lots adjoining
residential districts, which shall conform to Section 2-2-8 of this title:
Required Lot Area-ten thousand (10,000) square feet.
Minimum lot width-eighty (80) feet.
Required Yard Areas and Building Setbacks:
B-1 General Business District shall provide or maintain the following lot areas and lot width at the
building line:
Front yard – none
Side yard – none
Rear yard – none
Building setback from streets – twenty-five (25) feet from the street right of way lines.
Building Height:
No building hereafter erected or structurally enlarged shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height.
Required Off-Street Parking:
Required off-street parking shall be as provided in Chapter 10 of this Title.
SECTION 2-6-2: B-1-O GENERAL BUSINESS DISTRICT OVERLAY ZONE
The purpose of the B-1-O General Business District Overlay Zone is to permit consideration of new or
improved business development along Western Avenue in greater depths than otherwise permitted provided
such development is harmoniously planned to function well in terms of appearance, vehicle access and
parking and other similar considerations and meet the requirements as outlined herein.
A. Permitted Uses:
Same as permitted in B-1.
Special uses
Same as permitted in B-1.
Required Lot Area
Minimum required lot area – the minimum required lot area to be considered for harmonious
planned development shall be the area between two (2) adjacent streets intersecting Western
Avenue to the depth of the B-1-O Overlay district as indicated on the zoning map. Such property
may be developed in up to two (2) separate uses provided no single use is less than thirty percent
(30%) of the total frontage between streets.
TITLE 2 – ZONING
Page 21
Procedure – Petition for Increased Lot Depth
Where the minimum lot area requirements are met, the applicant can apply for the increased depth
as outlined in the B-1-O Overlay district provided the Planning Commission finds the following
conditions are met:
B-1-O area for total width between adjacent streets is proposed in one (1) or two (2) uses
meeting the above area requirements.
Site plan review and approval is conducted by the Planning Commission.
Appropriate landscaping is provided and thereafter maintained for a strip of not less than
ten feet (10’) in depth along Western Avenue and not less than six feet (6’) in depth along
adjacent streets intersecting Western Avenue.
Expansion in depth of the business district shall be the same depth for the entire block.
Screen fence of six feet (6’) in height, materials and design of which are approved by the
Planning Commission shall be constructed and thereafter maintained along the rear of the
expanded depth commercial district.
Any alley within the expanded depth commercial district shall be considered for vacation
by the City.
Vehicular access, circulation, and parking shall be handled in a planned organized way for
the total proposed development or improvement.
Night lighting shall be designed to minimize effect on adjacent non-business properties.
Outdoor storage or trash facilities shall be obscured from view with a permanent fence or
wall on three (3) sides and hinged door(s) on the fourth side.
For the purpose of assuring that the proposed development meets the requirements outlined herein,
a site plan of the proposed development is required.
Within sixty (60) days of filing of the proposed development site plan with the City Clerk the
Planning Commission shall schedule the request on its meeting agenda and so notify the Planning
Commission members, the applicant, and City Council. In its review the Planning Commission
members may request such modifications, as it deems appropriate.
Upon the Planning Commission’s determination that required conditions are met, they will so
advise the City Council. Upon the City Council’s concurrence, including any required action for
alley vacation, the Zoning Officer will be directed to issue the zoning permit to the full extent of
the B-1-O Overlay Zone.
The Zoning Officer shall maintain a copy of the approved site plan, and prior to issuing a certificate
of occupancy shall make a determination that the new or expanded business is in compliance with
the approved site plan.
SECTION 2-6-3: B-2 HIGHWAY AND SERVICE BUSINESS DISTRICT
The purpose of the B-2 Highway and Service Business District is to accommodate those businesses which,
because of their need for large sites, or heavy use of storage warehousing or trucking large material,
equipment, or supplies, are not generally compatible with the more customary, retail and office uses of the
B-1 General Business District.
A. Permitted Uses:
Business uses permitted in B-1; special uses permitted in the B-1 district shall only be
permitted as special uses in the B-2 district unless otherwise specifically provided as a
following permitted use.
Appliance sales and service, auction houses, auto rental agencies, automotive service
stations, auto and truck body repair and customizing.
Blueprinting, boat sales, blinds and drapery/sales and installation.
Bowling alleys, building material sales but not manufacturing.
Catering establishments.
TITLE 2 – ZONING
Page 22
Clubs, lodges, fraternal and business organizations, meeting halls, and recreation facilities,
carpet, floor covering sales and installation.
Drive-in food, refreshment, and other business establishments servicing customers in cars.
Dry cleaning and laundry establishments.
Exterminating shops.
Farm supplies but not to include outdoor storage of farm equipment.
Food stores and fertilizer application service.
Food and produce wholesale establishments, fuel sales, fruit and vegetable open air
markets but not bulk plants.
Garages for repair, servicing, and storage of automobiles and trucks, but not to include
outdoor storage other than vehicles awaiting repair or pick-up.
Hotels and motels.
Live bait sales.
Machinery sales, but not to include outdoor storage of machinery, mail order stores.
Miniature golf courses, monument sales, motorcycle sales and service.
Roller rinks and ice skating rinks, print and publishing, orthopedic and medical appliance
stores, plumbing, heating and air conditioning shops.
Radio and TV facilities including antenna and booster equipment, service, cleaning, or
repair shops for personal, household, or garden equipment.
Schools; business, trade and professional.
Storage, mini-storage, warehousing, and wholesale establishments provided within
enclosed buildings.
Swimming pool/patio/fencing sales, service and supplies, upholstering, furniture finishing
and repair, vending/arcade machine distributor, utility repair and service offices and
garages.
Veterinarian or animal hospital without outdoor kennels or runways, pet shops, pet
grooming.
Welding shops, water softener sales/service, window cleaning/janitorial services.
Special Uses:
Following are permitted as special uses subject to the public hearing and other special use procedure
requirements outlined in Chapter 11 of this Title.
Any of the foregoing operations where outdoor storage of products used or sold on
premises is a necessary part of the operation.
Adult entertainment performance; adult material sales or rentals where material is
accessible to customers on open shelves and/or may be viewed in the establishment
provided such establishment is no closer than ¼ miles to any residential district.
Automobile, truck and farm equipment sales, including outdoor display or storage.
Cartage and express facilities including outdoor storage of goods, motor trucks, and other
equipment.
Contractors or construction offices and shops such as building, concrete, electrical,
masonry, heating, plumbing, refrigeration, and roofing, signs and sheet metal, including
any related outdoor storage areas.
Firewood sales including outdoor storage.
Farm machinery and supplies sales including lots for the outdoor display or storage of new
or used farm equipment.
Landscape and garden services, garden centers, nurseries and horticultural uses.
Mobile home and recreational vehicle sales and storage, not, however, to include storage
or parking of occupied mobile homes or recreational vehicles.
Monument sales, including outdoor display and storage of monuments.
Tattoo parlors.
Planned Unit Development, see Chapter 13 of this Title. (Ord. 2009-11)
TITLE 2 – ZONING
Page 23
Processing of animal and vegetable products such as tanneries, distilleries, breweries,
rendering plants, and slaughterhouses. (Ord. 2019-16)
Cannabis business establishments, including processing organizations, dispensing
organizations, and transporting organizations, but excluding cultivation centers, craft
growers, and infusing organizations. (Ord. 2019-43)
Required Lot Area and Width:
All buildings erected or structurally altered in the B-2 Highway and Service Business District shall
have the following minimum lot areas and lot width at the building line.
Required lot area – ten thousand (10,000) square feet.
Minimum lot width – eighty (80) feet.
Required Yards and Building Setback
All buildings erected or structurally altered in the B-2 highway and Service District shall provide
or maintain the following minimum yards and building setbacks except for certain lots adjoining
residential districts which shall conform to Chapter 2, Section 8 of this Title.
Front yard – none
Side yard – none.
Rear yard – none.
Building setback from streets – twenty-five (25) feet from the street right of way lines.
Building Height:
No building hereafter erected or structurally enlarged shall exceed forty-five (45) feet in height.
Required Off-Street Parking:
Required off-street parking shall be as provided in Chapter 10 of this Title.
Cannabis Business Establishment Zoning
In those zoning districts in which an Adult-Use Cannabis Dispensing Organization may be
located, the proposed facility must comply with the following:
a) The organization is licensed by the Department of Financial and Professional
Regulation through the State of Illinois;
b) The organization has obtained a local license issued by the City of West Peoria;
c) The organization is not located within 1,000 feet of the property line of a preexisting
public or private nursery school, preschool, primary or secondary school,
business day care center, business day care home or residential care home.
Learning centers and vocational/trade centers shall not be classified as a public or
private school for purposes of this Section;
d) The organization is not located within 1,500 feet of the property line of an existing
medical cannabis dispensing organization or adult-use dispensing organization;
and
e) The organization shall fully comply with all requirements of the Compassionate
Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act (410 ILCS 130/1 et seq.) and the Cannabis
Regulation and Tax Act (410 ILCS 705/1-1 et seq.). (Ord. 2019-43)
TITLE 2 – ZONING
Page 24
TITLE 2 ZONING
CHAPTER 7 INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
2-7-1: I-1 Light Industrial District
2-7-2: I-2 Heavy Industrial District
2-7-3 Performance Standards
SECTION 2-7-1: I-1 LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
Light Industrial District is to accommodate a wide range of manufacturing and similar industrial facilities
which can conform to a high level of performance and can coexist without serious side effects to
neighboring properties.
A. Permitted Uses:
Light manufacturing, fabricating, assembling, packaging, repairing, servicing, and
processing of materials, goods, and products provided entirely within enclosed buildings
and conforming with the performance standards contained herein. Outdoor storage of
materials is not allowed except where such materials are enclosed by a solid fence or wall.
Animal hospitals, veterinary clinics, kennels with outdoor runways.
Agriculture implement sales and service.
Bottling plants, creameries, and dairies.
Bowling alleys.
Dry cleaning and laundry plants.
Greenhouses – wholesale.
Lumber yards.
Mail order houses.
Medical and dental clinics.
Offices.
Printing facilities.
Public utility stations, distribution centers, and regulator stations.
Radio and television studios.
Research and testing laboratories.
Restaurants.
Trade schools.
Transmitting towers and antennas in conjunction with the principal use on the premises.
Wholesale outlets, storage, and warehousing.
Sales of used automobiles, including outdoor display or storage.
(Ord. 2011-10)
Special Uses:
Following are permitted as special uses subject to the public hearing and other special use procedure
requirements outlined in Chapter 11 of this Title.
Storage, sale or distribution, or primary usage of explosive, highly flammable, highly toxic
or radioactive materials.
Penal and correctional institutions.
Sewage treatment plants.
Bus or truck garages and storage yards.
Planned Unit Development, see Chapter 13 of this Title. (Ord. 2009-11)
Required Lot Area and Width:
All buildings erected or structurally altered in I-1Light Industrial District shall have the following
minimum lot areas and lot width at the building line.
Required lot area – ten thousand (10,000) square feet.
TITLE 2 – ZONING
Page 25
Minimum lot width – eighty (80) feet.
Required Yards and Building Setback:
No building shall hereafter be erected or structurally enlarged within the I-1 Light Industrial District
without providing or maintaining the following minimum required yards:
Front yard – thirty (30) feet.
Side yard – twenty (20) feet.
Rear yard – twenty (20) feet.
Building Height:
Maximum building height of sixty-five (65) feet in the I-1 Light Industrial District.
Required Off-Street Parking:
Required off-street parking shall be as provided in Chapter 10 of this Title.
SECTION 2-7-2: I-2 HEAVY INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
The purpose of the I-2 Heavy Industrial District is to provide for and accommodate heavy industrial uses
in a manner which minimizes adverse effects.
A. Permitted Uses:
1. All uses permitted “permitted uses: in the I-1 Light Industrial District."
2. Any manufacturing, fabricating, assembly and processing of materials and products not
allowed as “permitted uses: in the I-1 District" except that uses permitted in the I-1 District
as “special uses" shall be permitted in the I-2 District only as special uses.
3. Cartage and express facilities including storage of goods, motor trucks, and other
equipment.
Special Uses:
Following are permitted as special uses subject to the public hearing and other special use procedure
requirements outlined in Chapter 11 of this Title:
Uses permitted in the I-1 Light Industrial district as “special uses.”
Manufacturing or processing requiring large quantities of water, producing any quantity of
toxic, noxious, corrosive, or explosive, or otherwise hazardous material either as a primary
or side product.
Extraction and processing of stone, sand, and gravel including the necessary processing
and loading equipment and structures.
Processing of animal and vegetable products such as tanneries, distilleries, breweries,
rendering plants, and plants for the production of glue, soap, paint, or varnish. (Ord. 2019-16)
Manufacturing of coal, tar, petroleum, and asphalt products.
Planned Unit Development, see Chapter 13 of this Title. (Ord. 2009-11)
Required Lot Area and Width:
All buildings erected or structurally altered in I-2Heavy Industrial District shall have the following
minimum lot areas and lot width at the building line:
Required lot area – ten thousand (10,000) square feet.
Minimum lot width – eighty (80) feet.
Required Yards and Building Setback:
No building shall hereafter be erected or structurally enlarged within the I-2 Heavy Industrial
District without providing or maintaining the following minimum required yards:
Front yard – thirty (30) feet.
Side yard – twenty (20) feet.
Rear yard – twenty (20) feet.
Building Height:
Maximum building height of sixty-five (65) feet in the I-2 Heavy Industrial District.
TITLE 2 – ZONING
Page 26
Required Off-Street Parking:
Required off-street parking shall be as provided in Chapter 10 of this Title.
SECTION 2-7-3 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
A. General:
Any new use established in I-1 and I-2 Districts after the effective date of this Title shall be so
operated as to comply with the performance standards governing: (1) Noise; (2) Vibration; (3)
Toxic and noxious matter; (4) Odorous matter; (5) Fire and explosive hazards; and (6) Glare and
heat, as set forth hereinafter for the district in which such use shall be located. No use already
established on the effective date hereof shall be so altered or modified as to conflict with, or further
conflict with, the applicable performance standards established hereinafter for the district in which
such use is located. No emission or by-product of any industrial use shall violate or exceed state
Titles. It shall be the responsibility of all industrial uses to adhere to such Titles, including the
obtaining of necessary permits.
Certification from an engineer or scientific testing laboratory approved by the City Council or its
Designee, indicating that the use of the land and all processing either does or will comply with the
applicable performance standards, shall accompany application for a zoning certificate. Where
standards indicated here differ from those of state agencies, the more restrictive shall apply.
Noise: I-1 and I-2 Districts:
Sound levels shall be measured with a sound level meter and associated octave band filter
manufactured according to standards prescribed by the American Standards Association.
Measurements shall be made using the flat network of the sound level meter. Impulsive type noises
shall be subject to the performance standards hereinafter prescribed, provided that such noises shall
be capable of being accurately measured with such equipment. Noises capable of being so
measured, for the purpose of this Chapter, shall be those noises which cause rapid fluctuations of
the needle of the sound level meter with a variation of no more than plus or minus two (2) decibels.
Noises incapable of being so measured, such as those of an irregular and intermittent nature, shall
be controlled so as not to become a nuisance to adjacent uses.
At no point on the boundary of a Residence or Business District shall the sound pressure level of
any operation or plant (other than background noises not directly under the control of the
manufacturer) exceed the decibel limits in the octave bands designated below:
Octave Band Frequency
(cycles per second)
Along Residence District Boundaries Along Business District Boundaries
0 to 75 72 79
75 to 150 67 74
150 to 300 59 66
300 to 600 52 59
600 to 1,000 46 53
1,200 to 2,400 40 47
2,400 to 4,800 34 41
over 4,800 32 39
Vibrations; I-1 and I-2 Districts:
Vibrations within a district shall be controlled so as not to become a nuisance to adjacent
uses.
No industrial operation or activity (except those not under the direct control of the
manufacturer) shall cause at any time ground transmitted vibrations in excess of the limits
set forth below. Vibrations shall be measured at any point along a Residence District
TITLE 2 – ZONING
Page 27
boundary line with a three (3) component measuring instrument approved by the Zoning
Administrator, and shall be expressed as displacement in inches.
Frequency (cycles per second)
Maximum Permitted Displacement along
Residence District Boundaries (Inches)
0 to 10 .0008
10 to 20 .0005
20 to 30 .0002
30 to 40 .0002
40 and over .0001
Toxic and Noxious Matter; I-1 and I-2 Districts:
No activity or operation shall cause, at any time, the discharge of toxic or noxious matter across lot
lines in such concentration as to be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety, comfort or
welfare or cause injury or damage to the environment, property, or business. Determination of such
adverse affects shall be made by the Zoning Officer.
Odorous Matter; I-1 and I-2 Districts:
The emission of odorous matter in such manner or quantity as to be detrimental to or
endanger the public health, safety, comfort or welfare is hereby declared to be a public
nuisance and shall henceforth be unlawful.
No activity or operation shall cause, at any time, the discharge of odorous matter in such
concentrations as to be detectable without the use of instruments at any point along lot
lines.
Fire and Explosive Hazards; I-1 and I-2 Districts:
The manufacture, utilization or storage of pyrographic and explosive dusts shall be in
accordance with the safety codes of the National Fire Protection Association. Such dusts
include, but are not limited to: Aluminum, bronze and magnesium powder, powdered coal,
powdered plastics, flour and feed, spices, starches, sugar, cocoa, sulfur, grain (storage) and
wood flour.
In the I-1 Districts; the following additional Titles shall apply:
a) The storage, utilization or manufacture of solid materials or products ranging from
incombustible to subject to moderate burning is permitted.
b) The storage, utilization or manufacture of solid materials or products ranging from
free or active burning to intense burning is permitted provided the following
condition is met:
Said materials shall be stored, utilized or manufactured within completely enclosed
buildings having incombustible exterior walls, or protected throughout by an
automatic fire extinguishing system. Or said materials may be stored outdoors,
and such storage shall have fifty feet (50’) clearance from all property lines.
In the I-2 District, the following additional Titles shall apply:
a) The storage, utilization or manufacture of solid materials, ranging from
incombustible to subject to intense burning is permitted, subject to all applicable
rules and Titles.
b) The storage and utilization of flammable liquids or materials, which produce
flammable or explosive vapors or bases, shall be permitted in accordance with the
Titles of the Office of The State Fire Marshall of the State of Illinois, or any
successor agency.
Glare and Heat: I-1 and I-2 Districts:
Any operation producing intense glare or heat shall be performed within a completely enclosed
building in such manner as not to create a public nuisance or hazard along lot lines. Exposed
TITLE 2 – ZONING
Page 28
sources of light shall be shielded so as not to create a nuisance across lot lines. Determination of
the nuisance factor in regard to glare or heat intensity shall be made by the Zoning Officer.
TITLE 2 – ZONING
Page 29
TITLE 2 ZONING
CHAPTER 8 NONCONFORMING USES
2-8-1 Intent
2-8-2 Nonconforming Lots of Record For New Single Family Dwellings
2-8-3 Nonconforming Uses of Primarily Open Land
2-8-4 Nonconforming Structures Due To Not Meeting Bulk Requirements
2-8-5 Nonconforming Uses Within Structures
2-8-6 Repairs and Maintenance of Nonconforming Structures
2-8-7 Uses Under Special Exception Provisions
SECTION 2-8-1 INTENT
Within the districts established by this Title or amendments that may later be adopted there exists:
Lots,
Structures,
Uses of land and structures, and
Characteristics of use
Which were lawful before this Title was passed or amended, but which would be prohibited, regulated or
restricted under the terms of this Title or future amendments, it is the intent of this Title to permit these
nonconformities to continue until they are removed. It is further the intent of this Title that nonconformities
shall not be enlarged upon, expanded or extended, nor be used as grounds for adding other structures or
uses prohibited elsewhere in the same district.
Nonconforming uses are declared by this Title to be compatible with permitted uses in the districts involved.
A nonconforming use of a structure, a nonconforming use of land, or a nonconforming use of structure and
land in combination may be continued but shall not be extended or enlarged after the effective date hereof,
shall not have attached on a building or premises, additional signs intended to be seen from off the premises,
or shall not have the addition of other uses, of a nature which would be prohibited generally in the district
involved.
To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this Title shall be deemed to require a change in the plans, construction
or designated use of any building on which actual construction was lawfully begun prior to the effective
date of adoption or amendment of this Title and upon which actual building construction has been carried
on diligently. Actual construction is hereby defined to include the placing of construction materials in
permanent position and fastened in a permanent manner.
Where excavation or demolition or removal of an existing building has been substantially begun preparatory
to rebuilding, such excavation or demolition or removal shall be deemed to be actual construction, provided
that work shall be carried on diligently.
SECTION 2-8-2 NONCONFORMING LOTS OF RECORD FOR NEW SINGLE-FAMILY
DWELLINGS
In any district in which single family dwellings are permitted, a single-family dwelling and customary
accessory buildings may be erected on any single lot of record at the effective date of this Title or
amendment thereof, notwithstanding limitations imposed by other provisions of this Title. Such lot must
be in separate ownership and not continuous frontage with other lots in the same ownership. This provision
shall apply even though such lot fails to meet the requirements for area or width, or both, that are generally
applicable in the district, provided that yard dimensions and requirements other than those applying to area
TITLE 2 – ZONING
Page 30
or width, or both, of the lot shall conform to the Titles for the district in which such lot is located. Variance
of yard requirements shall be obtained only through action of the Zoning Board of Appeals.
If two (2) or more lots or combinations of lots or portions of lots with continuous frontage in single
ownership are of record at the time of passage or amendment of this Title, and if all or part of the lots do
not meet the requirements established for lot width and area, the lands involved shall be considered to be
undivided parcels for the purpose of this Title, and no portion of said parcel shall be used or sold in a manner
which diminishes compliance with lot width and area requirements established by this Title, nor shall any
division of any parcel be made which creates a lot width or area below the requirements stated in this Title.
SECTION 2-8-3 NONCONFORMING USES OF PRIMARILY OPEN LAND
Where at the time of passage of this Title lawful use of land exists which would not be permitted by the
Titles imposed by this Title, and where such use involves no individual structure with a replacement cost
exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), the use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise
lawful, provided:
A. No such nonconforming use shall be enlarged or increased, nor extended to occupy a greater area
of land than was occupied at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Title.
B. No such nonconforming use shall be moved in whole or in part to any portion of the lot or parcel
other than that occupied by such use at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Title.
C. If any such nonconforming use is abandoned for a period of six (6) consecutive months, and such
abandonment is intentional, then any subsequent uses of such property shall conform to the
regulations applicable in the district in which such property is located. (Ord. 2002-06)
D. No additional structure not conforming to the requirements of this Title shall be erected in
connection with such nonconforming use of land.
SECTION 2-8-4 NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES DUE TO NOT MEETING BULK
REQUIREMENTS
Where a lawful structure exists at the effective date hereof of amendment of this Title that could not be
built under the terms of this Title by reason of restrictions on area, lot coverage, height, yards, its location
on the lot or other requirements concerning the structure, such structure may be continued so long as it
remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions:
A. No such nonconforming structure may be enlarged or altered in a way which increases its
nonconformity, but any structure or portion thereof may be altered to decrease its nonconformity.
B. Should such nonconforming structure or nonconforming portion of structure be destroyed by any
means to an extent of more than fifty percent (50%) of its value (including land value) at time of
destruction, it shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this Title.
However, acts of peril, beyond the property owner’s control, shall not be grounds for discontinuing
a nonconforming use.
C. Should such structure be moved for any reason for any distance whatever, it shall thereafter
conform to the Titles for the district in which it is located after it is moved.
(Ord. 1996-3, 1998-23, 2001-04)
SECTION 2-8-5 NONCONFORMING USES WITHIN STRUCTURES
If lawful use involving individual structures with a replacement cost of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or
more, of structure and premises in combination, exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of
this Title, that would not be allowed in the district under the terms of this Title, the lawful use may be
continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions:
TITLE 2 – ZONING
Page 31
A. No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by this Title in the district in which it is located
shall be enlarged, extended, constructed, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered except in
changing the use of the structure to a use permitted in the district in which it is located.
B. Any nonconforming use may be extended throughout any parts of a building which were manifestly
arranged or designed for such use at the time of adoption or amendment of this Title, but no such
use shall be extended to occupy any land outside such building.
C. If no structural alterations are made, any nonconforming use of a structure, or structure and
premises, may as a special permit be changed to another nonconforming use provided that the
Zoning Board of Appeals, either by general rule or by making findings in the specific case, shall
find that the proposed use is equally appropriate or more appropriate to the district than the existing
nonconforming use. In permitting such change, the Zoning Board of Appeals may require
appropriate conditions and safeguards in accord with the provisions of this Title.
D. If any such nonconforming use is abandoned for a period of six (6) consecutive months, and such
abandonment is intentional, then any subsequent uses of such property shall conform to the
regulations applicable in the district in which such property is located. (Ord. 2002-06)
E. Where nonconforming use status applies to a structure and premises in combination, removal or
destruction of the structure shall eliminate the nonconforming status of the land. Destruction for
the purpose of this subsection is defined as damage to an extent of more than fifty percent (50%)
of the value (including land value) at the time of destruction. However, acts of peril beyond the
property owner’s control shall not be grounds for discontinuing the non-conforming use.
SECTION 2-8-6 REPAIRS AND MAINTENANCE OF NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES
On any nonconforming structure or portion of a structure containing a nonconforming use, work may be
done on ordinary repairs, of non-bearing walls, fixtures, wiring or plumbing, provided that the cubic content
of the nonconforming structure or portion of structure shall not be increased.
If a nonconforming structure or portion of a structure containing a nonconforming use becomes physically
unsafe or unlawful due to lack of repairs and maintenance and is declared by any duly authorized official
to be unsafe or unlawful by reason of physical condition, it shall not thereafter be restored, repaired or
rebuilt except in conformity with the Titles of the district in which it is located.
Nothing in this Title shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any
building or part thereof declared to be unsafe by an official charged with protecting the public safety, upon
order of such official.
SECTION 2-8-7 USES UNDER SPECIAL PERMIT PROVISIONS
Any use which is permitted as a special use in a district under the terms of this Title (other than a change
through Zoning Board of Appeals action from a nonconforming use to another use not generally permitted
in the district) shall not be deemed a nonconforming use in such district but shall without further action be
considered a conforming use.
TITLE 2 – ZONING
Page 32
TITLE 2 ZONING
CHAPTER 9 SIGN TITLES
2-9-1 Purpose
2-9-2 Types of Signs Defined
2-9-3 General Application of Sign Titles; Sign Permit Required
2-9-4 General Regulations for Signs
2-9-5 Sign Regulations Within Residential Districts
2-9-6 Sign Regulations Within Business Districts
2-9-7 Business Signs Within Industrial Districts
SECTION 2-9-1 PURPOSE
The following regulations are provided to maintain the attractiveness and orderliness of the City, and to
protect public safety.
SECTION 2-9-2 TYPES OF SIGNS DEFINED
All definitions applicable in this chapter are found in Chapter 12 of this Title. (Ord. 2001-02)
SECTION 2-9-3 GENERAL APPLICATION OF SIGN TITLES; SIGN PERMIT REQUIRED
No sign, outdoor advertising structure or display of any character shall be permitted except in conformity
with the following regulations. A sign permit is required for erection, construction, placement or
replacement of any sign to be permanently attached to a building or to be permanently erected as a freestanding
sign. See Title 11, Fee Schedule.
SECTION 2-9-4 GENERAL REGULATIONS FOR SIGNS
A. Flashing, Moving, Glaring Sign Prohibited: No illuminated business sign shall be of excessive
brightness or shall flash, scintillate or move. Time and temperature or message signs not otherwise
prohibited under this Title will be allowed, provided they do not create hazardous or annoying
glare.
B. Signs Not to Interfere With Traffic Control Signs: No business sign shall be so located as to hide
from view or so illuminated as to interfere with the effectiveness of any traffic-control device or
signal.
C. Signs Not to Obstruct Motorists' View: No business sign or sign structure shall be located in such
a manner as to materially impede the motorist's view at any street or highway intersection.
D. Signs Exempt From Regulations of this Chapter:
Signs used exclusively for the posting or display of official notices by a public agency or
official, or by a person giving legal notice;
Signs erected or maintained by a public agency or official;
Signs required by law to be displayed by a public utility for directional warning or
informational purposes;
Informational and directional signs (which may include a corporate identity symbol);
Residential nameplate signs of not more than one (1) square foot, one per dwelling except
those on corner lots which may have one nameplate sign facing each street.
Temporary special event signs and banners for commercial, community and not-for-profit
sponsored events, provided same are not in use more than fourteen (14) consecutive days.
TITLE 2 – ZONING
Page 33
Temporary garage, yard or moving sale signs, real estate sale or open house signs, and
construction project signs, provided same are removed promptly after such sale, open
house or project completion.
Temporary, child-operated refreshment stand signs.
Temporary election or political signs provided, where said signs promote a particular
candidate(s) or issue(s) for a particular election. They shall be removed within seven (7)
days after such election. No such sign shall, however, exceed eight (8) square feet in area
in residential districts and thirty-two (32) square feet in area in non-residential districts.
(Ord. 2001-02)
Sign Pasting or Painting on Walls Prohibited; Signs Not Face Adjacent Residential District: No
sign shall be permitted to be placed on any wall, fence or standard facing the side of any adjoining
lot which shares a lot line and is located in a residential district, except for those signs permitted in
residential districts as provided herein.
Civic Organization Signs on Entry Roads: Signs indicating the time and place of meetings of civic
organizations are permitted on the main entry roads into town provided only one sign structure is
utilized to accommodate all such notices on each major entry road.
Portable Signs Prohibited: Portable signs mounted on wheels or a chassis so as to be readily moved
from place to place are prohibited and must be removed within six (6) consecutive months of the
effective date of this Title. It is also impermissible to use such signs by attaching them permanently
to the ground, a pole or any building, and such signs are not made non-portable simply by removal
of any wheels or chassis. (Ord. 2000-29)
Off-Premise Signs Prohibited: Off-premise signs are prohibited.
Interpretations of Sign Size Limitations Or Various Sign Types: The maximum size limitations
herein apply to each facing of a sign structure.
Limits on Business Signs Extending Into Public Right-Of-Way: No free-standing business sign
shall extend over the right-of-way line of any street or highway. Where existing commercial
buildings have no front or side yards or setbacks from the street or road right-of-way, an attached,
low silhouette sign may project up to one (1) foot over the right-of-way line.
Signs to Be Maintained: All signs shall be maintained in good and safe structural condition. The
painted portions of signs shall be periodically repainted and kept in good condition. Illuminated
signs shall be kept in proper working order.
Certain Non-Conforming Signs May Continue: Except where otherwise stated herein, any sign in
existence on the effective date of this Title which does not comply with the provisions herein may
continue in existence as a matter of right and may be maintained and repaired pursuant to the
provisions of Chapter 8 of this Title. If non-conforming signs are to be replaced, they shall only
be replaced by signs in conformity with sign requirements of the Title.
Signs to Be Placed Only With Consent Of Property Owner: No sign or part thereof shall be located
on any private property without the consent of the owner, holder, lessee, agent or trustee.
Removal of Inappropriate Commercial Signage: All signage no longer appropriate for or germane
to the business enterprise conducted at that location shall be promptly removed. (Ord. 2001-02)
SECTION 2-9-5 SIGN REGULATIONS WITHIN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
The following sign regulations shall pertain to all residential districts:
A. Residential Signs Within Residential Districts:
Building identification Signs for Multiple-Family Dwellings: For each multiple-family
dwelling, identification signs indicating only the name and address of the building and the
name of the management, not exceeding a total of sixteen (16) square feet in area. Such
TITLE 2 – ZONING
Page 34
signs may not be closer than eight feet (8’) to any other zoning lot. On a corner lot,
identification signs shall be permitted on each street.
Project Identification Sign for Multi-Building Residential Projects: A residential project
having a number of buildings shall be permitted one additional sign at the major entry with
the name of the project only. Such sign shall be not greater than thirty-two (32) square feet
in area and located not closer than sixteen feet (16’) to any other zoning lot.
Sign Height and Projection: No attached sign shall project higher than one (1) story or ten
(10) feet, whichever is lower, above the curbline. No free-standing sign shall project higher
than seven (7) feet above the curbline. No attached sign shall project more than (12) inches
from the wall to which it is attached.
All single family, two-family, and multi-family dwellings shall have the street address
numbers of such dwelling prominently displayed on the front yard side of the dwelling or
primary building thereon and readily visible from the street. (Section 9-6(A) incorporates
this provision for Business Districts.) (Ord. 2000-24)
Non-Residential Signs Within Residential Districts:
Church Bulletins, Cemetery Signs, Educational Institutions, Social Facilities, And Other
Similar Uses: A single identification sign not exceeding twenty (20) square feet except
that on corner lots, two (2) twenty (20) square foot signs will be permitted, one facing each
street.
Non-Conforming Business Signs: Non-conforming business uses may have exterior signs
not exceeding twelve (12) square feet.
Parking Signs: Signs designating parking area entrances or exits are limited to one (1) sign
for each entrance or exit of no more than three (3) square feet gross sign area for each sign
face. One additional sign shall be permitted designating the conditions of use and name of
business served by the parking provided the sign does not exceed nine (9) square feet. No
advertising is permitted on parking area signs.
Sign Height and Projection: No attached sign shall project more than one (1) story or ten
(10) feet above the curbline and more than twelve (12) inches from the wall to which it is
attached. No free-standing sign shall project higher than seven (7) feet.
Any other provisions of this Title notwithstanding, the operator of a public or private outdoor
recreation center may erect temporary fabric or vinyl on premises or off premises signs at the
following locations, provided that the signs are in use for no more than one (1) race season or still
in use more than one hundred-eighty (180) calendar days from their first date of use, whichever is
shorter:
Along the interior perimeter of the facility so as to be visible to spectators.
All such signs shall be legible and maintained in good condition with no tears, cracks, peeling paint
or other conditions which detract from the appearance of the signs. (Ord 2010-35)
SECTION 2-9-6 SIGN REGULATIONS WITHIN BUSINESS DISTRICTS
A. Sign uses permitted in residential districts shall also be permitted in business districts. The
regulations covering permitted uses in residential districts shall also apply in business districts.
B. Business Signs In the B-1 Districts: In the B-1 Business District, business signs are permitted
subject to the following conditions:
Area of Attached and Free-Standing Business Signs: The gross area in square feet of all
signs attached to the wall of a building shall not exceed fifteen (15) percent of the wall area
to which it is attached or of which it is a part where a protective canopy exists over a
pedestrian walkway. Under canopy signs are permitted provided no closer than nine (9)
feet to the sidewalk underneath the signs. The gross area of all free-standing signs shall
not exceed one (1) square foot of area per each lineal foot of frontage on the zoning lot.
TITLE 2 – ZONING
Page 35
Height and Projection Of Signs: No free-standing business sign shall exceed twenty five
(25) feet in height. No attached building sign shall project more than twelve (12) inches
from the wall to which it is attached, nor extend above the roof line.
Integrated Shopping and Office Centers: For integrated shopping and office centers in
single ownership or under unified control, one additional free-standing sign other than
those provided for in the B-1 District above, shall be permitted subject to the following:
a) Sign Content: Such signs shall indicate only the name and location of such center
and the name and type of business of each occupant of the center.
b) Sign Area: The gross area in square feet of such additional sign lot shall not exceed
one times the lineal feet of frontage of such zoning lot.
c) Height of Sign: Such sign shall not exceed twenty-five (25) feet in height.
Business Sign In the B-2 District: In the B-2 District, business signs are permitted subject to the
following conditions:
Sign Area for Attached Business Signs: The gross area in square feet of attached signs
shall not exceed twenty percent (20%) of the wall area per fascia to which it is attached or
of which it is a part.
Sign Area for Free-Standing Business Signs: The gross area in square feet of all freestanding
business signs shall not exceed one (1) square foot per each lineal foot of frontage
of the zoning lot.
Height of Business Signs: No free-standing business sign shall exceed twenty-five feet
(25’) in height. No attached business sign shall project more than twelve (12) inches from
the wall to which it is attached nor extend above the roofline.
Additional Free-Standing Business Signs at Integrated Retail And Office Building Or
Complex: For integrated retail and office building complexes with more than one building
in single ownership or under unified control, one (1) additional free-standing business sign,
other than those contained in B-2 District above, shall be permitted subject to the following:
a) Content: Such signs shall advertise only the name and location of such center, and
the name and type of business of each occupant of the center.
b) Area: The gross area in square feet of the additional free-standing business sign
on the zoning lot shall not exceed one (1) square foot per each lineal foot of
frontage of zoning lot.
c) Height: Such additional free-standing business signs shall not project more than
thirty feet (30’) above the curb level.
SECTION 2-9-7 BUSINESS SIGNS WITHIN INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
The following sign regulations shall pertain to business and advertising signs within industrial districts:
A. Business Signs Permitted In the I-1 And I-2 Industrial Districts Area Subject to the Following
Conditions:
Sign Area for Attached Business Signs: The gross area in square feet of attached business
signs shall not exceed twenty five percent (25%) of the wall area to which it is attached or
of which it is a part.
Sign Area For Free-Standing Business Signs: The gross area in square feet of all freestanding
business signs shall not exceed one (1) square foot per lineal foot of frontage on
the zoning lot.
Height of Business Signs: No attached business sign shall extend above the roofline. No
free-standing business sign shall exceed twenty-five (25) feet in height.
TITLE 2 – ZONING
Page 36
TITLE 2 ZONING
CHAPTER 10 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING
2-10-1 Purpose
2-10-2 Procedure
2-10-3 General Requirements Applying to Both Off-Street Parking and Loading
2-10-4 Additional Regulations Applying to Off-Street Parking Only
2-10-5 Location of Required Off-Street Parking
2-10-6 Schedule of Parking Requirements
2-10-7 Additional Regulations Applying to Off-Street Loading Only
2-10-8 Schedule of Off-Street Loading Requirements
SECTION 2-10-1 PURPOSE
The purpose of the following Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations is to alleviate or prevent
congestion of the public streets by establishing minimum requirements for off-street parking and loading
of motor vehicles in relation to the property served.
SECTION 2-10-2 PROCEDURE
For all uses except one (1) and two (2) family residential structures, an application for a zoning permit for
a new or enlarged building, structure, or use shall include a plot drawn to scale and fully dimensioned
showing any parking or loading facilities to be provided to meet the requirements specified herein.
SECTION 2-10-3 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS APPLYING TO BOTH OFF-STREET PARKING
AND LOADING
A. General Application: No buildings or structures shall be erected or land uses initiated after the
effective date of this Title without providing accessory off-street parking and loading as required
herein.
B. Buildings Under Construction: Buildings lawfully under construction or approved for construction
prior to the adoption of this Title shall not be required to modify or change the approved plans for
off-street parking and loading, provided that such construction is completed within one (1) year
from the date of passage of this Title.
C. Reduction in Parking or Loading Need: When a building or structure shall undergo any decrease
in number of dwelling units, gross floor area, seating capacity, number of employees or other unit
of measurement specified hereinafter for required parking or loading facilities, and further, when
said decrease would result in a requirement for fewer total parking or loading facilities through
application of the provisions of this chapter, parking and loading, may be reduced accordingly,
provided that existing parking or loading facilities remaining would at least equal the parking or
loading requirements as expressed herein when applied to the modified building or structures.
D. Increase In Parking or Loading Need: When a building or structure shall undergo any increase in
the number of dwelling units, gross floor area, seating capacity or other unit of measurement
specified hereinafter for required parking or loading spaces through application of the provisions
of the Chapter thereto, parking and loading facilities shall be increased to accommodate only the
additional need as a result of such change.
E. Existing Parking or Loading Not to be Reduced: Accessory off-street parking and loading spaces
in existence on the effective date of this Title may not be reduced in number unless already
TITLE 2 – ZONING
Page 37
exceeding the requirements as expressed herein for equivalent new construction; in which event,
said spaces shall not be reduced below the number required for such equivalent new construction.
F. Parking and Loading for Reconstructing Damaged Nonconforming Uses: Any nonconforming
building, structure or use in existence on the effective date of this Title shall, if partially destroyed
by fire, collapse or other cause and permitted to rebuild or reconstruct under appropriate provisions
of this Title, provide off-street parking and loading equivalent to those maintained prior to such
damage being sustained.
G. Parking for Combined Uses at One Location: Where more than one use for which parking
requirements are indicated occurs at a location, parking required shall be either the sum of that
required for each separate use or that required for the use requiring the greatest amount of parking,
whichever is more.
H. Requirements for Off-Street Parking and Loading for Uses Not Specified: Requirement for Uses
Not Specified: Schedule for requirements for the number of off-street parking and loading spaces
for various uses is provided herein. The parking and loading requirements for any use not specified
shall be the same as the use with parking and loading requirements stated which most closely
approximates the proposed use.
SECTION 2-10-4 ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS APPLYING TO OFF-STREET PARKING ONLY
A. Limitation of Residential Off-Street Parking: Residential off-street parking accessory to residential
uses and provided in accordance with the requirements of this Chapter shall be used solely for the
parking of vehicles of the owners, occupants or guests of the property to which said parking is
accessory unless off-street space exceeds that required for such vehicles.
B. Joint or Shared Off-Street Parking: Off-Street parking for different buildings, structures or uses
may be provided collectively, provided the total number of spaces will equal the total requirements
for all such uses sharing the parking facility.
C. Guarantee of Off-Site Parking: For other than one (1) and two (2) family residential structures
when required off-street parking is to be provided elsewhere than on the lot on which the principal
use is located, the control and continuing availability of the off-site parking will be guaranteed
either by deed or long-term lease or recorded easement and the owner shall be bound by covenants
properly recorded, requiring the owner, his or her heirs and assigns, to maintain the required number
of parking spaces during the existence of the principal use.
D. Districts in Which Off-Site Off-Street Parking Accessory To Multi-Family Residential Uses Is
Prohibited: No parking facilities accessory to multi-family residential uses, when provided off-site
are to be located in an R-l residential district.
E. Type and Maximum Number of Vehicles to be Stored on Lots in Residential Districts;
Type and maximum number of vehicles to be stored in other than enclosed garages on
single and two (2) family lots in Residential Districts.
a) Class I Vehicles: Vehicles (other than a recreational vehicle) not exceeding twenty
(20) feet in length, seven (7) feet in width and eight (8) feet in height.
Class I Vehicles: Three (3) permitted per single-family lot or per dwelling unit on
duplex lot.
b) Class II Vehicles: Vehicles (other than a recreational vehicle) not a Class I Vehicle
not exceeding twenty-three (23) feet in length, eight (8) feet in width and ten (10)
feet in height, and if used in business, not exceeding ten thousand (10,000) pounds
gross weight including vehicle and maximum load.
Class II Vehicles: Storage not permitted on lot.
c) Class III Vehicles: Vehicle (other than a recreational vehicle) dimensions or weight
limitations of Class I or Class II Vehicles.
TITLE 2 – ZONING
Page 38
Class III Vehicles: Storage not permitted on lot.
d) Recreational Vehicle: One (1) permitted per single-family lot or one per dwelling
unit on a duplex lot.
Types and maximum number of vehicles to be stored in other than enclosed garages on
multi-family residential lots in Residential Districts:
Any number of Class I and Class II vehicles may be stored on lots in the R-2 District
provided that no vehicles will be stored so as to reduce availability of off-street parking
spaces below the minimum required for the use or uses directly served by the parking area.
No Class III vehicles shall be stored in any parking lot in a Multi-family Residential
District.
Vehicles to be currently licensed and operable:
All vehicles stored, in other than enclosed garages on lots in Residential Districts shall have
any required current license and be in operable condition. (Ord. 1997-12)
F. Location and Layout of Off-Street Parking:
Plans for the layout of off-street parking for the purpose of meeting parking requirements
shall be in accordance with the following minimum requirements:
Interpretation of fractional parking spaces resulting from the application of the following
schedule parking requirements shall be as follows: A fractional parking space shall be
considered as one (1) parking space.
All spaces shall be provided adequate access by means of internal maneuvering lanes.
Backing onto a street from other than a one (1) or two (2) family residential structure shall
be prohibited. Variance may be applied for where other than backing is impractical.
Adequate ingress and egress to the parking lot by means of clearly defined drives shall be
provided. Parking lot entrances and exits shall be at least twenty-five feet (25') distant
from any adjacent residential district.
Parking is permitted in the required front, side or rear yards as specified in permitted
obstructions in yards as outlined in Chapter 2 of this Title.
For all newly established and expanding uses, all off-street parking areas and driveways
are to be hard surfaced as defined in this Title. (Ord. 1997-13)
Landscaped buffers or screening is required to be provided and continuously maintained
for off-street parking areas for any business or industrial use adjacent or backing on a
residential district and for any apartment use along any side adjoining an R-1 District.
Types and sizes of plant material shall be as provided in Chapter 2, Section 9 of this Title.
Lighting to illuminate parking areas shall be so arranged as to direct lighting away from
adjoining properties.
It shall be unlawful to park a Class I motor vehicle in a R-1 or a R-2 District unless the
motor vehicle shall be parked on a hard surface as defined in this ordinance.
(Ord. 2015-26, 2007-07, Ord. 1997-13)
Pattern
Maneuvering-
Parking Lane
Width
Parking Space
Width
Parking Space
Length
Total Width of One
Tier of Spaces Plus
Maneuvering Lane
Total Width of
Two Tiers of
Spaces Plus
Maneuvering
Lane
0°* 12 ft. 8 ft. 23 ft. 20 ft. 28 ft.
45° 12 ft. 8 ft. 6 in. 20 ft. 32 ft. 52 ft.
60° 15 ft. 8 ft. 6 in. 20 ft. 36 ft. 6 in. 58 ft.
90°** 20 ft. 9 ft. 20 ft. 40 ft. 60 ft.
* - Parallel Parking.
** - Perpendicular Parking
TITLE 2 – ZONING
Page 39
No more than twenty percent (20%) of any front yard nor more than fifty percent (50%) of
any rear yard shall be hard surfaced, as defined in this Title, for the purpose of off-street
parking. (Ord. 1997-13)
On a corner lot, in addition to the foregoing rules, no more than twenty percent (20%) of
any side yard shall be hard surfaced, as defined in this Ordinance, for the purpose of offstreet
parking. (Ord. 1997-13)
Handicapped Parking Required:
For any parking area to be used by the general public, oversized handicapped spaces, sixteen feet
(16') in width and twenty feet (20') in length shall be provided according to the following schedule:
Required Off-Street Parking Required Handicapped Space
1-20 1
21-50 2
51-75 3
76-100 4
Each additional 50 Spaces or portion thereof 1 additional space
SECTION 2-10-5 LOCATION OF REQUIRED OFF-STREET PARKING
The off-street parking facilities required for the uses mentioned in the schedule of parking requirements,
and for other similar uses, shall be on the same lot or parcel of land as the use they are intended to serve,
but in case of other than one (1) and two (2) family residential structures when practical difficulties prevent
their establishment upon the same lot, the required parking facilities shall be provided within three hundred
feet (300') of the premises to which they are appurtenant. Said distance shall be the walking distance
between the nearest point of the parking area to the nearest entrance of the building the parking is to serve.
Off-street parking provided on other than the same lot as the use served shall meet the requirements for
guarantee of off-street parking as outlined in Chapter 10, Section 4 of this Title.
SECTION 2-10-6 SCHEDULE OF PARKING REQUIREMENTS
A. Parking Required for Residential Uses:
One (1) Family Dwelling: Two (2) parking spaces. Garage and drive shall each be
considered as one (1) parking space each for single-family residential uses only.
Two (2) Family Dwelling: Two (2) parking spaces per dwelling unit. Garage and drive
shall be considered as one (1) parking space each per dwelling unit.
Multi-family Residential: One and one-half (1 1/2) parking spaces for each dwelling unit
having one (1) bedroom. Two (2) parking spaces for each dwelling unit having two (2) or
more bedrooms.
Unrelated Group Family Home: One (1) space for each resident.
Family Care Home: One (1) space per employee plus one (1) space for each resident. The
resident parking requirement may be waived by the Zoning Officer for those facilities that
prohibit ownership or operation of motor vehicles by residents of the facility.
Elderly or Senior Housing: One (1) space for each three (3) residents, plus one (1) space
for each employee.
Mobile Home Parks: Two (2) spaces for each mobile home site, plus one (1) space for
each employee of the mobile home park.
Lodging, Boarding, and Rooming Houses: One (1) space for each guest at maximum
capacity, plus one (1) space for the owner or manager.
B. Parking Required for Institutional Uses:
Churches or Temples: One (1) space for each four (4) seats in the main worship hall.
TITLE 2 – ZONING
Page 40
Elementary and Junior High Schools: One (1) space for each teacher, employee or
administrator in addition to requirements of auditorium, as indicated in Chapter 10, Section
6, (B) 14 of this Title.
Fraternities, Sororities and Dormitories: One (1) parking space for each active member,
plus one (1) additional space for the manager.
Libraries: One (1) parking space for each two hundred (200) square feet of floor area.
Medical and Dental Clinics: One (1) parking space for each two hundred (200) square feet
of gross floor area, with a minimum of five (5) spaces.
Museums: One (1) parking space, per each four hundred (400) square feet of floor area.
Nursery Schools, Day Care Centers or Day Care Homes: One (1) space for each employee
plus two (2) additional visitor spaces.
Nursing and Convalescent Homes and hospitals: One (1) space for each four (4) beds, plus
one (1) space for each staff doctor and visiting doctor, plus one (1) space for each two (2)
employees.
Private Clubs and Lodges (without sleeping accommodations): One (1) parking space for
each four (4) members of the total membership or one (1) space for each two hundred (200)
square feet of floor area in the building, whichever is larger.
Private Golf, Swimming, Tennis Club or Similar Use: One (1) space for each four (4)
family or individual memberships, plus spaces required for accessory uses such as bar and
restaurant areas, as provided for in Chapter 10, Section 6.5 of this Title.
Public Swimming Pools: One (1) parking space for each three (3) persons at maximum
capacity.
Public Golf Courses: Six (6) spaces for each golf hole, plus spaces required for accessory
bar and restaurant use, as indicated in Chapter 10, Section 6 .5 of this Title.
Senior high Schools: One (1) space for each teacher, employee or administrator and one
(1) space for each ten (10) students in addition to requirements of auditorium, as indicated
in this section of this Title.
Stadium, Sports Arena, Auditoriums and Gymnasiums: One (1) space for each six (6) seats
or twelve feet (12’) of benches.
C. Parking Required for Business and Commercial Uses:
Planned Commercial or Shopping Center: One (1) space for each two hundred (200)
square feet of usable floor area or retail area.
Beauty Parlor or Barber Shop: Two (2) spaces for each barber or beauty chair.
Bowling Alleys: Four (4) spaces for each bowling lane, plus spaces required for accessory
uses such as bar and restaurant.
Convention Halls, Dance Halls, Skating Rinks, Assembly or Exhibition Halls or Other
Similar Places of Assembly Without Fixed Seats: One (1) parking space for each one
hundred (100) square feet of usable floor area used for assembly.
Establishments Handling the Sale and Consumption on the Premises of Alcoholic
Beverages, Food or Refreshments: One (1) parking space for each one hundred (100)
square feet of floor area.
Furniture and Appliance Shops, Household Equipment and Repair or Machinery Shops:
One (1) parking space for each six hundred (600) square feet of floor area.
Gasoline Service Stations: One (1) space for each lubrication or service stall, plus one (1)
space for each two (2) serviced pumps or one (1) space for each four (4) unserviced pumps.
Laundromats and Coin-Operated Dry Cleaners: One (1) space for each four (4) washing
or cleaning machines.
Miniature or "Par 3" Golf Courses: Three (3) spaces for each hole, plus one (1) for each
employee.
Mortuaries: One (1) space for each one hundred (100) square feet of floor area in the public
areas.
TITLE 2 – ZONING
Page 41
Motel, Hotel, Bed and Breakfast, or Other Similar Uses: One (1) space for each occupancy
unit, plus one (1) space for each owner and employee, plus for motels and hotels, spaces
as required herein for accessory uses such as bar and restaurant.
Motor Vehicle Sales and Service: One (1) space for each four hundred (400) square feet
of salesroom, plus one (1) space for each auto service stall.
Photo Studio or Video Film Service where retail sales are minor and incidental to the
primary service: Two (2) spaces for each employee serving customers.
Retail Stores not Specifically Designated Above: One (1) parking space for each one
hundred fifty (150) square feet of retail floor area.
Theaters, Indoor: One (1) space for each six (6) seats, plus one (1) space for each two (2)
employees.
D. Parking Required for Offices and Financial Institutions;
Banks, Savings and Loan: One (1) space for each four hundred (400) square feet of usable
floor area or customer service area.
Other Business and Professional Offices: One (1) space for each two hundred-fifty (250)
square feet of floor area.
E. Parking Required for Industrial Uses:
Manufacturing and Industrial Uses, Research and Testing Laboratories, Laundry and Dry
Cleaning Plants, Printing, Binding, Publishing, Assembly of Materials and Products, and
Other Similar Uses: One (1) parking space for every two (2) employees on the largest shift,
including office workers.
Warehouse and Storage Uses: One (1) parking space for every employee in the largest
shift, including office workers.
SECTION 2-10-7 ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS APPLYING TO OFF-STREET LOADING ONLY
Location and Layout of Off-Street Loading: Off-Street loading spaces shall be as provided in the schedule
of off-street loading requirements. An off-street loading berth shall be a hard-surfaced area of land open
or enclosed, other than a street or public way, used principally for the standing, loading or unloading of
motor trucks, tractors and trailers so as to avoid undue interference with public streets and alleys. Loading
spaces, where required, shall be not less than ten (10) feet in width, forty-five (45) feet in length and fourteen
(14) feet in height (10' x 45' x 14'), exclusive of access aisles and maneuvering space. Plans for location
and layout of off-street loading areas shall meet the following minimum requirements:
A. Loading berths shall be no closer than one hundred feet (100') to an adjoining residential zoning
district unless completely screened along that adjoining side by a building wall not less than eight
feet (8') in height.
B. Location of loading berths shall not obstruct the visibility at intersections.
C. Loading berths open to the sky may be located in any required side or rear yard, provided that
loading berths within one hundred feet (100') of residential districts are enclosed as specified above.
Loading berths shall not be located in front yards or closer to the front street than the building
setback.
D. Fractional loading berth space resulting from the application of the schedule of off-street loading
requirements shall be considered an additional loading berth.
E. Off-street loading areas for office, commercial, and industrial uses shall be hard surfaced with
bituminous concrete, A-3, or equivalent.
SECTION 2-10-8 SCHEDULE OF OFF-STREET LOADING REQUIREMENTS
TITLE 2 – ZONING
Page 42
For all property uses where loading or unloading of materials and merchandise is an essential part of such
business, the following requirements shall apply:
A. Hospitals, Sanitariums, and Clinics: One (1) off-street loading space for the first forty thousand
(40,000) square feet of gross floor area, plus one (1) additional space for each one hundred fifty
(150,000) square feet of gross floor area in excess of forty thousand (40,000) square feet.
B. Retail Shops, Bowling Alleys, Taverns, Restaurants: One (1) off-street loading space for each
structure containing twenty thousand (20,000) to one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet of
gross floor area, plus one (1) additional space for each one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet
of gross floor area in excess of one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet.
C. Office Buildings, Including Banks, Business and Professional Offices: One (1) off-street loading
space for each structure containing forty thousand (40,000) to one hundred thousand (100,000)
square feet of gross floor area plus one (1) additional space for each one hundred thousand
(100,000) square feet of gross floor area in excess of one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet.
D. Furniture and Appliance Outlets, Motor Vehicle Sales, Wholesale Stores,Household Equipment or
Machinery Sales: One (1) off-street loading space for each building of ten thousand (10,000) to
twenty-five thousand (25,000) square feet of gross floor area, plus one (1) space for each twentyfive
thousand (25,000) square feet of gross floor area in excess of twenty-five thousand (25,000)
square feet.
E. Manufacturing, Research and Testing Laboratories, Laundry and Cleaning Plants, Printing,
Binding and Publishing, Warehouse and Storage, Processing and Distribution of Materials and
Products: One (1) off-street loading space for each fifteen thousand (15,000) to forty thousand
(40,000) square feet of gross floor area, plus one (1) space for each sixty thousand (60,000) square
feet of gross floor area in excess of forty thousand (40,000) square feet.
TITLE 2 – ZONING
Page 43
TITLE 2 ZONING
CHAPTER 11 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
2-11-1 Responsibility for Zoning Administration
2-11-2 Procedure for Zoning Administration
2-11-3 Interpretation and Relation to Other Ordinance and Restrictions
2-11-4 Repeal of Prior Zoning Titles
2-11-5 Penalties
2-11-6 Fees
2-11-7 Plan Commission
2-11-8 Zoning Board of Appeals
SECTION 2-11-1 RESPONSIBILITY FOR ZONING ADMINISTRATION
The authority for administration of this Title is hereby vested in the Zoning Officer, the Zoning Board of
Appeals, the Planning Commission and the City Council as outlined herein.
A. Duties of the City Council in Administration of this Title: The City Council, in its responsibilities
under this Title, shall carry out and perform the following duties:
Approve the appointment, by the Mayor, of the Zoning Officer.
a) Take action, following procedures as outlined herein on the following:
b) Adopting zoning standards, including the Zoning District Map, and take action on
subsequent petitions for amendment of such standards.
c) Take action on special use applications.
Take action on variation applications.
Engage professional services as it deems advisable to assist the Planning Commission
and/or City Council in review of matters pending before one (1) or more such bodies.
B. Zoning Officer, Creation of Office, Appointment and Duties: The Zoning Officer of the City shall
be appointed for a one (1) Year Term by the Mayor with the approval of the City Council. Term of
office shall run from May I to April 30. A Deputy Zoning Officer may be appointed in a similar
manner to take action on Zoning Officer matters in the absence of the Zoning Officer. Reappointments
are possible.
Duties of the Zoning Officer in Administration of this Title: The Zoning Officer, in his
responsibilities under this Title, shall carry out and perform the following duties:
Issue all zoning and sign permits and maintain records of permits issued. Issue all
certificates of occupancy and maintain records of certificates issued.
Conduct inspections of buildings, structures and uses of land to determine compliance with
the terms of this Title.
Maintain necessary forms for permits, appeals, application for zoning amendments, special
uses, variances, and other matters required to be acted upon by the Zoning Board of
Appeals.
Inform persons in violation of this Title of the provisions of this Title with which they are
in noncompliance and the remedies available to them. Notify the City Council and City
Attorney by letter of persons found in violation. Post stop work orders and assess stop work
order fees established by City Council. See Title 11, Fee Schedule.
Maintain permanent and current records of this Title, including, but not limited to copies
of zoning ordinances including district maps, all maps, amendments and special uses,
variations, appeals and applications therefor.
Receive, file, and forward to the Zoning Board of Appeals, applications for special uses,
or variations and arrange for proper notice for public hearing.
TITLE 2 – ZONING
Page 44
Receive, file and forward to the Planning Commission applications for amendments and
arrange for proper notice for public hearing. Receive, file, and forward site plan review
materials to the Planning Commission in instances where site plan review is required under
this Title.
Make recommendation to the City Council and Planning Commission periodically on need
for amending and restudy of the provisions of this Title.
Provide such clerical and technical assistance as may be required by the office in the
exercise of its duties.
Duties of the Planning Commission in Administration of this Title: The Planning Commission has
the following duties and responsibilities under this Title:
To receive from the Zoning Officer applications for text and map amendments regarding
this Title and the official Zoning Map, respectively, hear and make recommendations upon
such applications. Notify City Council of such recommendations.
To receive from the Zoning Officer materials for site plan review in those instances where
site plan review is required under this Title.
To, upon its own action, petition for zoning amendments when deemed appropriate.
Duties of the Zoning Board of Appeals in Administration of this Title:
Receive from the Zoning Officer, hear and make determinations of appeals filed by any
person, office, department, board or bureau aggrieved by a decision of the Zoning Officer
and notify the Zoning Officer of such determination.
Receive from the Zoning Officer, hear and recommend variations of this Title in harmony
with the general purpose and intent, and only in the specific instances contained in the
variation procedures outlined in this Chapter. Notify the Zoning Officer of such variation
actions and recommendation to Council.
Receive from the Zoning Officer applications for special exceptions, hear and make
determinations consistent with the standards outlined in this Title for granting special
exceptions. Notify the Zoning Officer of such decisions and recommendation to Council.
To, upon its own action, petition for zoning amendment when deemed appropriate.
Membership. The Planning Commission and Zoning Board of Appeals shall consist of seven (7)
members that reside within the City. Members shall be appointed by the Mayor on the basis of their
particular fitness for their duty and subject to approval of the City Council. A person may serve on
both the Planning Commission and the Zoning Board of Appeals simultaneously. (Ord. 2019-15)
SECTION 2-11-2 PROCEDURE FOR ZONING ADMINISTRATION
A. Zoning Permit Procedure:
No zoning permit pertaining to the use of land, structures or buildings or sign permit shall
be issued by any officer, department or employee of the City unless the application for such
permit has been subjected to review by the Zoning Officer for compliance with this Title.
Any permit issued in conflict with the provisions of this Title shall be null and void. Zoning
or sign permits shall not be issued to any applicant so long as that applicant is indebted to
the City for any prior fees of any type. See Title 11, Fee Schedule, for application fee.
Applications for zoning and sign permits shall be filed in written form with the Zoning
Officer on forms prescribed by him indicating:
For Zoning Permits:
a) Legal description and address of the property;
b) Name and address of applicant, owner and contractor;
c) Uses to be established or expanded;
d) Other information deemed appropriate by the Zoning Officer to clearly denote the
nature and character of the intended improvement and use.
TITLE 2 – ZONING
Page 45
For Sign Permits:
a) Address of property;
b) Description of sign to be constructed or erected, including location, dimensions,
height and clearances (for overhead signs).
For all uses, except one (1) and two (2) family residential structures on platted regular
shaped lots, the applications for a zoning permit shall be accompanied by a drawing
to scale showing the actual dimensions as certified by a land surveyor or licensed civil
engineer as a true copy of the lot on which the improvement or use is to be placed,
accompanied by a drawing to scale of the location on such lot of the proposed building,
structure of use, and accessory buildings; and location and height of any fences or
landscape screening proposed to be installed.
For one (1) and two (2) family structures on platted regular shaped lots, the application for
a zoning permit shall be accompanied by a dimensioned freehand sketch drawing showing
the proposed building, structure or use, nearest distances to lot lines, height of buildings or
portions of buildings, and location and height of fences or landscape screening proposed
to be installed.
The Zoning Officer shall approve or deny the issuance of a zoning permit or a sign permit
within ten (10) calendar days of the date of filing for such permit. If not approved within
the time limit, the zoning permit shall be deemed to be denied. The Zoning Officer may
require, in certain circumstances, that the requested permit application be reviewed by the
local Fire Department for its recommendation to the appropriate parties.
(Ord. 1996-03, 1998-23, 2001-04, 2002-11)
Such zoning permit or sign permit, once issued, shall be maintained in a prominent location
at the premises for which it is issued, and shall not be removed until final inspection and
issuance of a certificate of occupancy by the Zoning Officer relative to the zoning permit
or until the construction or erection of the sign is complete relative to the sign permit.
Work or change in use authorized by zoning permit but not started within ninety (90) days
shall require a new permit. Construction or erection of a sign authorized by a sign permit
but not started within thirty (30) days shall require a new permit. Permits issued for new
building construction or expansion shall require the completion of the exterior of buildings
within three hundred sixty (360) days. A permit shall be revoked and notice of violation
issued when it shall be found from personal inspection or competent evidence that the rules
or Titles under which it has been issued are being violated. See Title 11, Fee Schedule for
sign permit fee.
Zoning Certificate of Occupancy Procedure:
No building or building addition constructed after the effective date of this Title, shall be
used for any purpose until a certificate of occupancy has been issued by the Zoning Officer.
No change in use shall be made until such certificate of occupancy shall state that the use
of occupancy complies with the provisions of this Title.
Every application for a zoning permit shall be deemed to be an application for a certificate
of occupancy.
No certificate of occupancy for the use of a premises for which a zoning permit has been
issued shall be issued until construction has been completed, a final inspection made and
the premises certified to be in compliance with the plans and specifications for which the
zoning permit was issued. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued to any applicant so
long as that applicant is indebted to the village for any prior fees of any type. The zoning
certificate of occupancy shall be issued or denied within seven (7) days after the Zoning
Officer is notified that the building or premises is ready for occupancy.
Variance:
The Zoning Board of Appeals, after a public hearing, may recommended to the City
Council the varying of the regulations of this Title in harmony with their general purpose
TITLE 2 – ZONING
Page 46
and intent only in the specific instances hereinafter set forth, where the Zoning Board of
Appeals makes finding of fact in accordance with the standards hereinafter prescribed and
further, finds that there are practical difficulties or particular hardships in the way of
carrying out the strict letter of these regulations.
An application for variation shall be filed in writing with the Zoning Officer. The
application shall contain such information as the Zoning Board of Appeals may, by rule,
require. The Zoning Officer shall arrange proper legal notice, as required by law, and
schedule a public hearing before the Zoning Board of Appeals. The required legal notice
may be supplemented by such additional form of notice as the Zoning Board of Appeals
may, by rule, require.. See Title 11, Fee Schedule. (Ord. 1998-10)
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall not recommend to the City Council varying the
requirements of this Title, as authorized by this Section, unless it shall first make findings
of fact based upon the evidence presented to it in each of the following, evidence of which
the petitioner is responsible for demonstrating:
a) That the property in question cannot yield a reasonable return if permitted to be
used only under the conditions allowed by the regulations governing the zoning
district in which it is located.
b) That special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to the land,
structure or building involved and which are not applicable to other lands,
structures or buildings in the same district.
c) That literal interpretation of the provisions of this Title would deprive the applicant
of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties in the same district under the terms
of this Title.
d) That the plight of the applicant is due to unique circumstances and does not result
from the actions of the applicant.
e) That granting the variation requested will not confer on the applicant any special
privilege that is denied by this Title to other lands, structures or buildings in the
same district.
f) That the variation, if granted, will not alter the essential character of the locality.
No non-conforming uses of neighboring lands or structures, in the same district, and no
permitted, special or non-conforming uses of lands or structures in other districts shall be
considered grounds for the issuance of a variance.
The Zoning Board of Appeals may require such conditions and restrictions upon the
premises benefited by a variation as may be necessary to comply with the standards set
forth in this Section to reduce or minimize the injurious effect of such variation upon other
property in the neighborhood, and to implement the general purpose and intent of this Title.
The following situations, and only those situations, are permissible areas in which
variations from the requirements of this Title are allowed to be recommended by the
Zoning Board of Appeals, and granted by the City Council when in accordance with the
standards established in this Section:
a) To permit a yard less than required by the applicable regulations.
b) To permit the use of a lot of record on the effective date of this Title for a use
otherwise prohibited solely because of the insufficient area of the lot, but in no
event shall the area of the lot be less than sixty percent (60%) of the required lot
area.
c) To permit the same off-street parking spaces to qualify as required spaces for two
(2) or more uses, provided that the maximum use of such facility by each use does
not take place during the same hours of the same days of the week.
d) To increase by not more than twenty-five percent (25%) the maximum distance
that required parking spaces are permitted to be located from the use served.
e) To permit a variation in number, size or location of accessory use, accessory area,
accessory buildings or structures.
TITLE 2 – ZONING
Page 47
f) Nothing herein contained shall be construed to give or grant to the Zoning Board
of Appeals the power to recommend through variations, or to the City Council, the
authority to alter or change the zoning classifications of the Zoning District Map
or to permit a use not otherwise permitted by variation; such power and authority
being exercised only by the Zoning Amendment Procedure as outlined
subsequently herein.
g) Allowance of barbed wire as a fence material. (Ord. 2017-16)
Appeals Procedure:
An appeal may be taken to the Zoning Board of Appeals by any person or by any officer,
department, board or bureau aggrieved by a decision of the Zoning Officer. Such an appeal
shall be taken within forty-five (45) days of the action complained of, by filing with the
Zoning Officer a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The Zoning Officer shall
forthwith transmit to the Zoning Board of Appeals all the papers constituting a record upon
which the action appealed from was taken. See Title 11, Fee Schedule for application fee
to appeal Zoning Board decision.
An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed unless the Zoning
Officer certifies to the Zoning Board of Appeals, after notice of the appeal has been filed
with the City Clerk, that by reason of facts stated in the appeal, a stay would, in his opinion,
cause imminent peril to life or property, in which case the proceedings shall not be stayed
unless by a restraining order which may be granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals or by
a court of record in application of the Zoning Officer and on due cause shown.
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall select a reasonable time and place for the hearing of
the appeal and give notice thereof to the parties, and shall render a written decision on the
appeal without unreasonable delay. The Zoning Board of Appeals may affirm or may
reverse, wholly or in part, or modify the order, requirement, decision or determination that,
in its opinion, ought to be done; and to that end, shall have all the powers of the officer
from whom the appeal is taken. The Zoning Officer shall maintain records of all actions
of the Zoning Board of Appeals relative to appeals.
Zoning Amendment Procedure:
Amendments may be proposed by the City Council, the Planning Commission, the
Zoning Board of Appeals, or any person, firm, corporation, or organization, provided that
any person, firm, corporation, or organization shall have a freehold interest, a possessory
interest entitled to exclusive possession, a contractual interest which may become a
freehold interest, or any exclusive possessory interest (with the concurrence of the person
holding the freehold interest) which is specifically enforceable in the land which is
described in the application for amendment. Any proposal shall set forth names of owners
of all beneficial interests in any land trusts wherein a land trust is proposing such
amendment.
An application for an amendment shall be obtained from and filed with the Zoning Officer.
Such applications for zoning amendments shall be in a form so that the application, when
complete, including required accompanying material, shall provide such information as
required by the Planning Commission for its review. Application for amendments initiated
by the Planning Commission, Zoning Board of Appeals or City Council shall include a
copy of the minutes of that body approving the filing of an application for zoning
amendment.
Applications for zoning amendments initiated by any person, firm, corporation or
organization described above as eligible to petition for a zoning amendment, shall not be
considered nor scheduled for public hearing until the zoning amendment fee has been
deposited with the City Clerk to partially cover the cost of this procedure, and under no
condition shall such sum or any part thereof be refunded for failure of said amendment to
be enacted into law. See Title 11, Fee Schedule, for application for zoning amendment fee.
TITLE 2 – ZONING
Page 48
Once an application for an Amendment has been filed with the Zoning Officer, the Zoning
Officer shall arrange proper legal notice, as required by law, and schedule a public hearing
before the Planning Commission. (Ord. 1998-11)
The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on each application for zoning
amendment at the time and place scheduled in the public notice. The hearing shall be
conducted and a record of proceedings preserved in the manner as from time to time
prescribed by the Planning Commission. Where additional information is required for the
Planning Commission's review, the Commission, by official action, may continue the
hearing to the time and place of the next Planning Commission meeting.
Within forty-five (45) days after the close of the hearing on a proposed amendment, the
Planning Commission shall make its recommendations to the City Council. On
applications for zoning amendments which would change the zoning classification of a
particular property, the recommendation shall include findings of fact bearing on the
decision. Such findings of fact shall relate to matters such as:
a) Existing uses of other property within the general area of the subject property;
b) Evidenced recent trends in land use development of the general area;
c) Any conditions which render the property less desirable or inappropriate for the
uses to which it is presently zoned;
d) Availability of other areas already zoned for such uses;
e) The zoning amendment, if granted, serves the public interest and not solely benefit
the property of the applicant alone.
f) The amendment would not be inconsistent with the objectives of the
Comprehensive Plan.
In its findings of fact and recommendation to the City Council, the Planning Commission
may recommend approval or disapproval, or recommend the change of zoning
classification of the subject property to any other more restrictive zoning classification than
specified in the public notice.
The City Council shall not act upon a proposed amendment to this Title until it shall have
received a written report and recommendation from the Planning Commission except,
however, an absence of action by the Planning Commission within forty-five (45) days of
the public hearing of the matter shall be deemed to be a favorable recommendation. A
favorable vote of two-thirds (2/3) of the Aldermen then holding office shall be required to
adopt a zoning amendment not recommended by the Planning Commission. (Ord. 2002-12)
The City Council, after receiving the recommendation of the Planning Commission, or
after the above prescribed time period, if no report is received, and without further public
hearing may grant or deny any proposed zoning amendment or may refer it back to the
Planning Commission for further study. In case of a written protest against any proposed
zoning amendment signed and acknowledged by the owners of twenty percent (20%) of
the frontage proposed to be altered, or by the owners of twenty percent (20%) of the
frontage immediately adjoining or across an alley therefrom, or by the owners of twenty
percent (20%) of the frontage directly opposite the frontage proposed to be altered, as to
Titles or district, filed with the City Clerk, such amendment shall not be passed except by
the favorable vote of two-thirds (2/3) of the Aldermen then holding office. (Ord. 2002-12)
The City Council shall cause to be published, no later than March 31 of each year, a zoning
district map clearly showing the existing zoning uses, divisions, restrictions, regulations
and classifications for the preceding calendar year. If, in any calendar year, there are no
changes in the zoning uses, divisions, restrictions, regulations, and classifications, no map
need be published for such calendar year.
The City Council may establish a fee to be charged each person desiring a copy of such
map. Such fee shall be paid to the City Clerk who shall account for such moneys. Such
fees shall be applied to defray the cost of publishing the zoning map.
TITLE 2 – ZONING
Page 49
Special Uses:
Applications for special use may be filed by any person having a freehold interest in land
or a possessory interest entitled to exclusive possession (with the concurrence of the person
holding the freehold interest), or a contractual interest, which may become a freehold
interest, or an exclusive possessory interest, which is specifically enforceable. See Title
11, Fee Schedule, for application fee.
An application for a special use permit shall be obtained from and filed with the Zoning
Officer. Such application for a special use permit shall be in a form so that the application,
when complete, including required accompanying material, shall provide such information
as required by the Zoning Board of Appeals for its review. The accompanying material
shall include a written statement signed by the applicant as to how the standards for the
granting of the special use permit are met. These standards shall include:
a) That the proposed use will not adversely affect other property developed or able to
be developed to the uses already permitted;
b) That adequate utilities, access roads, drainage and other necessary supporting
facilities have been or are being provided;
c) That adequate measures have been provided to accommodate ingress and egress
so as to avoid congestion, not unduly impede surrounding traffic flows, or create
hazardous or unsafe conditions;
d) That the standards for site development, will be such as to enhance the proposed
use and its setting, screen or so locate parking, loading, storage, and less attractive
accessory uses away from public view, and to otherwise complement the visual
appearance of the area in which the proposed project is to be located. The applicant
may offer or the Zoning Board of Appeals may require a development plan and
landscape and screening plan as part of the applicant’s written statement;
e) That the proposed special use, if permitted, will conform to all other requirements
of the district in which it is to be located or if not conforming, a listing of necessary
variations which will be required subsequent to the granting of the special use by
the City Council.
Once the special use application has been filed with the Zoning Officer, the Zoning Officer
shall arrange proper legal notice as required by law and schedule the public hearing for the
next regular Zoning Board of Appeals meeting, which fulfills minimum public notice
requirements.
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hold a public hearing on the proposed special use at
the time and place scheduled in the public notice. The hearing shall be conducted and a
record of the proceedings preserved in the manner as from time to time prescribed by the
Zoning Board of Appeals.
Within forty-five (45) days of the close of the hearing on the proposed special use, the
Zoning Board of Appeals shall make its recommendation to the City Council attaching the
applicant’s signed statement and any other conditions suggested by the Zoning Board of
Appeals. The City Council may grant or deny the special use permit and may modify or
attach any additional conditions to which the proposed special use would be subject. The
granting of a special use by City Council previously denied by the zoning board of appeals
requires a two-thirds (2/3) vote of the City Council in approving such special use.
The granting of a special use by the City Council shall constitute authorization for the
Zoning Officer to issue a zoning permit for the proposed use subject to any conditions
imposed in the granting.
Special uses approved by the City Council shall be designated on the Zoning Map by a
symbol. Failure of the applicant or other subsequent person, individual, firm, or
corporation continuing the special use, from continually maintaining the use in a manner
complying with the conditions under which the use was granted, shall constitute a zoning
violation subject to the penalties of this Title.
TITLE 2 – ZONING
Page 50
In the event of termination of a special use, permitted uses under the applicable zoning
classification shall be the only uses allowed and for which required permits may be issued.
Conditions may be imposed upon special uses under this Zoning Ordinance as amended
from time to time as follows by recommendation of the Zoning Board of Appeals and
approval of the City Council:
a) The proposed size of the venture may be limited.
b) Number of building units may be limited.
c) The number of persons who may live or work in the proposed venture may be
limited.
d) That any proposed or required landscaping be properly maintained.
e) That natural drainage of the parcel not be disturbed in any manner detrimental to
surrounding property.
f) That all ordinances of the City of West Peoria be complied with.
g) That additional buffering be supplied.
h) That lighting be installed or used in a particular manner.
i) That approval must be obtained from the Zoning Board of Appeals and the City
Council to transfer the special use permit.
j) That a forfeiture of the special use permit will occur if a violation of the conditions
or City ordinances applicable thereto is not corrected within thirty (30) days after
written notice of the violation is mailed.
k) Also, prior to the granting of any special use, the Zoning Board of Appeals may
recommend and the City Council may place such other conditions and restrictions
upon the establishment, locations, construction, maintenance and operation of the
special use as it is deemed necessary for the protection of the public interest and to
secure compliance with applicable ordinances. In all cases in which special uses
are subject to conditions, the Zoning Board of Appeals may recommend and the
City Council may require evidence and guarantees as it may deem necessary as
proof that the conditions stipulated in connection therewith are being and will be
complied with. (Ord. 1999-11)
SECTION 2-11-3 INTERPRETATION AND RELATION TO OTHER ORDINANCES AND
RESTRICTIONS
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this Title, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements
for the promotion of public safety, health, convenience, comfort, morals and general welfare. It is not
intended by this Title to interfere with, abrogate, annul or repeal any ordinance, rules or Titles previously
adopted and not in conflict with any of the provisions of this Title or which shall be adopted pursuant to
law relating to the use of buildings or premises, nor is it intended by this Title to interfere with, abrogate or
annul any easements, covenants or other agreements between parties, except that where this Title imposes
a greater restriction upon the use of buildings or premises or upon the height of buildings or required larger
open spaces than other covenants or other agreements, the provisions of this Title shall control.
SECTION 2-11-4 REPEAL OF PRIOR ZONING TITLES
Upon its adoption and this Title taking effect, any prior existing zoning rules and Titles heretofore applying
to West Peoria shall continue in effect, except where the terms of this Title conflict with such rules and
regulations, in which case the terms of this Title shall control.
SECTION 2-11-5 PENALTIES
A. Violations and Penalties: Any person or any entity which violates, disobeys, omits, neglects, or
refuses to comply with, or who resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of this Title shall
TITLE 2 – ZONING
Page 51
be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each
offense. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
B. City Council May Pursue Additional Remedies to Violations: In case any building or structure is
erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted or maintained or any building,
structure or land is used in violation of this Title, the proper authorities of the City of West Peoria,
in addition to other remedies, may institute any appropriate action or proceedings to prevent such
unlawful erection, maintenance or use; to restrain, correct or abate such violation; to prevent the
occupancy of said building, structure or land; or to prevent any illegal act, conduct, business or use
in or about such premises.
SECTION 2-11-6 FEES
An application for an amendment, special use, variation, appeal, or zoning permit, filed by or on behalf of
the owner or owners of the property affected shall be accompanied by the appropriate fee which shall be
set by the City Council by resolution as it shall deem necessary from time to time. Application for zoning
permit shall also be construed as an application for the certificate of occupancy for which no fee is required.
SECTION 2-11-7 PLAN COMMISSION
A. The Plan Commission will consist of seven (7) members. The original Plan Commission members
shall be appointed to serve the following terms:
One for one (1) year;
One for two (2) years;
One for three (3) years;
One for four (4) years;
One for five (5) years;
One for six (6) years;
One for seven (7) years.
The successors to each member so appointed shall serve for a term of five (5) years and until their
successors are appointed and qualified.
Vacancy. If a vacancy occurs in the office of any commission member, a successor shall be
appointed to serve for the unexpired term.
Appointments. Members of the Plan Commission shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice
and consent of the City Council. One of the members shall be named as Chairman at the time of
his or her appointment.
Meetings and Rules. All meetings of the Plan Commission shall be held at the call of the Chairman
and at such other times as the Plan Commission may determine. All hearings conducted by said
Plan Commission under the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance shall be in accordance with the
statutes. In all proceedings of the Plan Commission, the Chairman, and in his absence the acting
Chairman, shall have the power to administer oaths. The Plan Commission shall keep minutes of
its meetings and also keep records of its hearings and other official actions. No hearings shall be
conducted without a quorum of the Commission which shall consist of at least four (4) members.
The Plan Commission may make recommendations upon the vote of a majority of a quorum. All
meetings of the Plan Commissions hall be open to the public. (Ord. 1994-09)
SECTION 2-11-8 ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
A. The Zoning Board of Appeals will consist of seven (7) members, one of whom shall be designated
as Chairman at the time of his appointment. The members and Chairman shall be appointed by the
Mayor with the advice and consent of the City Council. Initial members shall be appointed as
follows:
TITLE 2 – ZONING
Page 52
One for one (1) year;
One for two (2) years;
One for three (3) years;
One for four (4) years;
One for five (5) years;
One for six (6) years;
One for seven (7) years.
The successors to each member so approved shall serve for a term of five (5) years and until their
respective successors are appointed and qualified.
B. Vacancy. If a vacancy occurs in the office of the Zoning Board of Appeals, the Mayor with the
advice and consent of the City Council shall immediately appoint a replacement to serve the
remainder of the term.
C. Meetings and Rules.
All meetings of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be held at the call of the Chairman and
at such other times as the Board may determine. Testimony of witnesses at any hearing
shall be given under oath. The Chairman, or in his absence the acting Chairman, may
administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings of the Board shall
be open to the public. The Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote
of each member upon every question or failing to vote indicating that fact, and shall also
keep records of its examinations and other official action. Every rule, regulation,
amendment, or repeal thereof in every order, requirement, decision, or determination of the
Board shall immediately be filed in the office of the City Clerk and shall be a public record.
No hearings shall be conducted without a quorum which shall consist of at least four (4) of
all the members. Any absent member who certifies that he or she has read a transcript of
the proceedings before the Board may vote upon any question before the Board.
(Ord. 1994-09)
TITLE 2 – ZONING
Page 53
TITLE 2 ZONING
CHAPTER 12 DEFINITIONS
2-12-1 Rules for Construction
2-12-2 Definitions
SECTION 2-12-1 RULES FOR CONSTRUCTIONS
The language set forth in the text of this Title shall be interpreted in accordance with the following rules
for construction:
A. The singular number includes the plural and the plural, the singular.
B. The present tense includes the past and future tenses and the future, the present.
C. The word "shall" is mandatory, while the word "may" is permissive.
D. The masculine gender includes the feminine and the neuter.
E. All measured distances shall be to the nearest integral foot. If a fraction is one-half (1/2) or less,
the integral foot next below shall be taken.
F. Whenever a word, a phrase or term defined hereinafter appears in the text of this Title, its meaning
shall be construed as set forth in the definition thereof. The word "lot" shall include all other
structures of every kind regardless of similarity to buildings; and, the phrase "use for" shall include
the phrase "arranged for," "intended for," "maintained for," "designed for" and "occupied for".
SECTION 2-12-2 DEFINITIONS
Accessory Use or Building: A use or building customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use
or building and located on the same lot with such principal use or building. Nothing in the West Peoria
Zoning regulations as amended from time to time is intended to apply to buildings or structures that are less
than twenty-five (25) square feet in floor area and less than five (5) feet in height. (Ord. 2000-22)
Alley: A public way with a width not exceeding twenty feet (20') in right-of-way used primarily as a service
access to the rear or side of a property which abuts on a street.
Automotive Service Station: Buildings and premises where gasoline, oil, grease, batteries, tires and
automobile accessories may be supplied and dispensed at retail. Uses permissible at an automotive service
station do not include major mechanical and body work, straightening of body parts, painting, welding,
storage of automobiles not in operating condition, or other work involving noise, glare, fumes, smoke or
other characteristics to an extent greater than normally found in automotive service stations, an automotive
service station is not a repair garage nor a body shop (see Garage).
Basement: A portion of a building located partly underground but having less than one- half (1/2) of its
clear floor-to-ceiling height above the average grade of the adjoining ground (see Cellar).
Bed and Breakfast Inn: A structure having historical or architectural character occupied as a residence by
the property owner and providing overnight accommodations and in some instances, a meal or meals to
occupants. The bed and breakfast inn provides guest accommodations of not more than three (3) bedrooms
to guests with occupancy of one (1) week or less (see Rooming House).
Buildable Area: The total area of the parcel minus the area within the required front, rear, and side yards.
Building: Any structure which is built for the support, shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or
movable property of any kind, and which is permanently affixed to the land (see Structure).
TITLE 2 – ZONING
Page 54
Building, Accessory: A subordinate building or a portion of a principal building, the use of which is
incidental and customary to that of the principal building.
Building, Detached: A building surrounded by open space on the same lot.
Building, Principal: A non-accessory building in which the principal use of the lot on which it is located,
is conducted.
Building, Temporary: A building not designed to be permanently located in the place where it is, or where
it is intended to be placed or affixed.
Bulk: The term used to indicate the size and setbacks of buildings or structures and the location of same
with respect to one another, and including the following:
A. Size and height of buildings.
B. Location of exterior walls at all levels in relation to lot lines, street or to other buildings.
C. All open spaces allocated to buildings.
D. Amount of lot area provided per dwelling unit.
Cellar: The portion of a building located partly or wholly underground, and having one-half (1/2), or more
than one-half (1/2), of its clear floor-to-ceiling height below the average grade of the adjoining ground (see
Basement).
City: The City of West Peoria.
City Clerk: The City Clerk of West Peoria.
City Council: The City Council of West Peoria.
City Zoning Board: The City of West Peoria Zoning Board of Appeals.
Club or Lodge, Private: A non-profit association of persons who are bonafide members paying dues, which
owns, hires or leases a building or portion thereof, the use of such premises being restricted to members
and their guests.
Curb Level: The level of the established curb in front of a building or structure measured at the center of
such front. Where no curb level has been established, it shall be deemed to be the established level of the
center line of the street surface in front of a building or structure, measured at the centerline of such front.
Day Care Center-Resident Occupied: Any childcare facility receiving more than eight (8) children for
care during all or part of a day in a family home.
Day Care Center-Non-Resident Occupied: Any child care facility receiving more than three (3) children
for care during all or part of a day in a facility at which the proprietor does not reside.
Day Care Home: Any child care facility receiving more than three (3) up to a maximum of twelve (12)
children for care during all or part of a day in a family home. The maximum includes the family's natural,
foster, or adopted children and all other persons under the age of twelve (12).
Day Care Group Home: Any child care facility receiving up to a maximum of sixteen (16) children for
care during all or part of a day in a family home. The maximum includes the family's natural, foster, or
adopted children and all other persons under the age of twelve (12).
District: A section or part of the incorporated or unincorporated portion of the City for which the use Titles
are uniform.
Drive-In Establishment: An establishment which accommodates patron's automobiles on the immediate
premises allowing services to the patrons in their automobiles and/or self-service by the patrons.
TITLE 2 – ZONING
Page 55
Driveway or Drive: All hard-surfaced areas leading from the public right-of-way to a hard-surfaced offstreet
parking area or which are used as hard surfaced parking areas. The terms Drive and Driveway are
used interchangeably. (Ord. 1997-09, 1997-14)
Dwelling Unit: One (1) room, or rooms connected together, constituting a separate, independent
housekeeping establishment for owner occupancy, or rental or lease on a weekly, monthly or longer basis
and, physically separated from any other rooms or dwelling units which may be in the same structure, and
containing independent cooking and sleeping facilities. Dwelling units are intended for use exclusively as
living quarters for one (1) family (see Family) and not more than an aggregate of two (2) roomers.
Dwelling, Single Family: A detached residential dwelling unit other than a mobile home, designed for and
occupied by one (1) family only.
Dwelling, Two (2) Family (Duplex): A residential building containing two (2) dwelling units including
detached and semi-detached and attached dwelling units, designed for and occupied by two (2) families.
Dwelling Unit, Two (2) Family Attached: A dwelling unit joined to one (1) other dwelling unit by a party
wall.
Dwelling Unit, Two (2) Family, Semi-Detached: A dwelling unit with its own individual outside entrance
in a two (2) family structure where one (1) unit is above the other.
Dwelling Unit, Two (2) Family, Detached: A dwelling unit in a two (2) family structure where both units
share a common outside entrance and interior common foyer or entry hallway.
Dwelling, Multiple Family (Apartment): A detached residential building, surrounded on all sides by open
space on the same lot, designed for and occupied by three (3) or more families, with the number of families
in residence not exceeding the number of dwelling units provided.
Family: One (1) or more persons related by blood, marriage or adoption, or a group of not more than five
(5) adults not so related.
Family Care Home: A home housing a group of not more than eight (8) unrelated persons with handicap
or impairment, who with assistance or supervision, reside together in a family-type environment as a single
housekeeping unit. Excluded from this definition are current or former criminal offenders and persons
whose disability arises from current use or addiction to a controlled substance. The persons in supervision
shall be considered in addition to the handicapped or impaired persons in determining number of occupants
permitted.
Fence, Ornamental: A fence more than fifty percent (50%) open and of a decorative style. Ornamental
fences shall not be chain link or wire construction. (Ord. 2001-04)
Fence, Privacy: A solid fence primarily for providing privacy or visual screening.
Flood-Plain Area: That continuous area, adjacent to a stream or stream bed or other natural drainage
channels or areas, whose elevation is equal to or lower than the one hundred (100) year flood elevation as
established by any Flood Plain Ordinance in effect.
Garage, Public: Any building where automotive vehicles are painted, repaired, rebuilt, reconstructed
and/or stored for compensation (see Automotive Service Station).
Hard Surface or Hard Surfaced: A surface composed of Portland cement concrete, white rock, crushed
stone no smaller than CA-11, or blacktop. Any Portland cement concrete surface shall be not less than
three and one-half (3 ½) inches of concrete with reinforced steel mesh. Any blacktop surface shall contain
a compacted aggregate base with a blacktop surface not less than four (4) inches in depth. Any crushed
stone surface shall contain crushed stone not less than four (4) inches in depth. (Ord. 1997-14, 1997-09)
Home Occupation: An occupation conducted in a dwelling unit, provided that:
A. No person other than members of the family residing on the premises shall be engaged in such
occupation.
TITLE 2 – ZONING
Page 56
B. The use of the dwelling unit for the home occupation shall be clearly incidental and subordinate to
its use for residential purposes by its occupants, and not more than twenty five percent (25%) of
the floor area of the dwelling unit shall be used in the conduct of the home occupation.
C. There shall be no change in the outside appearance of the building or premises, or other visual
evidence of the conduct of such home occupation other than one (1) sign, not exceeding one square
foot in area, non-illuminated, and mounted flat against the wall of the principal building.
D. No home occupation shall be conducted in any accessory building.
E. There shall be no direct sales and/or rentals of products off display shelves or racks.
F. No traffic shall be generated by such home occupation in greater volume than would normally be
expected in a residential neighborhood, and any need for parking generated by the conduct of such
home occupation shall be met off the street and other than in a required front yard.
G. No equipment or process shall be used in such home occupation which creates noise, vibration,
glare, fumes, odors or electrical interference detectable to the normal senses off the lot, if the
occupation is conducted in a single-family residence, or outside the dwelling unit if conducted in
other than a single-family residence. In the case of electrical interference, no equipment or process
shall be used which creates visual or audible interference in any radio or television receivers off
the premises or causes fluctuations in line voltage off the premises.
Hotel (or Motel): A building or buildings designed to accommodate individual sleeping units with no
provision for cooking facilities and occupied primarily by transient travelers. The term "hotel" includes
"inn" and "lodge". The term "motel" includes "motor hotel", "motor lodge", "tourist court" and similar
terms.
Junk Yard: An open area or fenced-in enclosure where used or secondhand materials are bought, sold,
exchanged, stored, baled, packed, disassembled or handled, including but not limited to scrap iron and other
metals, paper, rags, rubber tires and bottles. A junk yard includes an auto-wrecking yard but does not
include uses established entirely within enclosed buildings.
Off-Street Loading: A space, accessible from a street, alley or way, in a building or on a lot for the use of
trucks while loading or unloading merchandise or materials.
Landowner: A landowner shall mean the legal or beneficial owner or owners of land. The holder of an
option or contract to purchase, a lessee having a remaining term of not less than forty (40) years, or other
person having an enforceable proprietary interest in such land, shall be deemed to be a landowner for the
purpose of this Title.
Lodging Room: A room rented as sleeping and living quarters, but without cooking facilities, and with or
without an individual bathroom. In a suite of rooms without cooking facilities, each room which provides
sleeping accommodations shall be counted as one lodging room.
Lot: For purposes of this Title, a lot is a parcel of land of at least sufficient size to meet minimum zoning
requirements for use, coverage and area, and to provide such yards and other open spaces as are herein
required. Such lot shall have frontage on an improved public street, or on an approved private street, and
may consist of:
A single lot of record.
A portion of a lot of record.
A combination of complete lots of record, or complete lots of record and portions of lots of record,
or of portions of lots of record.
A parcel of land described by metes and bounds.
TITLE 2 – ZONING
Page 57
Provided, that in no case of division or combination shall any residential lot or parcel be created
which does not meet the minimum lot requirements of this Title.
Lot Area: The area of a horizontal plane bounded by the vertical planes through front, side and rear lot
lines.
Lot, Corner: A lot situated at the junction of and abutting on two (2) or more intersecting streets; or a lot
at the point of deflection in alignment of a single street, the interior angle of which is one hundred thirtyfive
degrees (135°) or less.
Lot, Depth: The mean horizontal distance between the front lot line and the rear lot line of a lot measured
within the lot boundaries.
Lot Line: A property boundary line of any lot held in single or separate ownership; except that where any
portion of the lot extends into the abutting street or alley, the lot line shall be deemed to be the street or
alley right-of-way line.
Lot of Record: A lot which is part of a subdivision recorded in the office of the Peoria County Recorder
of Deeds, or a lot or parcel described by metes and bounds, the description of which has been so recorded.
Lot, Reversed: A lot on which the frontage is at right angles or approximately right angles [interior angle
less than one hundred thirty-five degrees (135°)] to the general pattern in the area.
Lot, Through: A lot defined as a lot other than a corner lot with frontage on more than one (1) street.
Through lots abutting two (2) streets may be referred to as double frontage lots.
Lot, Mobile Home: The area assigned to a mobile home in a mobile home park.
Lot Width: Width of lot shall be considered to be the distance between straight lines connecting front and
rear lot lines at each side of the lot, measured across the rear of the required front yard; provided, however,
that width between side lot lines at their foremost points (where they intersect with the street pavement)
shall not be less than eighty percent (80%) of the required lot width except in the case of lots on the turning
circle of a cul-de-sac, where the eighty percent (80%) requirement shall not apply. (Ord. 2002-13)
Mobile Home: A mobile home is any vehicle or similar portable structure originally constructed with
wheels, whether or not the wheels are still contained hereon, and designed and constructed to permit
occupancy for dwelling or sleeping purposes.
Mobile Home Park: A mobile home park means any plot of ground upon which two (2) or more
independent trailers, occupied for dwelling or sleeping purposes, are located, regardless of whether or not
a charge is made for such accommodation.
Motel: See Hotel.
Motor Freight Terminal: A building or premises in which freight is received or dispatched by motor
vehicle.
Parking Space/Lot: Striped, hard surfaced space within a parking area or a building of not less than one
hundred fifty-seven and one-quarter (157.25) square feet (eight and one-half (81/2) feet by eighteen and
one-half (181/2) feet, and a vertical clearance of at least seven (7) feet), exclusive of access drives, aisles,
ramps, columns, or office and work area, for the storage of one (1) passenger automobiles or commercial
vehicles under two (2) ton capacity. (Ord. 2002-14)
Planning Commission: The West Peoria Planning Commission. The term Planning Commission and Plan
Commission are used interchangeably.
Principal Use: The primary use of an other than vacant lot. A lot will normally have one (1) principal use
and permitted accessory uses such as garages or outbuildings related to the principal use.
TITLE 2 – ZONING
Page 58
Public Service Area: An area including such uses as fire and police stations, telephone exchanges, radio
and television transmitting and relay stations and towers, filter plants and pumping stations and similar
uses.
Recreational Vehicle: Vehicle utilized for occasional recreational use including boat, trailer, or camper.
For purpose of this Title a boat mounted on a trailer shall be considered one (1) recreational vehicle.
Refuse: All waste products resulting from human habitation, except sewage.
Repair Garage: See Garage, Public.
Rest Home (Nursing Home): A private home for the care of children or the aged or infirm, or a place of
rest for those suffering bodily disorders. Such a home does not contain equipment for surgical care or for
treatment of disease or injury, nor does it include maternity care nor care for mental illness or mental
infirmities.
Rooming House (Tourist Home): A building, or portion thereof, containing lodging rooms which
accommodate three (3) or more persons who are not members of the keeper's family, and where lodging
rooms or meals, or both, are provided for compensation.
Sanitary Landfill: A method of disposing of refuse by spreading and covering with earth. Where sanitary
landfill is referred to in this Title, it shall be construed to be a landfill meeting the regulations of the Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency and the Illinois Pollution Control Board.
Semi-Detached: See Dwelling Unit.
Setback: The minimum horizontal distance permitted between the front line or side line of the building and
nearest the street line, disregarding steps and unroofed porches.
Sign: A name, identification, description, display or illustration which is affixed to or painted or
represented directly or indirectly upon a building or other outdoor surface or piece of land; and which
directs attention to an object, product, place, activity, person, institution, organization or business.
However, a sign shall not include any display of official court or public office notices nor shall it include a
sign located completely within an enclosed building unless the context shall be exposed to view from a
street.
Sign, Area: Sign Area, used interchangeably with “gross sign area,” is the area encompassed within the
shortest line drawn around the perimeter of the display, message or wording to include all letters and designs
which are part of the sign.
Sign, Business: A sign which directs attention to a business or profession conducted, or to a commodity,
service or entertainment sold or offered, upon the premises where such sign is located, or to which it is
affixed.
Sign, Directional: A directional sign is a sign that provides instruction regarding parking, driveways, and
entrances or exits.
Sign, Flashing: Any illuminated sign on which the artificial light is not maintained stationary and/or
constant in intensity and color at all times when such sign is in use. For the purpose of this Title, any
moving, illuminated sign shall be considered a flashing sign.
Sign, Free Standing: A free standing sign is a sign erected on a freestanding framework supported and
affixed by one (1) or more uprights or braces in or upon the ground.
Sign, Gross Surface Area Of: The entire area within a single continuous perimeter enclosing the extreme
limits of such sign and in no case passing through or between any adjacent elements of same. However,
such perimeter shall not include any structural elements lying outside the limits of such sign and not forming
an integral part of the display.
Sign, Illuminated: An illuminated sign is a sign that is illuminated by internal or external light generated
or caused by the application of electricity.
TITLE 2 – ZONING
Page 59
Sign, Informational: An informational sign is a sign that informs the public of the name of the business or
facility located on a particular zoning lot.
Sign, Low Silhouette: A low silhouette sign is a sign that is no taller than one (1) foot and no wider than
eight (8) feet and no deeper than one (1) foot.
Sign, Nonconforming: A nonconforming sign is a sign that complied with the applicable laws when
established, but does not conform to the provisions of this Title.
Sign, Roof: A roof sign is a sign attached to the roof of a building.
Sign, Off-Premise: An off-premise sign is a sign that advertises goods, products, services or facilities or
directs persons to a location different from the zoning lot where the sign is installed.
Sign, Wall: A sign attached to the wall of a building.
Special Use: Use permitted only after public hearing and procedural requirements outlined in Chapter II
of this Title. Special use and special exception are used interchangeably.
Stored: When referring to parking of vehicles, the parking of vehicles for seventy-two (72) hours or more.
Story: That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next
above, or if there is no floor above, the space between the floor and the ceiling next above.
Street (Avenue, Drive, Place, Road, Terrace, Parkway, Boulevard or Court): Right-of-way of a
required width, which affords a primary means of access to abutting property.
Street Line: The dividing line between a lot and a contiguous street.
Structural Alterations: Any change, other than incidental repairs, in the supporting members of a building
or structure, such as bearing walls or partitions, columns, beams or girders; or any substantial change in the
roof or exterior walls.
Structure: Anything erected, the use of which-requires a fixed location on the ground; or attached to
something having a permanent location on the ground. A sign, billboard, other advertising medium,
accessory shed, tool room, or other similar building (whether fixed in location or placed on skids) detached
or projecting, shall be construed to be a structure.
Unrelated Group Family Home: Home for a group of not more than five (5) unrelated adults living
together as a common household.
Use: The purpose or activity for which the land, or building thereon, is designed, arranged or intended, or
for which it is occupied or maintained.
Use, Accessory: See Accessory Use.
Use, Principal: See Principal Use.
Use, Special: See Special Use.
Yard: An open space on a lot which is unoccupied and unobstructed by building structures from ground
level to the sky. A yard extends along a line and at right angles to such lot line to a depth or width specified
in the yard regulations for the zoning district in which such lot is located. (Exhibit A.) (Ord. 2019-40)
Yard, Front: A yard extending along the full width of the front lot line between side lot lines.
Yard, Rear: A yard extending across the rear of the lot between inner side yard lines. In the case of through
lots and corner lots, there will be no rear yards, but only front and side yards.
Yard, Side: A yard extending from the rear line of the required front yard to the rear lot line, or in the
absence of any clearly defined rear lot line to the point on the lot farthest from the intersection of the lot
line involved with the public street. In the case of through lots, side yards shall extend from the rear lines
of front yards required. In the case of corner lots, the yard upon which the building fronts shall be
TITLE 2 – ZONING
Page 60
considered the front yard. The yard facing the other street shall be considered the side street yard and the
yards between the corner yard and adjoining properties shall be interior side yards.
Exhibit A.
Zoning Lot: A single unified tract of land located within a single block which, at the time of filing for a
building permit, is designated by its owner or developer as a tract to be used, developed or built upon as a
unit under single or unified ownership or control. Such lot shall have frontage on a street; shall be of at
least sufficient size to meet minimum zoning requirements for use, coverage and area; and shall provide
such yards and other open spaces as herein required.
(Ord. 2019-40)
TITLE 2 – ZONING
Page 61
TITLE 2 ZONING
CHAPTER 13 PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT [SPECIAL USE]
2-13-1 Purpose
2-13-2 Procedure
2-13-3 Location
2-13-4 Specific Content
2-13-5 Standards
2-13-6 Conditions and Guarantees
2-13-7 Inspections After Development
SECTION 2-13-1 PURPOSE
The purpose of the PUD regulations is to allow more creative and imaginative design for land developments
than is possible under the more conventional zoning regulations. In this regard, the bulk and use regulations
of any district may be modified within a PUD.
Preservation of natural site qualities, better urban amenities, more open space in and around the project,
and a higher quality project are the desired results of the PUD process.
A. The following objectives are sought through the use of the PUD procedure:
To permit a creative approach to the use of land and related physical facilities that results
in better design and development, with the inclusion of aesthetic amenities.
To encourage a pattern of development to preserve natural vegetation, topographic, and
geological features and environmentally appropriate features.
To create a method for the permanent preservation of common open space for the continued
use and enjoyment of the residents of the development.
To provide for more usable and suitably located recreation facilities and other public and
private facilities.
To encourage a land use which promotes the public health, safety, comfort, morals, and
welfare of the surrounding area, while allowing an economically viable project.
B. The PUD is intended to provide for projects incorporating a single type or a variety of related uses
which are planned and developed as a unit. The PUD should provide amenities otherwise required
by law and often establishes facilities and open space greater than the minimums required by law.
C. The unique and substantially different character of PUD requires their administrative processing as
a “special use” in the Zoning Ordinance. PUD are more complex and of a different character than
other special uses requiring the establishment herein of specific and addition procedures, standards,
and exceptions to guide the recommendations of the Z.B.A. and action of the West Peoria City
Council.
SECTION 2-13-2 PROCEDURE
A PUD may be granted as a special use in accordance with the procedures and standards of this Article and
may depart from the normal procedures, standards, and other requirements of the other sections of the
Zoning Ordinance.
Applications shall be made as hereinafter provided and shall be accompanied by the required plats and
documents. Detailed plans, drawings, and other information as specified by the Zoning Ordinance shall be
required at the time of various meetings and hearing. Each step shall be reviewed and certified by the Zoning
Officer as being in accordance with the PUD requirements and the open meetings act.
TITLE 2 – ZONING
Page 62
A. Pre-application Procedure (Optional):
Pre-Application Conference: Prior to the filing of an application for approval of a PUD,
the developer may request of the Z.B.A. an informal meeting to discuss the development
of their land and submit an informal proposal therefore. The request for a Pre-Application
Conference shall be a part of a regularly scheduled Z.B.A. meeting and shall be established
by the West Peoria City Council from time-to-time and the materials set forth in this
Article. The Pre-Application Conference is not mandatory. It is intended that the informal
proposal submitted will be in preliminary conceptual form, and the substance and detail of
the matters presented shall, beyond complying with this Article, be largely within the
discretion of the developer. However, the Z.B.A. may request the submission of other
specified information and discussion, and no commitments shall be given, nor shall
statements or opinions of the Z.B.A. members be deemed binding. No recommendations
need to be made to, or acted upon, by the West Peoria City Council.
Preliminary Plat Procedure:
Purpose: The purpose of the Preliminary Plat is to obtain tentative approval and/or
commitments from the City that the plans, design, and program that the developer intends
to build and follow are acceptable, and that the developer can reasonably proceed into final
detailed architecture, engineering, surveying, and landscape architecture in anticipation of
Final Plat approval and subsequent construction. This is a relatively detailed submission
that assures the developer that their plan is acceptable and that he can invest the money
necessary to prepare final plans with the assurance that the Final Plat and plans will be
accepted if they substantially conform to the Preliminary Plat and plans. It is at this stage
that the final modifications, adjustments and interpretations are made to the conceptual
plan.
Procedure: A request for Preliminary Plat Approval of the PUD shall be submitted to the
Zoning Officer who shall refer same to the Z.B.A. for a public hearing and report and
recommendation as to whether or not the West Peoria City Council should approve the
Preliminary Plat. The required procedure for review of the Preliminary Plat shall be:
a) Submission of the following:
(i) Application for review of a PUD Preliminary Plat including all
information and materials required in this Article.
(ii) Four (4) copies of all required information shall be submitted on nothing
bigger than eleven by seventeen inch (11” x 17”) paper.
(iii) The application shall be accompanied by a fee which shall be established
by the West Peoria City Council.
b) The Z.B.A. shall hold a public hearing on the application for a PUD, in accordance
with the procedures of the Zoning Ordinance applicable to Special Uses.
c) Following the public hearing on the Preliminary PUD Plat and supporting data, the
Z.B.A. shall, within fifteen (15) working days, unless an extension is requested by
the petitioner, submit Findings of Fact and a written Recommendation for
approval, modification or disapproval, and the reasons therefore, or indicate why
a report cannot be rendered to the West Peoria City Council at that time.
d) The West Peoria City Council, after receipt of the Findings of Fact and
Recommendation from the Z.B.A., shall approve, modify, or disapprove the
Preliminary Plat within a period of ten (10) working days, unless an extension is
requested by the petitioner. It is within the discretion of the West Peoria City
Council to waive specific requirements.
e) In the case of approval, or approval with modification, the West Peoria City
Council shall pass an ordinance granting the special use and indicate their approval
of the Plat and arrange zoning map modifications as necessary. The West Peoria
City Council may require such special conditions as they may deem necessary to
TITLE 2 – ZONING
Page 63
ensure conformance with the intent of the planning objectives of the city and the
stated purposes of the PUD.
f) Approval of a Preliminary PUD Plat shall not constitute approval of the Final Plat.
Rather, it shall be deemed an expression of acceptance to the layout submitted on
the Preliminary Plat as a guide to the preparation of the Final Plat which will be
submitted for approval of the city and subsequent recording upon the fulfillment
of the requirements of these regulations and conditions of the preliminary
approval, if any. The Final Plat shall be approved if it conforms to the Preliminary
Plat. The Preliminary and Final Plat may be filed and approved simultaneously, or
the Final Plat may be filed and approved without a Preliminary Plat if all the land
is to be developed at one time, and if all requirements of both the Preliminary Plat
and Final Plat procedures are met. No building permit shall be issued for any
structure until the Final Plat has been filed, approved, and recorded.
Final Plat Procedure:
Purpose: The purpose of the Final Plat is to designate with particularity the land
subdivided into conventional lots as well as the division of other lands not so subdivided,
into common open space and building sites. The Final Plat is intended as a document to be
recorded. The Final Plat shows the exact location of facilities while the Preliminary Plat
shows the general location of the same facilities.
Procedure: The Final Plat shall be submitted as a PUD Plat and shall conform substantially
to the Preliminary Plat as approved and, if desired by the developer, may be submitted in
stages with each stage reflecting the approved Preliminary Plat which is proposed to be
recorded and developed; provided, however, that such portion conforms to all requirements
of these regulations as approved by West Peoria City Council. The required procedure for
approval of a Final Plat shall be:
a) The Final Plat and supporting data required in this Article shall be submitted, with
appropriate comments by the Zoning Officer, to the Z.B.A. for certification that
the Final Plat and other required documentation are in conformity with the Zoning
Ordinance, and consistent with the approved Preliminary Plat and with any
documentation corollary thereto, and conditions of approval thereof, and further
for review and recommendation at a public hearing of all architectural,
landscaping, and any other aesthetic or other matters remaining to be approved
after the Preliminary Plat stage.
b) After review of the Final Plat, the Z.B.A. shall, within fifteen (15) working days,
unless extension is required by the petitioner, recommend approval or disapproval,
and the reasons therefore, to the West Peoria City Council.
c) The West Peoria City Council, after receipt of the Final Plat from the Z.B.A., shall
approve or disapprove the Final Plat within a period of thirty (30) days, unless an
extension is requested by the petition; and if approved, shall pass an ordinance
authorizing the PUD and allowing the issuance of all necessary permits.
d) Permits are to be issued only after the Final PUD Plat and supporting data have
been recorded with the County Recorder of Deeds and shall be issued in full
conformance with the Zoning Ordinance. Proof of the recording of the Final Plat
shall be provided to the Zoning Officer.
e) Recording the Final Plat: The Ordinance authorizing construction of the PUD
shall be effective only upon recording of the Final PUD Plat and supporting data
with the County Recorder of Deeds. The recording of the Final Plat shall inform
all who deal with the PUD of the restrictions placed upon the land and act as a
zoning control device.
f) Submission Requirements: The Final Plats must be submitted for approval in
accordance with the scheduling approved by the Z.B.A. The Final Plat must be
submitted not later than forty-five (45) days from the approval of the Preliminary
TITLE 2 – ZONING
Page 64
Plat and construction as authorized by the issuance of a building permit must begin
within ninety (90) days of the date of filing of the Final Plat dealing with such
construction. In the event that same is not done, the PUD Special Use shall be null
and void and the Z.B.A. and/or the Plan Commission shall initiate such zoning
changes as it deems necessary to serve the public interest. If construction falls more
than six (6) months behind the building schedule filed with the Final Plat, the West
Peoria City Council shall either extend the schedule period or initiate action to
revoke the PUD Special Use. Extensions in the building schedule for a six (6)
month period may be recommended and granted by the West Peoria City Council.
g) Occupancy: Upon the completion of the PUD, a portion thereof, or an individual
building or element of the PUD in full compliance with the Final PUD Plat and
supporting data, then and only then may an Occupancy Permit be issued by the
Zoning Officer to allow the use of a building or facility.
Changes in the Planned Unit Development:
The PUD project shall be developed only according to the ordinance approving the Final Plat and
all supporting data. The Ordinance and supporting data together with all amendments shall be
binding on the applicants, their successors, grantees, and assigns and shall limit and control the use
of premises and location of structures in the PUD project as set forth therein.
Changes to the approved and recorded PUD may be made, as follows:
Major Changes: Changes which alter the concept or intent of the PUD including the
increases in density, increases in the height of buildings, reductions of proposed open
space, significant changes in building facility locations, changes in the development
schedule, changes in road standards, or other changes may be approved only by submission
of a new Final PUD Plat and supporting data and the “Final Plat” procedure. All changes
to the “original” Final Plat shall be recorded with the County Recorder of Deeds as
amendments to the Final Plat or reflected in the recording of a new “corrected” Final Plat.
Minor Changes: The Zoning Officer may approve minor changes in the PUD which do
not change the appearance, concept, or intent of the development.
SECTION 2-13-3 LOCATION
The PUD is authorized as a Special Use in each of the zoning districts of the Zoning Ordinance.
SECTION 2-13-4 SPECIFIC CONTENT
The PUD Plats and supporting data shall include at least the following information, unless waived by the
Z.B.A.
A. Pre-Application Stage
General Site Information: Data regarding the site conditions, land characteristics, available
community facilities and utilities, existing covenants, and other related information.
Sketch Plan: A drawing showing the proposed location and extent of the land uses, streets,
lots, and other features.
Description: A complete property survey and legal description of the site proposed for
development.
Preliminary Plat Stage
Detailed Plan: A drawing of the PUD shall be prepared as a scaled drawing and shall show
such designations as proposed streets (public and private), all buildings and their use,
common open space, recreation facilities, parking areas, service areas, and other facilities
to indicate the character of the proposed development. The submission may be composed
of one or more sheets and drawings and shall include:
TITLE 2 – ZONING
Page 65
a) Boundary lines – bearings and distance.
b) Easements – location, width and purpose and what they are for.
c) Streets on and adjacent to the tract street names, right-of-way widths, existing or
proposed centerline elevations, pavement type, walks, curbs, gutters, culverts, etc.
d) Utilities: A preliminary engineering study providing information on existing and
proposed sanitary, storm, water, and other utilities necessary to adequately service
the development.
e) Ground elevations on the tract.
f) Other conditions on the tract – watercourses, flood plains, marshes, rocky outcrops,
wooded areas, isolated preservable trees one foot (1’) or more in diameter, houses,
accessory buildings, and other significant features.
g) Other conditions on adjacent land – approximate direction and gradient of ground
slope, including any embankments or retaining walls; character and location of
major buildings, railroads, power lines, towers, and other nonresidential land uses
or adverse influences; owners of adjacent unplanted land; for adjacent platted land
refer to subdivision plat by name, and show approximate percent built-up, typical
lot size, and dwelling type.
h) Zoning – show zoning districts on and adjacent to the tract.
i) Proposed public improvements – highways or other major improvements planned
by public authorities for future construction on or near the tract.
j) Open Space – all parcels of land intended to be dedicated for public use or reserved
for the use of all property owners with the purpose indicated.
k) Structures – general location, purpose and height, of each building.
l) Map Data – name of development, name of site planner, north point, scale, date of
preparation, and acreage of site.
m) Miscellaneous – such additional information may be required by the Z.B.A.
n) Buffer in a screening manner in accordance with the provisions of the West Peoria
zoning ordinance that apply to the newly established multi-family uses adjacent to
single-family residential uses or districts.
o) The project shall employ or retain full time on-site management, including specific
responsibility for site security.
p) Open space between all buildings must be adequate to allow for light and air and
access by firefighting equipment.
q) As determined by the City at the time of issuance of the special use permit, the
land uses, intensities, and phasing of the PUD must be consistent with the
anticipated ability of the City, the school districts, and other public bodies to
provide and economically support police and fire protection, water supply, sewage
disposal, schools, and other public facilities and services without placing undue
burden on existing infrastructure, businesses, and residents.
r) All plans and aspects of the project must comply with the provisions of the West
Peoria Subdivision and Erosion Control Ordinances, unless deviations therefore
are granted by the City Council.
s) The proponent of the proposed PUD shall pay all applicable fees in advance.
t) Each residential PUD consists of a site that is at least thirty thousand square feet
(30,000 ft2).
u) No principle or accessory building shall exceed forty feet (40’) in height.
v) All dedicated streets within a multi-family Residential PUD must meet the
minimum specification set forth in the subdivision control ordinance or other
applicable City codes governing street specifications at the time of permitting. A
dedicated street that provides access to ten (10) or fewer dwelling units may be
considered a private drive and shall then conform to the construction standards as
determined by the Zoning Officer at the time of permitting.
TITLE 2 – ZONING
Page 66
w) Except as specifically determined by the West Peoria City Council at the time of
issuance of the special use permit, all Residential/Commercial PUD shall conform
to the applicable requirements for off-street parking and loading at the time of
permitting. The on-site parking of recreational vehicles for more than twenty-four
(24) hours shall be prohibited. All Residential/Commercial PUD shall conform to
the applicable requirements for signs set forth in the City’s sign ordinance or other
applicable City codes.
x) The placement of exterior lighting.
y) If the property is to be served by a private water system a statement by the
appropriate health official stating that the proposed water system will be adequate
for the proposed use.
Objectives: A statement of planning objectives to be achieved by the PUD. This statement
should include a description of the character of the proposed development and the rationale
behind the assumptions and choices of the developer.
Ownership: Statement of present and proposed ownership of all land within the project,
including present tract designation according to official records in offices of the Country
Recorder of Deeds. If legal title to the property is in trust, then a statement of the names
and percentage of interest of all the beneficiaries shall be submitted. If legal title to the
property is in a corporation, limited partnership or other legal entity then a statement of the
names of all persons or entities owning ten percent (10%) or more of the stock or other
ownership interest shall be submitted.
Schedule: Development schedule indicating:
a) Stages in which project will be built with emphasis on area, density, use and public
facilities such as open space to be developed with each stage. Overall design of
each stage shall be shown on the plat and through supporting graphic material.
b) Approximate dates for beginning and completion of each stage.
Covenants: Provide proposed agreements, provisions, or covenants which will govern the
use, maintenance, and continued protection of the planned development and any of its
common open space. Said covenants shall be provided to and reviewed, and must meet
with the approval of, the City Attorney prior to recordation.
Density: Provide information on the density of residential uses, including the number of
dwelling units per acre, the number of dwelling units by type, the number of buildings by
type, and the number of bedrooms in each dwelling unit type.
Non-Residential Use: Provide information on the type and amount of ancillary and nonresidential
uses, including the amount of common open space.
Service Facilities: Provide information on all service facilities and off-street parking
facilities.
Architectural Plans: Preliminary architectural plans for all primary buildings shall be
submitted in sufficient detail to permit an understanding of the following:
a) The style, development, and design of the buildings,
b) The number, size, and type of dwelling units,
c) The floor area of the buildings,
d) The type and total ground coverage,
e) The height of buildings.
Landscape Plans: Preliminary plans for vegetation, earth sculpturing, berming and
aesthetic features shall be submitted.
Facilities Plans: Preliminary plans or information, adequate to indicate that the proposed
development can be serviced, shall be submitted for:
a) Roads including classification, width of right of way, width of pavement and
typical construction details.
b) Sanitary sewers.
c) Storm drainage.
d) Water supply system.
TITLE 2 – ZONING
Page 67
e) Lighting programs.
f) Sidewalks, paths, and trails.
g) Direction of water runoff not directed to storm drains.
School Impact Study: Provide information on the student load and financial impact on the
local school districts, including expected scheduling of potential students.
Tax Impact Study: Provide information on the taxes to be generated by the proposed project
and the cost to the various taxing bodies to provide the necessary service to the project.
Traffic Analysis: Provide information on the adequacy of the local transportation and
thoroughfare system to handle anticipated traffic volumes generated by the PUD. Also, an
analysis should be made of the adequacy of the internal vehicular circulation pattern.
Market Study: Provide an economic feasibility study of the proposed development,
including information on land utilization and marketing potential. Evidence should be
presented showing the need and feasibility of the proposed development.
To the extent the development will include residential condominiums, anything required
to be provided to potential purchasers shall be provided as part of the developer’s
application.
Final Plat Stage
Final Detailed Plan: A Final PUD Plat, suitable for recording with the County Recorder of
Deeds, shall be prepared and submitted to the Z.B.A. for approval. The purpose of the Final
Plat is to designate with particularity the land subdivided into conventional lots as well as
the division of other land not so treated, into common open areas and building areas. The
Final Plat shall include, but not limited to:
a) An accurate legal description of the entire area under immediate development
within the PUD.
b) A subdivision plat of all subdivided lands in the same form and meeting all the
requirements of a normal subdivision plat.
c) An accurate legal description of each separate not subdivided use area, including
common open space.
d) Designation of the exact location of all buildings to be constructed.
e) Certificates, seals, and signatures required for the dedication of lands, and
recording the documents.
f) Tabulation on separate not subdivided use area, land area, number of buildings,
number of dwelling units, number of people per dwelling unit and number dwelling
units per acre.
g) A plat of annexation if applicable.
Common Open Space Documents:
All common open space may be either conveyed to a municipal or public corporation,
conveyed to a not-for-profit corporation or entity established for the purpose of benefiting
the owners and residents of the PUD or retained by the developer. A letter on entity
letterhead must be presented indicating the approval and acceptance of such open space by
the entity. It is the responsibility of the property owner to maintain the property. In any
event, the Z.B.A. may require legally binding covenants and other guarantees, in a form
approved by the City Attorney, that the common open space will be permanently preserved
as an open area. All land conveyed to a not-for-profit corporation or like entity shall be
subject to the right of said corporation to impose a legally enforceable lien against the
individually owned property in the PUD for maintenance and improvement of the common
open space. Such documents shall also provide that the city shall have the right, but not the
obligation, to perform necessary maintenance of the common open space, and shall have a
lien against the individually owned property in the PUD for the costs thereof.
Public and Quasi-Public Facilities: All public and quasi-public facilities and improvements
made necessary as a result of the PUD shall be either constructed in advance of the approval
of the Final Plat pursuant to a permit duly obtained, or a bond or letter of credit in a form
TITLE 2 – ZONING
Page 68
approved by the City Attorney shall be posted to guarantee construction of the required
improvements. The bond or letter of credit, payable to the city, shall be sufficient to cover
the full cost of the improvements as estimated by the city, plus ten percent (10%). Detailed
construction plans shall be submitted for all public and quasi-public facilities to be built.
Public and quasi-public facilities shall include, but not be limited to roads, curbs, gutters,
sidewalks, street lights, street signs, water, sewer improvements or open spaces,
recreational facilities, landscaping, and public parking facilities.
Construction Plans: Detailed plans shall be submitted for design, construction or
installation of site amenities; including buildings, landscaping, lakes, retention ponds, fire
hydrants and other site improvements.
Construction Schedule: A final construction schedule shall be submitted for that portion of
the PUD for which approval is being requested.
If at any time during the construction of the development approved by the special use
permit, the Zoning Officer determines that development is not proceeding in accordance
with the special use permit as approved, the Zoning Officer may issue a stop work order
and collect a stop work fee from the developer.
Guarantee Deposit: A deposit shall be made to the city in cash, letter of credit or
maintenance bond in a form approved by the City Attorney, equal to fifteen percent (15%)
of the estimated cost of public facility installations. This deposit shall be a guarantee of
satisfactory performance of the facilities constructed within the PUD and shall be held by
the city for a period of eighteen (18) months from the date of acceptance of the facilities
by the city. After such eighteen (18) months, the deposit shall be refunded if no defects
have developed, or if any defects have been developed, then the balance of such deposit, if
any, shall be refunded after reimbursement for amounts expended in correcting defective
facilities.
Covenants: Final agreements, provisions, or covenants which will govern the use,
maintenance, and continued protection of the PUD shall be submitted to the City Attorney
for review and approval. Said covenants shall not be recorded without the written approval
of the City Attorney.
Environmental Hazard/Clean-up: The procedures for the investigation and remediation of
any environmental hazard must meet the requirements of the Illinois Environmental
Protection Act.
SECTION 2-13-5 STANDARDS
The PUD must meet the following standards:
A. Size and Ownership: the site of the PUD must be under single ownership and/or unified control
and be not less than thirty thousand square feet (30,000 ft2).
B. Compatibility: The PUD shall be demonstrated by the developer to be of a type, and to be so
located as to exercise no or as very little as possible undue detrimental influence upon surrounding
properties, and to be compatible with surrounding uses.
C. Need: A showing of the desirability of the plan and its benefit to the community as a whole must
be made.
D. Yards: The required yards along the periphery of the PUD shall be at least equal in width or depth
to that of the adjacent zoning district or districts.
Buildings of more than twenty-four feet (24’) in height shall provide a set-back from any
property line of not less than equal to the height of such buildings.
E. Parking Requirements: Adequate parking shall be provided as required in other sections of the
Zoning Ordinance.
TITLE 2 – ZONING
Page 69
F. Traffic: Adequate provision shall be made to provide ingress and egress so designated as to
minimize traffic congestion on the public streets and promote safety.
G. Other Standards: The PUD may depart from strict conformance with the required density,
dimension, area, height, bulk, use, and other regulations for the zoning district in which the property
is located, so as long as the PUD will not be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety,
morals, comfort, or general welfare.
SECTION 2-13-5 CONDITIONS AND GUARANTEES
Prior to the granting of any PUD, the Z.B.A. with the approval of the West Peoria City Council or the West
Peoria City Council may require, such conditions and restrictions upon the establishment, location, design,
layout, height, density, construction, maintenance, aesthetics, operation, and other elements of the PUD as
deemed necessary for the protection of the public interest, protection of the adjacent area, and to secure
compliance with the standards specified in this Article. In all cases in which PUD are granted, the West
Peoria City Council shall require such evidence and guarantees as it may deem necessary as proof that the
conditions stipulated in connection therewith are being, and will be, complied with.
SECTION 2-13-5 INSPECTIONS AFTER DEVELOPMENT
The Zoning Officer shall inspect the special use on an annual basis to determine whether the conditions of
the special use continue to be met. If the Zoning Officer finds that any of the conditions have been violated,
he shall take appropriate enforcement action and may submit the matter to the West Peoria City Council
who shall have the authority to revoke the special use permit. (Ord. 2009-11)
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page 1
THE CITY OF WEST PEORIA
TABLE OF CONTENTS
TITLE 3: TRAFFIC AND PARKING
CHAPTER 1 - TURNS PROHIBITED
CHAPTER 2 - STREETS WITH WEIGHT RESTRICTIONS
CHAPTER 3 - REGULATION OF VEHICLES-STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING
CHAPTER 4 - STOP INTERSECTIONS
CHAPTER 5 - YIELD SIGNS
CHAPTER 6 - SPEED LIMITS
CHAPTER 7 - NO PARKING
CHAPTER 8 - RIGHT OF WAY OBSTRUCTIONS
CHAPTER 9 - CONSTRUCTION OF FACILITIES ON THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
CHAPTER 10 - MUNICIPAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS INFRASTRUCTURE MAINTENANCE FEE
TITLE 3 – TRAFFIC AND PARKING
Page 1
TITLE 3 TRAFFIC AND PARKING
CHAPTER 1 TURNS PROHIBITED
3-1-1 Turns Prohibited
SECTION 3-1-1 TURNS PROHIBITED
Right turns shall be prohibited between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. and between the hours of 4:00
p.m. and 6:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, at the following locations:
From Western Avenue onto Alice Avenue
Such prohibition shall not apply to buses.
(Ord. 1997-24)
TITLE 3 – TRAFFIC AND PARKING
Page 2
TITLE 3 TRAFFIC AND PARKING
CHAPTER 2 STREETS WITH WEIGHT RESTRICTIONS
3-2-1 Weight Limits
SECTION 3-2-1 WEIGHT LIMITS
A. Truck traffic on Rohmann Avenue within the City limits from the Swords Avenue to the western
end of Rohmann Avenue is limited to vehicles under eight (8) tons other than vehicles performing
necessary West Peoria city services to residents. The City shall post the weight limit on the street.
(Ord. 1994-30)
B. Local vehicles making local deliveries which are under fifteen (15) tons may apply for a permit to
exceed the weight limit. Such permit shall be applied for at the City Hall and permit fee shall be
as follows:
1. For vehicles from 8 tons to 12 tons: $12.50 per load
2. For vehicles from 12.1 to 15 tons: $20.00 per load
Vehicles in excess of fifteen (15) tons shall be prohibited and shall not be permitted. All vehicles
carrying loads in excess of eight (8) tons must obtain permits. Use of the streets by vehicles with
permits shall be limited to the hours from 8:30 a.m. to 5:30 p.m. (Ord. 1994-30)
C. Vehicles using City streets for the purpose of hauling, construction, business, or industrial purposes
which exceed the weight limits may apply for a permit per the following schedule: (i) Vehicles
over eight (8) tons but under fifteen (15) tons - $12.50 per load; (ii) Vehicles over fifteen (15) tons
and under twenty-six (26) tons - $20 per load. (Ord. 1994-31)
D. The following vehicles are exempt from the requirements of a permit and payment of the above
fees: Vehicles providing municipal and quasi-municipal (such as garbage, water sanitary sewer,
and utility services within the City of West Peoria); vehicles making deliveries to West Peoria
residents and businesses and performing construction services within the City of West Peoria
(Ord. 1994-31)
E. All vehicles in excess of the weight limits established in Exhibit C using City streets, whether
permitted or exempt, shall reach their destination by a route requiring the least amount of travel on
streets with weight limits. (Ord. 1994-31)
F. Penalty: Violation of this Title shall constitute a Class B misdemeanor, and violators may be fined
a minimum of $50.00 per violation and a maximum of $500.00 per violation. Each occurrence is
a separate violation. (Ord. 1994-30)
Exhibit C
The following streets, drives, courts, and avenues or portions thereof are limited to loads of eight (8) TONS:
Richmond, Gentry, Radan, Pierson, Idaho, Vaughn, Magnolia, Rhodora, Hillside, Herold, Market, Ohio,
Texas, Iowa, Dakota, Colorado, Edgehill, Woodlawn, Heading Ct., Belle Vista, Bluffcrest, Holling,
Rohmann Ct., Rohmann Avenue west of Swords, Alice, Kenwood, Pleasant, Lammers, Coolidge, Ashland,
Wendarm, Avon, Ardmore, Downs, Laura, Courtland, Sterling Ave. north of Rohmann, Cedar, LeRoy,
Fairway, Dixon, Bergen, Arthur, Moser, Barker, Kellogg, Callender, Ayres, Sherman, Moss, Melrose, and
Edna. (Ord. 1994-31)
The following streets, drives, courts, and avenues or portions thereof are limited to loads of fifteen (15)
TONS:
Waverly Ave. between Rohmann and Manor Parkway, and Manor Parkway. (Ord. 1994-31)
TITLE 3 – TRAFFIC AND PARKING
Page 3
TITLE 3 TRAFFIC AND PARKING
CHAPTER 3 REGULATION OF VEHICLES-STOPPING, STANDING AND
PARKING
3-3-1 Definitions
3-3-2 Stopping, Standing and Parking Prohibited in Special Places
3-3-3 Penalty
3-3-4 Size Restrictions In Residential Districts
3-3-5 No Parking Snow Routes
SECTION 3-3-1 DEFINITIONS
The words, terms, and phrases used in this Ordinance shall have the meanings ascribed to them in the
Illinois Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/1-100 et seq.), as now or hereafter amended, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning. (Ord. 2000-03)
SECTION 3-3-2 STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING PROHIBITED IN SPECIAL PLACES
A. Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or in compliance with law or the
directions of a police officer or official traffic-control device, no person shall:
1. Stop, stand, or park a vehicle:
a) On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a
street;
b) On a sidewalk or in any way blocking any sidewalk;
c) Within an intersection;
d) On a crosswalk;
e) In a roadway other than parallel with the edge of the roadway headed in the
direction of lawful traffic movement and with the curbside wheels of the vehicle
within twelve (12) inches of the curb or edge of the roadway; this
prohibition shall not apply to the parking of any vehicle in a designated diagonal
parking zone or space;
f) Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within thirty (30) feet of points on
the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless a different length
is indicated by signs or markings;
g) Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when stopping,
standing, or parking would obstruct traffic;
h) Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or within a highway
tunnel;
i) On any railroad tracks;
j) At any place where official signs prohibit stopping;
k) On any controlled-access highway;
l) In the area between roadways of a divided highway, including crossovers;
m) In a public parking area if the vehicle does not display a current annual registration
sticker or current temporary permit pending registration (Ord. 2016-07)
n) On any roadway for more than seven (7) consecutive calendar days in any onevehicle
sized area. (Ord. 2017-30)
2. Stand or park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except momentarily to pick up or
discharge passengers:
a) In front of a public or private driveway;
b) Within fifteen (15) feet of a fire hydrant;
TITLE 3 – TRAFFIC AND PARKING
Page 4
c) Within twenty (20) feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and on the side
of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within seventy-five (75) feet of
such entrance (when properly sign-posted);
d) At any place where official signs prohibit standing.
3. Park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except temporarily for the purpose of and while
actually engaged in loading or unloading property or passengers:
a) Within fifty (50) feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing;
b) At any place where official signs prohibit parking.
B. No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his control into any such prohibited area or away
from a curb such distance as is unlawful.
(Ord. 2000-03)
SECTION 3-3-3 ADDITIONAL PARKING REGULATIONS
A. Except as otherwise provided in this Section, every vehicle stopped or parked upon a two (2) way
roadway shall be so stopped or parked with the right-hand wheels parallel to and within twelve (12)
inches of the right-hand curb or as close as practicable to the right edge of the right-hand shoulder.
B. Every vehicle stopped or parked upon a one (1) way roadway shall be so stopped or parked parallel
to the curb or edge of the roadway, in the direction of authorized traffic movement, with its righthand
wheels within twelve (12) inches of the right-hand curb or as close as practicable to the right
edge of the right-hand shoulder, or with its left-hand wheels within twelve (12) inches of the lefthand
curb or as close as practicable to the left edge of the left-hand shoulder. (Ord. 2000-03)
SECTION 3-3-3 PENALTY
Violation of this Title shall constitute a Class B misdemeanor and violators may be fined a minimum of
twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per violation and a maximum of seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) per
violation. Each occurrence shall constitute a separate violation. (Ord. 2000-03)
SECTION 3-3-4 SIZE RESTRICTION IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
That any vehicle whose length exceeds two hundred thirty-five (235) inches or whose width, excluding
mirrors or similar accessories, exceeds eighty (80) inches, is declared to be a nuisance when parked in a
residence district which shall include, but not be limited to, all alleyways therein. This restriction does not
apply to any pick-up truck or van smaller than noted above. Further, that no person shall stand or park any
truck, tractor, semi-trailer, trailer, cart, camper, motor home, mini-home, recreational vehicle (as defined
from time to time in the Zoning Ordinance of the City of West Peoria), or bus on any residential street or
in any alleyway for a period longer than is necessary for the reasonably expeditious loading or unloading
of such vehicle; except that a driver of a bus may park such a bus in a designed bus zone. (Ord. 2001-09)
Any such vehicle found in violation of this section is hereby declared to be a nuisance, which may be fined
or abated by the appropriate City officer(s). Such fine to be not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than
five hundred dollars ($500.00). Repeated offences will lead to the impoundment of the vehicle.
(Ord. 2000-15)
SECTION 3-3-5 NO PARKING SNOW ROUTES
All streets within the corporate limits of the City of West Peoria are hereby designated as emergency snow
routes. It shall be unlawful to park any vehicles on these streets at any time within twelve (12) hours after
a snowfall of two (2) or more inches. Where there has been a snow forecast of two (2) or more inches for
any calendar day, it shall be unlawful to park any vehicles on any of these streets for that calendar day.
TITLE 3 – TRAFFIC AND PARKING
Page 5
The owner or lessor of a vehicle in violation of this section shall be subject to the following fine schedules:
1st Offense – if paid within seven (7) days of violation - $50.00
1st Offense – if paid after seven (7) days, but within ten (10) days of violation - $75.00
1st Offense – if paid after ten (10) days of violation - $100.00
2nd Offense - $150.00
3rd Offense – Towing of the vehicle, any and all charges at vehicle owner’s expense.
In all events, each day the violation exists shall constitute a separate offense.
The Street Department Manager is hereby granted the authority and discretion to take any and all actions
to remove any vehicle in violation of this Section, including, but not limited to, the towing of such vehicle
at the vehicle owner’s expense, so as to allow clear and unimpeded snow removal from snow routes.
Nothing contained in the preceding paragraphs shall limit the Street Department Manager’s authority and
discretion to seek the towing of any such vehicle at the vehicle owner’s expense, whether in lieu of and/or
in addition to any fine imposed under this Section regardless of the number of offenses of such vehicle.
(Ord. 1994-18, 1995-13, 2000-28, 2008-04) (Ord. 2014-24, 2006-17)
TITLE 3 – TRAFFIC AND PARKING
Page 6
TITLE 3 TRAFFIC AND PARKING
CHAPTER 4 STOP INTERSECTIONS
3-4-1 - Stop Signs
SECTION 3-4-1 STOP SIGNS
Stop signs shall be erected and all drivers of vehicles shall be required to stop at the intersections set forth
in Exhibit A attached hereto and made a part hereof. The following stop signs shall signify the following
stop intersections:
Exhibit A
Corner Street At Cross Street
1 SE Pierson Ave Nebraska (2)
1 S Pierson Ave Nebraska (2)
NE Richmond St Pierson Ave
SW Richmond St Pierson Ave
NW Gentry Ct. Richmond St.
2 NE sides Pierson Ave Farmington on both
1 NE side Idaho St Southport Rd -Rt 8
1 NW corner of Pierson NW Idaho St Southport Rd -Rt 8
Pierson Idaho St Southport Rd -Rt 8
SW Magnolia Ave Sterling Ave
NE Rhodora Ave Sterling Ave
NW Rhodora Ave Farmington Rd
SW Rhodora Ave Stever Ave
NW Stever Ave Farmington Rd
NE Hillside Ave Rhodora Ave
SW Otley Rd Park Rd
SW Shirldon Ct Park Rd
SW Ohio St Park Rd
SW Iowa St Park Rd
NE Iowa St Market St
SW Dakota St Park Rd
SW Colorado St Park Rd
End of Richmond St End
End of Radan Ct
SW Alice Ave Swords Ave
NE Alice Ave Swords Ave
SW Kenwood Ave Swords Ave
NE Kenwood Ave Swords Ave
SW Rohmann Ave Swords Ave
SE East end Lammers Ave Rohmann Ave
SE West end Lammers Ave Rohmann Ave
SE Coolidge Ct Rohmann Ave
NW Idaho St Rohmann Ave
TITLE 3 – TRAFFIC AND PARKING
Page 7
Corner Street At Cross Street
SE Idaho St Alice Ave
SE Ashland Ct Rohmann Ave
NW Ashland Ave Rohmann Ave
NE Kenwood Ave Ashland Ave
SW Kenwood Ave Ashland Ave
SW Kenwood Ave Sterling Ave
SW Alice Ave Ashland Ave
NE Avon Ct Ashland Ave
SW Heading Ave Ashland Ave
NW Heading Ct Heading Ave
NE Heading Ave Sterling Ave
SW Heading Ave Sterling Ave
SE Sterling Ave Heading Ave
SW Laura Ave Sterling Ave
SE Leroy Ave Heading Ave
SE Cedar Ave (2) Heading Ave
SW Heading Ave Western Ave
SW Laura Ave Western Ave
NE Laura Ave Waverly Ave
SW Laura Ave Waverly Ave
NW Cedar Ave Laura Ave
SE Cedar Ave Laura Ave
NW Cedar Ave Alice Ave
SE Cedar Ave Alice Ave
NW Cedar Ave Clarke Ave
SE Cedar Ave Clarke Ave
NW Cedar Ave Rohmann Ave
SE Cedar Ave Rohmann Ave
NW Cedar Ave Barker Ave
SE Cedar Ave Barker Ave
NW Cedar Ave Kellogg Ave
SE Cedar Ave Kellogg Ave
NW Cedar Ave Callender Ave
SE Cedar Ave Callender Ave
NW Cedar Ave Ayres Ave
SE Cedar Ave Ayres Ave
NW Cedar Ave Sherman Ave
SE Cedar Ave Sherman Ave
NW Cedar Ave Moss Ave
SE Cedar Ave Moss Ave
NW Cedar Ave Manor Pkwy
SE Cedar Ave Manor Pkwy
NW Cedar Ave Martin Luther King Dr
NW Waverly Ave Rohmann Ave
SE Waverly Ave Rohmann Ave
NW Waverly Ave Manor Pkwy
NW Sterling Ave Rohmann Ave
TITLE 3 – TRAFFIC AND PARKING
Page 8
SE Sterling Ave Rohmann Ave
Corner Street At Cross Street
NE Rohmann Ave Sterling Ave
SW Rohmann Ave Sterling Ave
NE Alice Ave Waverly Ave
SW Alice Ave Waverly Ave
SW Alice Ave Western Ave
NE Clarke Ave Waverly Ave
SW Clarke Ave Waverly Ave
SW Clarke Ave Western Ave
NE Barker Ave Sterling Ave
SW Barker Ave Sterling Ave
NE Barker Ave Waverly Ave
SW Barker Ave Waverly Ave
SW Barker Ave Western Ave
NE Kellogg Ave Sterling Ave
NE Kellogg Ave Waverly Ave
SW Kellogg Ave Waverly Ave
SW Kellogg Ave Western Ave
NE Callender Ave Sterling Ave
NE Callender Ave Waverly Ave
SW Callender Ave Waverly Ave
SW Callender Ave Western Ave
NE Ayres Ave Sterling Ave
NE Ayres Ave Waverly Ave
SW Ayres Ave Waverly Ave
SW Ayres Ave Western Ave
NE Sherman Ave Sterling Ave
NE Sherman Ave Waverly Ave
SW Sherman Ave Waverly Ave
SW Sherman Ave Western Ave
NE Moss Ave Sterling Ave
NE Moss Ave Waverly Ave
SW Moss Ave Waverly Ave
SW Moss Ave Western Ave
NE Manor Pkwy Sterling Ave
NE Manor Pkwy Cedar Ave
SW Manor Pkwy Cedar Ave
NE Manor Pkwy Arthur Ave
SW Manor Pkwy Arthur Ave
SW Manor Pkwy Western Ave
SW Edna Ave Cedar Ave
SE LeRoy Ave Rohmann Ave
SE Swords Ave Farmington Rd
NW turn Swords Ave Farmington Rd
SE Swords Ave Farmington Rd
SW Kellogg Ave Cedar Ave
NE Kellogg Ave Cedar Ave
(Ord. 1994-26) (Ord. 1994-18, 1994-28, 1996-05,1997-18,1999-17, 2000-12, 2011-42)
TITLE 3 – TRAFFIC AND PARKING
Page 9
TITLE 3 TRAFFIC AND PARKING
CHAPTER 5 YIELD SIGNS
3-5-1 Yield Signs
SECTION 3-5-1 YIELD SIGNS
Yield signs shall be erected and all drivers of vehicles shall be required to yield the right-of-way at the
intersections set forth in Exhibit B attached hereto and made a part hereof. The following locations shall
have yield signs located as below. (Ord. 1994-18)
Exhibit B
Corner Street At Cross Street
NE Herold Ave. Rhodora Ave.
NW Bluff Crest Ct. Heading Ave.
SE Courtland Ave. Laura Ave.
NW Courtland Ave. Laura Ave.
SW Downs Circle Sterling Ave.
SE Waverly Ave. Heading Ave.
SW Idaho St. Kenwood Ave.
NE Idaho St. Kenwood Ave.
SE Pleasant St. Kenwood Ave.
NW Pleasant St. Kenwood Ave.
.
TITLE 3 – TRAFFIC AND PARKING
Page 10
TITLE 3 TRAFFIC AND PARKING
CHAPTER 6 SPEED LIMITS
3-6-1 Speed Limits
3-6-2 Speed Limits and Penalties in Work Zones
SECTION 3-6-1 SPEED LIMITS
The permitted speed limits on City streets shall be as set forth below, however, on any street not listed and
posted the speed limit shall be thirty (30) MPH. The speed limit on all alleys shall be fifteen (15) MPH.
Speed Limit Street Cul-De-Sac Streets (15 MPH)
30 MPH Western Fairway Dr.
25 MPH Waverly Edna Ct.
30 MPH Sterling (45 MPH on the hill) Iris Ct.
25 MPH Ashland Barker (West of Sterling)
40 MPH Swords (20 on the curve) Coolidge Ct.
40 MPH Park Wendarm Ct.
25 MPH Market Rohmann Ct.
15 MPH Stever Rohmann Ave. (West of Pleasant)
25 MPH Rhodora Kenwood Ave. (West of Pleasant)
25 MPH Herold Alice (West of Pleasant)
25 MPH Market Heading (West of Ashland)
40 MPH Farmington Rd. Holling Dr.
30 MPH Pierson Bluff Crest
30 MPH Heading Belle Vista Ct.
25 MPH Laura Heading Ct.
25 MPH Alice Edgehill Ct.
25 MPH Clark Shirldon Ct.
20 MPH Kenwood Magnolia
30 MPH Rohmann Vaughn Ave.
25 MPH Barker Dell Ct.
25 MPH Kellogg Idaho Ct.
25 MPH Callendar Radan Ct.
15 MPH Cedar Richmond (West of Pierson)
25 MPH Ayres Gentry Ln.
25 MPH Sherman
25 MPH Moss
25 MPH Manor
25 MPH Ardmore
25 MPH Avon Curve
25 MPH Arthur
25 MPH Texas St.
25 MPH Iowa St.
25 MPH Dakota St.
25 MPH Colorado St.
TITLE 3 – TRAFFIC AND PARKING
Page 11
SECTION 3-6-2 SPEED LIMITS AND PENALTIES IN WORK ZONES
Speed limits in all posted work zones in the City of West Peoria shall be twenty (20) miles per hour. Any
person found guilty of violating the aforesaid speed limit shall be fined three hundred seventy-five dollars
($375.00) per offense. (Ord. 2011-45) (Ord. 2006-11)
TITLE 3 – TRAFFIC AND PARKING
Page 12
TITLE 3 TRAFFIC AND PARKING
CHAPTER 7 NO PARKING
3-7-1 No Parking
SECTION 3-7-1 NO PARKING
A. Parking is prohibited on all streets where "No Parking" is posted and on that portion of streets
where "No Parking Here to Corner" is posted.
B. No person shall park a vehicle in an alley so as to block the free movement of traffic or the driveway
entrance to any property.
C. The definitions set forth in the Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/11-100, et.seq. are hereby
expressly incorporated herein by reference and made a part hereof.
D. Vehicles displaying handicapped person identification devices as issued by the Secretary of State
(including handicapped person parking permits, transporter of handicapped person parking permits,
handicapped person vehicle registration plates and disabled veteran vehicle registration plates) may
be parked at specially designated handicapped parking spaces within the City. No vehicle shall be
parked in a space designated for vehicles for handicapped persons unless such vehicle shall have
displayed thereon a handicapped person parking device as set forth in this section. Any person
found guilty of violating this section shall be fined one hundred dollars ($100.00). Such person
shall also pay all required court costs. (Ord. 2001-10)
E. Parking is prohibited on both sides of Sterling Avenue between Heading and Rohmann.
(Ord. 1994-26)
F. There shall be no parking at any time on the Edna Court cul-de-sac. (Ord. 2018-12)
TITLE 3 – TRAFFIC AND PARKING
Page 13
TITLE 3 TRAFFIC AND PARKING
CHAPTER 8 RIGHT OF WAY OBSTRUCTIONS
3-8-1 Prohibitions
3-8-2 Removal of Obstructions from right-of-way
SECTION 3-8-1 PROHIBITIONS
A. No person shall blow or shovel snow, leaves or debris into or onto any City street from any other
property. The person guilty of same, shall be fined no less than fifty dollars ($50.00), and not to
exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). (Ord. 2008-05)
SECTION 3-8-2 REMOVAL OF OBSTRUCTIONS FROM RIGHT-OF-WAY
It shall be unlawful to place large items of personal property, excluding motor vehicles and including but
not limited to portable basketball hoops, on the streets and right-of-way of the City of West Peoria.
The owner of such items which identify their owner and are not allowed on the streets and right-of-way
shall be given reasonable notice prior to removing the object as abandoned. The owner of any such items
which may be erected or placed upon any street, avenue, alley or sidewalk or other public ground of the
city shall remove the same, upon receiving written notice from the Code Enforcement Officer, within fortyeight
(48) hours. If the owner of said items is not ascertainable through reasonable efforts at the time the
violation occurs, notice will be affixed to the item and deemed received by owner. Failure to remove such
items within forty-eight (48) hours is a violation of this subsection and such items remaining on the streets
and right-of-way beyond forty-eight (48) hours after notice will be considered abandoned. The person
guilty of violating this subsection, shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five
hundred dollars ($500.00).
Large items of personal property, excluding motor vehicles and including but not limited to portable
basketball hoops, which are found on city streets and right-of-way and which items do not identify their
owner, shall be considered abandoned and subject to removal by the police department and/or the Code
Enforcement Officer. Should the owner of said item or the person guilty of violating this subsection be
identified, they shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred ($500.00).
Abandoned personal property confiscated by the City may be redeemed by the rightful owner upon payment
of a fee of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), said
fee calculated to cover the City's cost in removing and storing the item. Any citizen whose property is
confiscated in accordance with this subsection, within seven (7) days of confiscation, may request a hearing
before a designee of the Mayor to contest whether the item of personal property was properly removed as
abandoned property. Said hearing shall be held within twenty-one (21) days of the request for a hearing.
(Ord. 2016-05)
TITLE 3 – TRAFFIC AND PARKING
Page 14
TITLE 3 TRAFFIC AND PARKING
CHAPTER 9 CONSTRUCTION OF FACILITIES ON THE PUBLIC RIGHTSOF-
WAY
3-9-1 Purpose and Scope
3-9-2 Definitions
3-9-3 Annual Registration Required
3-9-4 Permit Required; Applications and Fees
3-9-5 Action on Permit Applications
3-9-6 Effect of Permit
3-9-7 Revised Permit Drawings
3-9-8 Insurance
3-9-9 Indemnification
3-9-10 Security
3-9-11 Permit Suspension and Revocation
3-9-12 Change of Ownership or Owner's Identity or Legal Status
3-9-13 General Construction Standards
3-9-14 Traffic Control
3-9-15 Location of Facilities
3-9-16 Construction Methods and Materials
3-9-17 Vegetation Control
3-9-18 Removal, Relocation, or Modification of Utility Facilities
3-9-19 Cleanup and Restoration
3-9-20 Maintenance and Emergency Maintenance
3-9-21 Variances
3-9-22 Penalties
3-9-23 Enforcement
3-9-24 Severability
SECTION 3-9-1 PURPOSE AND SCOPE
A. Purpose. The purpose of this Section is to establish policies and procedures for constructing
facilities on rights-of-way within the City's jurisdiction, which will provide public benefit
consistent with the preservation of the integrity, safe usage, and visual qualities of the City rightsof-
way and the City as a whole.
B. Facilities Subject to This Section. This Section applies to all facilities on, over, above, along, upon,
under, across, or within the public rights-of-way within the jurisdiction of the City. A facility
lawfully established prior to the effective date of this Section may continue to be maintained,
repaired and operated by the utility as presently constructed and located, except as may be otherwise
provided in any applicable franchise, license or similar agreement.
C. Franchises, Licenses, or Similar Agreements. The City, in its discretion and as limited by law, may
require utilities to enter into a franchise, license or similar agreement for the privilege of locating
their facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the City rights-of-way. Utilities
that are not required by law to enter into such an agreement may request that the City enter into
such an agreement. In such an agreement, the City may provide for terms and conditions
inconsistent with this Section.
D. Effect of Franchises, Licenses, or Similar Agreements.
1. Utilities Other Than Telecommunications Providers. In the event that a utility other than a
telecommunications provider has a franchise, license or similar agreement with the City,
TITLE 3 – TRAFFIC AND PARKING
Page 15
such franchise, license or similar agreement shall govern and control during the term of
such agreement and any lawful renewal or extension thereof.
2. Telecommunications Providers. In the event of any conflict with, or inconsistency between.
the provisions of this Section and the provisions of any franchise, license or similar
agreement between the City and any telecommunications provider, the provisions of such
franchise, license or similar agreement shall govern and control during the during the term
of such agreement and any lawful renewal or extension thereof.
E. Conflicts with Other Ordinances. This Ordinance supersedes all Ordinances or parts of Ordinances
adopted prior hereto that are in conflict herewith, to the extent of such conflict.
F. Conflicts with State and Federal Laws. In the event that applicable federal or State laws or
regulations conflict with the requirements of this Section, the utility shall comply with the
requirements of this Section to the maximum extent possible without violating federal or State laws
or regulations.
G. Sound Engineering Judgment. The City shall use sound engineering judgment when administering
this Section and may vary the standards, conditions, and requirements expressed in this Section
when the City so determines. Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the ability of the City to
regulate its rights-of-way for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare.
SECTION 3-9-2 DEFINITIONS
As used in this Section and unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the words and terms listed shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this Section. Any term not defined in this Section shall have the
meaning ascribed to it in 92 JII. Adm. Code §530.30, unless the context clearly requires otherwise.
AASHTO: American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials.
ANSI: American National Standards Institute.
Applicant: A person applying for a permit under this Section.
ASTM: American Society for Testing and Materials.
Backfill: The methods or materials for replacing excavated material in a trench or pit.
Bore or Boring: To excavate an underground cylindrical cavity for the insertion of a pipe or electrical
conductor.
Carrier Pipe: The pipe enclosing the liquid, gas or slurry to be transported.
Casing: A structural protective enclosure for transmittal devices such as: carrier pipes, electrical
conductors, and fiber optic devices.
City: The City of West Peoria.
Clear Zone: The total roadside border area, starting at the edge of the pavement, available for safe use by
errant vehicles. This area may consist of a shoulder, a recoverable slope, a non-recoverable slope, and a
clear run-out area. The desired width is dependent upon the traffic volumes and speeds, and on the roadside
geometry. Distances are specified in the AASHTO Roadside Design Guide.
Coating: Protective wrapping or mastic cover applied to buried pipe for protection against external
corrosion.
Conductor: Wire carrying electrical current.
Conduit: A casing or encasement for wires or cables.
Construction or Construct: The installation, repair. maintenance, placement, alteration, enlargement,
demolition, modification or abandonment in place of facilities.
TITLE 3 – TRAFFIC AND PARKING
Page 16
Cover: The depth of earth or backfill over buried utility pipe or conductor.
Crossing Facility: A facility that crosses one or more right-of-way lines of a right-of-way.
Director of Public Works: The City Street Department Manager or his or her designees.
Disrupt the Right-of-Way: For the purposes of this Section, any work that obstructs the right-of-way or
causes a material adverse effect on the use of the right-of-way for its intended use. Such work may include,
without limitation, the following: excavating or other cutting; placement (whether temporary or permanent)
of materials, equipment, devices, or structures; damage to vegetation; and compaction or loosening of the
soil and shall not include the parking of vehicles or equipment in a manner that does not materially obstruct
the flow of traffic on a highway.
Emergency: Any immediate maintenance to the facility required for the safety of the public using, or in
the vicinity of, the right-of-way or immediate maintenance required for the health and safety of the general
public served by the utility.
Encasement: Provision or a protective casing.
Engineer: The City Engineer or his or her designee.
Equipment: Materials, tools, implements, supplies, and/or other items used to facilitate construction of
facilities.
Excavation: The making of a hole or cavity by removing material or laying bare by digging.
Extra Heavy Pipe: Pipe meeting ASTM standards for this pipe designation.
Facility: All structures, devices, objects, and materials (including track and rails, wires, ducts, fiber optic
cable, communications and video cables and wires, poles, conduits, grates, covers, pipes, cables, and
appurtenances thereto) located on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within rights-of-way under
this Section, except those owned by the City.
Freestanding Facility: A facility that is not a crossing facility or a parallel facility, such as an antenna,
transformer, pump, or meter station.
Frontage Road: Roadway, usually parallel, providing access to land adjacent to the highway where it is
precluded by control of access on highway.
Hazardous Materials: Any substance or material which, due to its quantity, form concentration, location,
or other characteristics, is determined by the City Engineer to pose an unreasonable and imminent risk to
the life, health or safety of persons or property or to the ecological balance of the environment, including,
but not limited to explosives, radioactive materials, petroleum or petroleum products or gases, poisons,
etiology (biological) agents, flammables, corrosives or any substance determined to be hazardous or toxic
under any federal or state law , statute or regulation.
Highway Code: The Illinois Highway Code, 605 ILCS 5/1-101 et seq., as amended from time to time.
Highway: A specific type of right-of-way used for vehicular traffic including rural or urban roads or streets.
"Highway" includes all highway land and improvements, including roadways, ditches and embankments,
bridges, drainage structures, signs, guardrails, protective structures and appurtenances necessary or
convenient for vehicle traffic.
IDOT: Illinois Department of Transportation.
ILCC: Illinois Commerce Commission.
Jacking: Pushing a pipe horizontally under a roadway by mechanical means with or without boring.
Jetting: Pushing a pipe through the earth using water under pressure to create a cavity ahead of the pipe.
Joint Use: The use of pole lines, trenches or other facilities by two or more utilities.
TITLE 3 – TRAFFIC AND PARKING
Page 17
Major Intersection: The intersection of two or more major arterial highways.
Occupancy: The presence of facilities on, over or under right-of-way.
Parallel Facility: A facility that is generally parallel or longitudinal to the centerline of a right-of way.
Parkway: Any portion of the right-of-way not improved by street or sidewalk.
Pavement Cut: The removal of an area of pavement for access to facility or for the construction of a
facility.
Permittee: That entity to which a permit has been issued pursuant to this Section.
Practicable: That which is performable, feasible or possible, rather than that which is simply convenient.
Pressure: The internal force acting radially against the walls of a carrier pipe expressed in pounds per
square inch gauge (psig).
Petroleum Products Pipelines: Pipelines carrying crude or refined liquid petroleum products including,
but not limited to, gasoline, distillates, propane, butane, or coal-slurry.
Prompt: That which is done within a period of time specified by the City. If no time period is specified,
the period shall be thirty (30) days.
Public Entity: A legal entity that constitutes, or is part of, the government, whether at local, state or federal
level.
Restoration: The repair of a right-of-way, highway, roadway, or other area disrupted by the construction
of a facility.
Right-of-Way: Any street, alley, other land or waterway, dedicated or commonly used for utility purposes,
including utility easements in which the City has the right and authority to authorize, regulate or permit the
location of facilities other than those of the City. "Right-of-way" shall not include any real or personal City
property that is not specifically described in the previous two (2) sentences and shall not include City
buildings, fixtures, and other structures or improvements, regardless of whether they are situated in the
right-of-way.
Roadway: That part of the highway that includes the pavement and shoulders.
Sale of Telecommunications at Retail: The transmitting, supplying, or furnishing of telecommunications
and all services rendered in connection therewith for a consideration, other than between a parent
corporation and its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, when the gross charge
made by one such corporation to another such corporation is not greater than the gross charge paid to the
retailer for its use or consumption and not for sale.
Security Fund: That amount of security required pursuant to this Section.
Shoulder: A width of roadway, adjacent to the pavement, providing lateral support to the pavement edge
and providing an area for emergency vehicular stops and storage of snow removed from the pavement.
Sound Engineering Judgment: A decision(s) consistent with generally accepted engineering principles,
practices and experience.
Street Department Manager: The City Director of Public Works or his or her designee.
Telecommunications: This term includes, but is not limited to, messages or information transmitted
through use of local, toll, and wide area telephone service, channel services, telegraph services,
teletypewriter service, computer exchange service, private line services, specialized mobile radio services,
or any other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar means, between or among
points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite, or similar facilities. Unless the context
clearly requires otherwise, "telecommunications" shall also include wireless telecommunications as defined
in the Illinois Telecommunications Infrastructure Maintenance Fee Act, 35 ILCS 635/1 et seq.
TITLE 3 – TRAFFIC AND PARKING
Page 18
"Telecommunications" shall not include value added services in which computer processing applications
are used to act on the form, content, code, and protocol of the information for purposes other than
transmission. "Telecommunications" s hall not include purchase of telecommunications by a
telecommunications service provider for use as a component part of the service provided by him or her to
the ultimate retail consumer who originates or terminates the end-to-end communications. Retailer access
charges, right of access charges, charges for use of intercompany facilities, and all telecommunications
resold in the subsequent provision and used as a component of, or integrated into, end-to-end
telecommunications service s hall not be included in gross charges as sales for resale.
"Telecommunications" shall not include the provision of cable services through a cable system as defined
in the Cable Communications Act of 1984 (47 U.S.C. Sections 521 and following) as now or hereafter
amended or cable or other programming services subject to an open video system fee payable to the City
through an open video system as defined in the Rules of the Federal Communications Commission (47
C.D.F. 76.1550 and following) as now or hereafter amended.
Telecommunications Provider: Means any person that installs, owns, operates or controls facilities in the
public right-of-way used or designed to be used to transmit telecommunications in any form.
Telecommunications Retailer: Means and includes every person engaged in making sales of
telecommunications at retail as defined herein.
Trench: A relatively narrow open excavation for the installation of an underground facility.
Utility: The individual or entity owning or operating any facility as defined in this Section.
Vent: A pipe to allow the dissipation into the atmosphere of gases or vapors from an underground casing.
Water Lines: Pipelines carrying raw or potable water.
Wet Boring: Boring using water under pressure at the cutting auger to soften the earth and to provide a
sluice for the excavated material.
SECTION 3-9-3 ANNUAL REGISTRATION REQUIRED
Every utility that occupies right-of-way within the City shall register on January 1 or the next business day
of each year with the Engineer, providing the utility's name, address and regular business telephone and
telecopy numbers, the name of one or more contact persons who can act on behalf of the utility in connection
with emergencies involving the utility's facilities in the right-of-way and a twenty-four (24) hour telephone
number for each such person, and evidence of insurance as required in this Section, in the form of a
certificate of insurance. A telecommunications provider that has registered under this Section, shall be
deemed to have satisfied the registration requirements under this Section.
SECTION 3-9-4 PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATION FEES
A. Permit Required. No person shall construct (as defined in this Section) any facility on, over, above,
along, upon, under, across, or within any City right-of-way which (1) changes the location of the
facility, (2) adds a new facility, (3) disrupts the right-of-way (as defined in this Section), or (4)
materially increases the amount of area or space occupied by the facility on, over, above, along,
under across or within the right-of-way, without first filing an application with the City Engineer
and obtaining a permit from the City therefor, except as otherwise provided in this Section. No
permit shall be required for installation and maintenance of service connections to customers'
premises where there will be no disruption of the right-of-way.
B. Permit Application. All applications for permits pursuant to this Ordinance shall be filed with the
City Clerk on a form provided by the City and shall be filed in such number of duplicate copies as
the City may designate. The applicant may designate those portions of its application materials that
TITLE 3 – TRAFFIC AND PARKING
Page 19
it reasonably believes contain proprietary or confidential information as "proprietary" or
"confidential" by clearly marking each page of such materials accordingly.
C. Minimum General Application Requirements. The application shall be made by the utility or its
duly authorized representative and shall contain, at a minimum, the following:
1. The utility's name and address and telephone and telecopy numbers;
2. The applicant's name and address, if different than the utility, its telephone, telecopy
numbers, e-mail address, and its interest in the work;
3. The names, addresses and telephone and telecopy numbers and e-mail addresses of all
professional consultants, if any, advising the applicant with respect to the application;
4. A general description of the proposed work and the purposes and intent of the facility and
the uses to which the facility will be put. The scope and detail of such description shall be
appropriate to the nature and character of the work to be performed, with special emphasis
on those matters likely to be affected or impacted by the work proposed;
5. Evidence that the utility has placed on file with the City:
a) A written traffic control plan demonstrating the protective measures and devices
that will be employed consistent with the Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic
Control Devices, to prevent injury or damage to persons or property and to
minimize disruptions to efficient pedestrian and vehicular traffic; and
b) An emergency contingency plan which shall specify the nature of potential
emergencies, including, without limitation, construction and hazardous materials
emergencies, and the intended response by the applicant. The intended response
shall include notification to the City and shall promote protection of the safety and
convenience of the public. Compliance with ILCC regulations for emergency
contingency plans constitutes compliance with this Section unless the City finds
that additional information or assurances are needed;
6. Drawings, plans and specifications showing the work proposed, including the certification
of an engineer that such drawings, plans, and specifications comply with applicable codes,
rules, and regulations;
7. Evidence of insurance as required in this Section;
8. Evidence of posting of the security fund as required in this Section;
9. Any request for a variance from one or more provisions of this Section; and
10. Such additional information as may be reasonably required by the City.
D. Supplemental Application Requirements for Specific Types of Utilities. In addition to the
requirements of Subsection (c) of this Section, the permit application shall include the following
items as applicable to the specific utility that is the subject of the permit application:
1. In the case of new electric power, communications or natural gas distribution system
installation, evidence that any "Certificate of Public Convenience and Necessity" has been
issued by the ILCC that the applicant is required by law, or has elected, to obtain;
2. In the case of natural gas systems, state the proposed pipe size, design, construction class,
and operating pressures;
3. In the case of water lines, indicate that all requirements of the Illinois Environmental
Protection Agency, Division of Public Water Supplies, have been satisfied;
4. ln the case of sewer line installations. indicate that the land and water pollution
requirements of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, Division of Water Pollution
Control, have been satisfied; or
5. In the case of petroleum products pipelines, state the type or types of petroleum products,
pipe size, maximum working pressure, and the design standard to be followed.
E. Applicant's Duty to Update Information. Throughout the entire permit application review period
and the construction period authorized by the permit, any amendments to information contained in
TITLE 3 – TRAFFIC AND PARKING
Page 20
a permit application shall be submitted by the utility in writing to the City within thirty (30) days
after the change necessitating the amendment.
F. Application Fees. Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license, or similar agreement, all
applications for permits pursuant to this Section shall be accompanied by a fee in the amount of
five hundred dollars ($500.00). No application fee is required to be paid by any telecommunications
retailer that is paying the municipal telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee pursuant to
Ordinance 1998-3 or the optional state telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee pursuant
to the Telecommunications Municipal Infrastructure Maintenance Fee Act, or by any electricity
utility that is paying the municipal electricity infrastructure maintenance fee pursuant to the
Electricity Infrastructure Maintenance Fee Act.
SECTION 3-9-5 ACTION ON PERMIT APPLICATIONS
A. City Review of Permit Applications. Completed permit applications, containing all required
documentation, shall be examined by the City Engineer within a reasonable time after filing. If the
application does not conform to the requirements of all applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules,
and regulations, the City Engineer shall reject such application in writing, stating the reasons
therefor. If the City Engineer is satisfied that the proposed work conforms to the requirements of
this Section and all applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules, and regulations, the City Engineer
shall issue a permit therefor as soon as practicable.
B. Additional City Review of Applications of Telecommunications Retailers.
1. Pursuant to Section 4 of the Telephone Company Act, 220 ILCS 65/4, a
telecommunications retailer shall notify the City that it intends to commence work
governed by this Section for facilities for the provision of telecommunications services.
Such notice shall consist of plans, specifications, and other documentation sufficient to
demonstrate the purpose and intent of the facilities and shall be provided by the
telecommunications retailer to the City not less than ten (10) days prior to the
commencement of work requiring no excavation and not less than thirty (30) days prior to
the commencement of work requiring excavation. The City Engineer shall specify the
portion of the right-of-way upon which the facility may be placed, used and constructed.
2. In the event that the City Engineer fails to provide such specification of location to the
telecommunications retailer within either (i) ten (10) days after service of notice to the City
by the telecommunications retailer in the case of work not involving excavation for new
construction; or (ii) twenty-five (25) days after service of notice by the telecommunications
retailer in the case of work involving excavation for new construction, the
telecommunications retailer may commence work without obtaining a permit under this
Section.
3. Upon the provision of such specification by the City, where a permit is required for work
pursuant to this Section, the telecommunications retailer shall submit to the City an
application for a permit and any and all plans, specifications and documentation available
regarding the facility to be constructed. Such application shall be subject to the
requirements of Subsection (a) of this Section.
SECTION 3-9-6 EFFECT OF PERMIT
A. Authority Granted; No Property Right or Other Interest Created. A permit from the City authorizes
a permittee to undertake only certain activities in accordance with this Section on City rights-ofway
and does not create a property right or grant authority to the permittee to impinge upon the
rights of others who may have an interest in the public rights-of-way.
TITLE 3 – TRAFFIC AND PARKING
Page 21
B. Compliance with All Laws Required. The issuance of a permit by the City does not excuse the
permittee from complying with other requirements of the City and all applicable statutes, laws,
ordinances, rules, and regulations.
SECTION 3-9-7 REVISED PERMIT DRAWINGS
In the event that the actual locations of any facilities deviate in any material respect from the locations
identified in the plans, drawings and specifications submitted with the permit application, the permittee
shall submit a revised set of drawings or plans to the City within ninety (90) days after the completion of
the permitted work. The revised drawings or plans shall specifically identify where the locations of the
actual facilities deviate from the locations approved in the permit. If any deviation from the permit also
deviates from the requirements of this Section, it shall be treated as a request for variance in accordance
with this Section. If the City denies the request for a variance, then the permittee shall either remove the
facility from the right-of- way or modify the facility so that it conforms to the permit and submit revised
drawings or plans therefor.
SECTION 3-9-8 INSURANCE
A. Required Coverages and Limits. Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license, or similar
agreement, each utility occupying right-of-way or constructing any facility in the right-of-way shall
secure and maintain the following liability insurance policies insuring the utility as named insured
and naming the City, and its elected and appointed officers, officials, agents, and employees as
additional insureds on the policies listed in paragraphs 1 and 2 below:
1. Commercial general liability insurance, including premises-operations, explosion,
collapse, and underground hazard (commonly referred to as "X," "C," and "U" coverages)
and products-completed operations coverage with limits not less than:
a) Five million dollars ($5,000,000) for bodily injury or death to each person;
b) Five million dollars ($5,000,000) for property damage resulting from any one
accident; and
c) Five million dollars ($5,000,000) for all other types of liability;
2. Automobile liability for owned, non-owned and hired vehicles with a combined single limit
of one million dollars ($1,000,000) for personal injury and property damage for each
accident;
3. Worker's compensation with statutory limits; and
4. Employer's liability insurance with limits of not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000)
per employee and per accident.
B. Excess or Umbrella Policies. The coverages required by this Section may be in any combination of
primary, excess, and umbrella policies. Any excess or umbrella policy must provide excess
coverage over underlying insurance on a following-form basis such that when any loss covered by
the primary policy exceeds the limits under the primary policy, the excess or umbrella policy
becomes effective to cover such loss.
C. Copies Required. The utility shall provide copies of any of the policies required by this Section to
the City within ten (10) days following receipt of a written request therefor from the City.
D. Maintenance and Renewal of Required Coverages. The insurance policies required by this Section
shall contain the following endorsement:
It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be canceled nor the intention not to
renew be stated until thirty (30) days after receipt by the City, by registered mail or certified mail,
return receipt requested, of a written notice addressed to the City Administrator of such intent to
cancel or not to renew.
TITLE 3 – TRAFFIC AND PARKING
Page 22
Within ten (10) days after receipt by the City of said notice, and in no event later than ten (10) days
prior to said cancellation, the utility shall obtain and furnish to the City evidence of replacement
insurance policies meeting the requirements of this Section.
E. Self-Insurance. A utility may self-insure all or a portion of the insurance coverage and limit
requirements required by Subsection (a) of this Section. A utility that self-insures is not required,
to the extent of such self-insurance, to comply with the requirement for the naming of additional
insureds under Subsection (a), or the requirements of Subsections (b), (c) and (d) of this Section.
A utility that elects to self-insure shall provide to the City evidence sufficient to demonstrate its
financial ability to self-insure the insurance coverage and limit requirements required under
Subsection (a) of this Section, such as evidence that the utility is a "private self-insurer" under the
Workers Compensation Act.
F. Effect of insurance and Self-Insurance on Utility's Liability. The legal liability of the utility to the
City and any person for any of the matters that are the subject of the insurance policies or selfinsurance
required by this Section shall not be limited by such insurance policies or self-insurance
or by the recovery of any amounts thereunder.
SECTION 3-9-9 INDEMNIFICATION
By occupying or constructing facilities in the right-of-way, a utility shall be deemed to agree to defend,
indemnify and hold the City and its elected and appointed officials and officers, employees, agents and
representatives harmless from and against any and all injuries, claims, demands, judgments, damages,
losses and expenses, including reasonable attorney's fees and costs of suit or defense, arising out of,
resulting from or alleged to arise out of or result from the negligent, careless or wrongful acts,
omissions, failures to act or misconduct of the utility or its affiliates, officers, employees, agents, contractors
or subcontractors in the construction of facilities or occupancy of the rights-of-way, and in providing or
offering service over the facilities, whether such acts or omissions are authorized, allowed or prohibited
by this Section or by a franchise, license, or similar agreement; provided, however, that the utility's
indemnity obligations hereunder shall not apply to any injuries, claims, demands, judgments, damages,
losses or expenses arising out of or resulting from the negligence, misconduct or breach of this Section by
the City, its officials, officers, employees, agents or representatives.
SECTION 3-9-10 SECURITY
A. Purpose. The permittee shall establish a Security Fund in a form and in an amount as set forth in
this Section. The Security Fund shall be continuously maintained in accordance with this Section
at the permittee's sole cost and expense until the completion of the work authorized under the
permit. The Security Fund shall serve as security for:
1. The faithful performance by the permittee of all the requirements of this Section;
2. Any expenditure, damage, or loss incurred by the City occasioned by the permittee's failure
to comply with any codes, rules, regulations, orders, permits and other directives of the
City issued pursuant to this Section; and
3. The payment by permittee of all liens and all damages, claims, costs, or expenses that the
City may pay or incur by reason of any action or non-performance by permittee in violation
of this Section including, without limitation, any damage to public property or restoration
work the permittee is required by this Section to perform that the City must perform itself
or have completed as a consequence solely of the permittee's failure to perform or
complete, and all other payments due the City from the permittee pursuant to this Section
or any other applicable law.
TITLE 3 – TRAFFIC AND PARKING
Page 23
B. Form. The permittee shall provide the Security Fund to the City in the form, at the permittee's
election, of cash, a surety bond in a form acceptable to the City, or an unconditional letter of credit
in a form acceptable to the City. Any surety bond or letter of credit provided pursuant to this
Subsection shall, at a minimum:
1. Provide that it will not be canceled without prior notice to the City and the permittee;
2. Not require the consent of the permittee prior to the collection by the City of any amounts
covered by it; and
3. Shall provide a location convenient to the City and within the State of Illinois at which it
can be drawn.
C. Amount. The dollar amount of the Security Fund shall be sufficient to provide for the reasonably
estimated cost to restore the right-of-way to at least as good a condition as that existing prior to the
construction under the permit, as determined by the City Engineer Director of Public Works, and
may also include reasonable, directly related costs that the City estimates are likely to be incurred
if the permittee fails to perform such restoration. Where the construction of facilities proposed
under the permit will be performed in phases in multiple locations in the City, with each phase
consisting of construction of facilities in one location or a related group of locations, and where
construction in another phase will not be undertaken prior to substantial completion of restoration
in the previous phase or phases, the City Engineer Director of Public Works may, in the exercise
of sound discretion, allow the permittee to post a single amount of security which shall be
applicable to each phase of the construction under the permit. The amount of the Security Fund for
phased construction shall be equal to the greatest amount that would have been required under the
provisions of this Subsection (c) for any single phase.
D. Withdrawals. The City, upon fourteen (14) days' advance written notice clearly stating the reason
for, and its intention to, exercise withdrawal rights under this Subsection, may withdraw an amount
from the Security Fund, provided that the permittee has not reimbursed the City for such amount
within the fourteen (14) day notice period. Withdrawals may be made if the permittee:
1. Fails to make any payment required to be made by the permittee hereunder;
2. Fails to pay any liens relating to the facilities that are due and unpaid;
3. Fails to reimburse the City for any damages, claims, costs or expenses which the City has
been compelled to pay or incur by reason of any action or nonperformance
by the
permittee; or
4. Fails to comply with any provision of this Section that the City determines can be remedied
by an expenditure of an amount in the Security fund.
E. Replenishment. Within fourteen (14) days after receipt of written notice from the City that any
amount has been withdrawn from the Security Fund, the permittee shall restore the Security Fund
to the amount specified in Subsection (c) of this Section.
F. Interest. The permittee may request that any and all interest accrued on the amount in the Security
Fund be returned to the permittee by the City, upon written request for said withdrawal to the City,
provided that any such withdrawal does not reduce the Security Fund below the minimum balance
required in Subsection (c) of this Section.
G. Closing and Return of Security Fund. Upon completion of the work authorized under the permit,
the permittee shall be entitled to the return of the Security Fund, or such portion thereof as remains
on deposit, within a reasonable time after account is taken for all offsets necessary to compensate
the City for failure by the permittee to comply with any provisions of this Section or other
applicable law. In the event of any revocation of the permit, the Security Fund, and any and all
accrued interest therein, shall become the property of the City to the extent necessary to cover any
reasonable costs, loss or damage incurred by the City as a result of said revocation, provided that
any amounts in excess of said costs, loss or damage shall be refunded to the permittee.
TITLE 3 – TRAFFIC AND PARKING
Page 24
H. Rights Not Limited. The rights reserved to the City with respect to the Security Fund are in addition
to all other rights of the City, whether reserved by this Section or otherwise authorized by law, and
no action, proceeding or exercise of right with respect to said Security Fund shall affect any other
right the City may have. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the City shall not be entitled to a double
monetary recovery with respect to any of its rights which may be infringed or otherwise violated.
SECTION 3-9-11 PERMIT SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION
A. City Right to Revoke Permit. The City may revoke or suspend a permit issued pursuant to this
Section for one or more of the following reasons:
1. Fraudulent, false, misrepresenting, or materially incomplete statements in the permit
application;
2. Non-compliance with this Ordinance;
3. Permittee's physical presence or presence of permittee's facilities on, over, above, along,
upon, under, across, or within the public rights-of-way presents a direct or imminent threat
to the public health, safety, or welfare; or
4. Permittee's failure to construct the facilities substantially in accordance with the permit and
approved plans.
B. Notice of Revocation or Suspension. The City shall send written notice of its intent to revoke or
suspend a permit issued pursuant to this Section stating the reason or reasons for the revocation or
suspension and the alternatives available to permittee under this Section.
C. Permittee Alternatives Upon Receipt of Notice of Revocation or Suspension. Upon receipt of a
written notice of revocation or suspension from the City, the permittee shall have the following
options:
1. Immediately provide the City with evidence that no cause exists for the revocation or
suspension;
2. Immediately correct, to the satisfaction of the City, the deficiencies stated in the written
notice, providing written proof of such correction to the City within five (5) working days
after receipt of the written notice of revocation; or
3. Immediately remove the facilities located on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or
within the public rights-of-way and restore the rights-of-way to the satisfaction of the City
providing written proof of such removal to the City within ten (10) days after receipt of the
written notice or revocation.
The City may, in its discretion, for good cause shown, extend the time periods provided in this
Subsection.
D. Stop Work Order. In addition to the issuance of a notice of revocation or suspension, the City may
issue a stop work order immediately upon discovery of any of the reasons for revocation set forth
within Subsection (a) of this Section.
E. Failure or Refusal of the Permittee to Comply. If the permittee fails to comply with the provisions
of Subsection (c) of this Section, the City or its designee may, at the option of the City: (1) correct
the deficiencies; (2) upon not less than twenty (20) days' notice to the permittee, remove the subject
facilities or equipment; or (3) after not less than thirty (30) days' notice to the permittee of failure
to cure the non-compliance, deem them abandoned and property of the City. The permittee shall be
liable in all events to the City for all costs of removal.
SECTION 3-9-12 CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP OR OWNER'S IDENTITY OR LEGAL STATUS
A. Notification of Change. A utility shall notify the City no less than thirty (30) days prior to the
transfer of ownership of any facility in the right-of- way or change in identity of the utility. The
new owner of the utility or the facility shall have all the obligations and privileges enjoyed by the
TITLE 3 – TRAFFIC AND PARKING
Page 25
former owner under the permit, if any, and all applicable laws, ordinances, rules and regulations,
including this Section, with respect to the work and facilities in the right-of-way.
B. Amended Permit. A new owner shall request that any current permit be amended to show current
ownership. If the new owner fails to have a new or amended permit issued in its name, the new
owner shall be presumed to have accepted, and agreed to be bound by, the terms and conditions of
the permit if the new owner uses the facility or allows it to remain on the City's right-of-way.
C. Insurance and Bonding. All required insurance coverage or bonding must be changed to reflect the
name of the new owner upon transfer.
SECTION 3-9-13 GENERAL CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS
A. Standards and Principles. All construction in the right-of-way shall be consistent with applicable
ordinances, codes, laws, rules and regulations, and commonly recognized and accepted traffic
control and construction principles, sound engineering judgment and, where applicable, the
principles and standards set forth in the following IDOT publications:
1. Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction;
2. Supplemental Specifications and Recurring Special Provisions;
3. Highway Design Manual;
4. Highway Standards Manual;
5. Standard Specifications for Traffic Control Items;
6. Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (92 Ill. Adm. Code § 545);
7. Flagger's Handbook; and
8. Work Site Protection Manual for Daylight Maintenance Operations.
B. Interpretation of Municipal Standards and Principles. If a discrepancy exists between or among
differing principles and standards required by this Section, the City Engineer shall determine, in
the exercise of sound engineering judgment, which principles apply and such decision shall be
final. If requested, the City Engineer shall state which standard or principle will apply to the
construction, maintenance, or operation of a facility in the future.
SECTION 3-9-14 TRAFFIC CONTROL
A. Minimum Requirements. The City's minimum requirements for traffic protection are contained in
IDOT's Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices and this Code.
B. Warning Signs. Protective Devices, and Flaggers. The utility is responsible for providing and
installing warning signs, protective devices and flaggers, when necessary, meeting all applicable
federal, state, and local requirements for protection of the public and the utility's workers when
performing any work on the public rights-of-way.
C. Interference with Traffic. All work shall be phased so that there is minimum interference with
pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
D. Notice When Access is Blocked. At least forty-eight (48) hours prior to beginning work that will
partially or completely block access to any residence, business or institution, the utility shall notify
the resident, business or institution of the approximate beginning time and duration of such work;
provided, however, that in cases involving emergency repairs pursuant to this Section, the utility
shall provide such notice as is practicable under the circumstances.
E. Compliance. The utility shall take immediate action to correct any deficiencies in traffic protection
requirements that are brought lo the utility's attention by the City.
TITLE 3 – TRAFFIC AND PARKING
Page 26
SECTION 3-9-15 LOCATION OF FACILITIES
A. Parallel Facilities Located Within Highways.
1. Overhead Parallel Facilities. An overhead parallel facility may be located within the rightof-
way lines of a highway only if:
a) Lines are located as near as practicable to the right-of-way line and as nearly
parallel to the right-of-way line as reasonable pole alignment will permit;
b) Where pavement is curbed, poles are as remote as practicable from the curb with
a minimum distance of two (2) feet (0.6 m) behind the face of the curb, where
available;
c) Where pavement is uncurbed, poles are as remote from pavement edge as
practicable with minimum distance of four (4) feet (1.2 m) outside the outer
shoulder line of the roadway and are not within the clear zone;
d) No pole is located in the ditch line of a highway; and
e) Any ground-mounted appurtenance is located within one (1) foot (0.3 m) of the
right-of-way line or as near as possible to the right-of-way line.
2. Underground Parallel Facilities. An underground parallel facility may be located within
the right-of-way lines of a highway only if:
a) The facility is located as near the right-of-way line as practicable and not more
than eight (8) feet (2.4 m) from and parallel to the right-of-way line;
b) A new facility may be located under the paved portion of a highway only if other
locations are impracticable or inconsistent with sound engineering judgment (e.g.,
a new cable may be installed in existing conduit without disrupting the pavement);
and
c) In the case of an underground power or communications line, the facility shall be
located as near the right-of-way line as practicable and not more than five (5) feet
(1.5 m) from the right-of-way line and any above grounded appurtenance shall be
located within one (1) foot (0.3 m) of the right-of-way line or as near as practicable.
B. Facilities Crossing Highways.
1. No Future Disruption. The construction and design of crossing facilities installed between
the ditch lines or curb lines of City highways may require the incorporation of materials
and protections (such as encasement or additional cover) to avoid settlement or future
repairs to the roadbed resulting from the installation of such crossing facilities.
2. Cattle Passes, Culverts, or Drainage Facilities. Crossing facilities shall not be located in
cattle passes, culverts, or drainage facilities.
3. Ninety (90) Degree Crossing Required. Crossing facilities shall cross at or as near to a
ninety (90) degree angle to the centerline as practicable.
4. Overhead Power or Communication Facility. An overhead power or communication
facility may cross a highway only if:
a) It has a minimum vertical line clearance as required by ILCC's rules entitled,
"Construction of Electric Power and Communication Lines" (83 Ill. Adm. Code
305);
b) Poles are located within one (1) foot (0.3 m) of the right-of-way line of the highway
and outside of the clear zone; and
c) Overhead crossings at major intersections are avoided.
5. Underground Power or Communication Facility. An underground power or
communication facility may cross a highway only if:
a) The design materials and construction methods will provide maximum
maintenance-free service life; and
b) Capacity for the utility's foreseeable future expansion needs is provided in the
initial installation.
TITLE 3 – TRAFFIC AND PARKING
Page 27
6. Markers. The City may require the utility to provide a marker at each right-of-way line
where an underground facility other than a power or communication facility crosses a
highway. Each marker shall identify the type of facility, the utility, an emergency phone
number. Markers may also be eliminated as provided in current Federal regulations. (49
C.F. R. 192.707 (1989)).
C. Facilities to be Located Within Particular Rights-of-Way. The City may require that facilities be
located within particular rights-of-way that are not highways, rather than within particular
highways.
D. Freestanding Facilities.
1. The City may restrict the location and size of any freestanding facility located within a
right-of-way.
2. The City may require any freestanding facility located within a right-of-way to be screened
from view.
E. Appearance Standards.
1. The City may prohibit the installation of facilities in particular locations in order to
preserve visual quality.
2. A facility may be constructed only if its construction does not require extensive removal
or alteration of trees or terrain features visible to the highway user or impair the aesthetic
quality of the lands being traversed.
F. Above Ground Installation. Above ground facilities may be installed only if:
1. No other existing facilities in the area are located underground;
2. New underground installation is not technically feasible; and
3. The proposed installation will be made at a location, and will employ suitable design and
materials, to provide the greatest protection of aesthetic qualities of the area being traversed
without adversely affecting safety. Suitable designs include, but are not limited to, selfsupporting
armless, single-pole construction with vertical configuration of conductors and
cable.
G. Facility Attachments to Bridges or Roadway Structures.
1. Facilities may be installed as attachments to bridges or roadway structures only where the
utility has demonstrated that all other means of accommodating the facility are not
practicable. Other means shall include, but are not limited to, underground, underwater,
independent poles, cable supports and tower supports, all of which are completely
separated from the bridge or roadway structure. Facilities transmitting commodities that
are volatile, flammable, corrosive, or energized, especially those under significant pressure
or potential, present high degrees of risk and such installations are not permitted.
2. A utility shall include in its request to accommodate a facility installation on a bridge or
roadway structure supporting data demonstrating the impracticability of alternate routing.
Approval or disapproval of an application for facility attachment to a bridge or roadway
structure will be based upon the following considerations:
a) The type, volume, pressure or voltage of the commodity to be transmitted and an
evaluation of the resulting risk to persons and property in the event of damage to
or failure of the facility;
b) The type, length, value, and relative importance of the highway structure in the
transportation system;
c) The alternative routings available to the utility and their comparative practicability;
d) The proposed method of attachment;
e) The ability of the structure to bear the increased load of the proposed facility;
f) The degree of interference with bridge maintenance and painting;
g) The effect on the visual quality of the structure; and
TITLE 3 – TRAFFIC AND PARKING
Page 28
h) The public benefit expected from the utility service as compared to the risk
involved.
SECTION 3-9-16 CONSTRUCTION METHODS AND MATERIALS
A. Standards and Requirements for Particular Types of Construction Methods.
1. Boring or Jacking.
a) Pits and Shoring. Boring or jacking under rights-of-way shall be accomplished
from pits located at a minimum distance specified by the City Engineer from the
edge of the pavement. Pits for boring or jacking shall be excavated no more than
forty-eight (48) hours in advance of boring or jacking operations and backfilled
within forty-eight (48) hours after boring or jacking operations are completed.
While pits are open, they shall be clearly marked and protected by barricades.
Shoring shall be designed, erected, supported, braced, and maintained so that it
will safely support all vertical and lateral loads that may be imposed upon it during
the boring or jacking operation.
b) Wet Boring or Jetting. Wet boring or jetting shall not be permitted under the
roadway.
c) Borings with Diameters Greater Than Six (6) Inches. Borings over six (6) inches
(0.15 m) in diameter shall be accomplished with an auger and following pipe, and
the diameter of the auger shall not exceed the outside diameter of the following
pipe by more than one (1) inch (25 mm).
d) Borings with Diameters Six (6) Inches or Less. Borings of six (6) inches or less in
diameter may be accomplished by either jacking, guided with auger, or auger and
following pipe method.
e) Tree Preservation. Any facility located within the drip line of any tree designated
by the City to be preserved shall be bored under or around the root system.
2. Trenching. Trenching for facility installation, repair, or maintenance on rights-of-way shall
be done in accord with the applicable portions of Section 603 of IDOT's "Standard
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction."
a) Length. The length of open trench shall be kept to the practicable minimum
consistent with requirements for pipe-line testing. Only one-half of any
intersection may have an open trench at any time unless special permission is
obtained from the City Engineer.
b) Open Trench and Excavated Material. Open trench and windrowed excavated
material shall be protected as required by Chapter 6 of the Illinois Manual on
Uniform Traffic Control Devices. Where practicable, the excavated material shall
be deposited between the roadway and the trench as added protection. Excavated
material shall not be allowed to remain on the paved portion or the roadway. Where
right-of-way width does not allow for windrowing excavated material off the
paved portion of the roadway, excavated material shall be hauled to an off-road
location.
c) The utility shall not trench within the drip line of any tree designated by the City
to be preserved.
3. Backfilling.
a) Any pit, trench, or excavation created during the installation of facilities shall be
backfilled for its full width, depth, and length using methods and materials in
accordance with IDOT's "Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction." When excavated material is hauled away or is unsuitable for
backfill, suitable granular backfill shall be used.
b) For a period of three (3) years from the date construction of a facility is completed,
the utility shall be responsible to remove and restore any backfilled area that has
TITLE 3 – TRAFFIC AND PARKING
Page 29
settled due to construction of the facility. If so ordered by the Engineer, the utility,
at its expense, shall remove any pavement and backfill material to the top of the
installed facility, place and properly compact new backfill material, and restore
new pavement, sidewalk, curbs, and driveways to the proper grades, as determined
by the Engineer.
4. Pavement Cuts. Pavement cuts for facility installation or repair shall be permitted on a
highway only if that portion of the highway is closed to traffic. If a variance to the limitation
set forth in this paragraph (4) is permitted under this Section, the following requirements
shall apply:
a) Any excavation under pavements shall be backfilled as soon as practicable with
granular material of CA-6 or CA-10 gradation, as designated by the Engineer.
b) Restoration of pavement, in kind, shall be accomplished as soon as practicable,
and temporary repair with bituminous mixture shall be provided immediately. Any
subsequent failure of either the temporary repair or the restoration shall be rebuilt
upon notification by the City.
c) All saw cuts shall be full depth.
d) For all rights-of-way which have been reconstructed with a concrete surface/base
in the last seven (7) years, or resurfaced in the last three (3) years, permits shall
not be issued unless such work is determined to be an emergency repair or other
work considered necessary and unforeseen before the time of the reconstruction or
unless a pavement cut is necessary for a J.U.L.I.E. locate.
5. Encasement.
a) Casing pipe shall be designed to withstand the load of the highway and any other
superimposed loads. The casing shall be continuous either by one-piece fabrication
or by welding or jointed installation approved by the City.
b) The venting, if any, of any encasement shall extend within one (1) foot (0.3 m) of
the right-of-way line. No above-ground vent pipes shall be located in the area
established as clear zone for that particular section of the highway.
c) In the case of water main or service crossing, encasement shall be furnished
between bore pits unless continuous pipe or City approved jointed pipe is used
under the roadway. Casing may be omitted only if pipe is installed prior to highway
construction and carrier pipe is continuous or mechanical joints are of a type
approved by the City. Bell and spigot type pipe shall be encased regardless of
installation method.
d) In the case of gas pipelines of sixty (60) psia or less, encasement may be
eliminated.
e) In the case of gas pipelines or petroleum products pipelines with installations of
more than sixty (60) psia, encasement may be eliminated only if:
(i) extra heavy pipe is used that precludes future maintenance or repair, and
(ii) cathodic protection of the pipe is provided
f) If encasement is eliminated for a gas or petroleum products pipeline, the facility
shall be located so as to provide that construction does not disrupt the right-ofway.
6. Minimum Cover of Underground Facilities. Cover shall be provided and maintained at
least in the amount specified in the following table for minimum cover for the type of
facility:
TITLE 3 – TRAFFIC AND PARKING
Page 30
TYPE OF FACILITY MINIMUM COVER
Power or Communication Line (In General)
Communication Line Installed by the Plowed Method
30 Inches (0.8 m)
24 Inches (0.6 m)
Gas or Petroleum Products 30 Inches (0.8 m)
Water Line Sufficient Cover to Provide Freeze Protection
Sanitary Sewer, Storm Sewer, or Drainage Line Sufficient Cover to Provide Freeze Protection
B. Standards and Requirements for Particular Types of Facilities.
1. Electric Power or Communication Lines.
a) Code Compliance. Electric power or communications facilities within City rightsof-
way shall be constructed, operated, and maintained in conformity with the
provisions of 83 III. Adm. Code 305 (formerly General Order 160 of the Illinois
Commerce Commission) entitled "Rules for Construction of Electric Power and
Communications Lines," and the National Electrical Safety Code.
b) Overhead Facilities. Overhead power or communication facilities shall use single
pole construction and, where practicable, joint use of poles shall be used. Utilities
shall make every reasonable effort to design the installation so guys and braces
will not be needed. Variances may be allowed if there is no feasible alternative and
if guy wires are equipped with guy guards for maximum visibility.
c) Underground Facilities. (1) Cable may be installed by trenching or plowing,
provided that special consideration is given to boring in order to minimize damage
when crossing improved entrances and side roads. (2) If a crossing is installed by
boring or jacking, encasement shall be provided between jacking or bore pits.
Encasement may be eliminated only if: (a) the crossing is installed by the use of
"moles," "whip augers," or other approved method which compress the earth to
make the opening for cable installation or, (b) the installation is by the open trench
method which is only permitted prior to roadway construction. (3) Cable shall be
grounded in accordance with the National Electrical Safety Code.
2. Underground Facilities Other than Electric Power or Communication Lines. Underground
facilities other than electric power or communication lines may be installed by:
a) The use of "moles," "whip augers," or other approved methods which compress
the earth to move the opening for the pipe;
b) Jacking or boring with vented encasement provided between the ditch lines or toes
of slopes of the highway;
c) Open trench with vented encasement between ultimate ditch lines or toes of slopes,
but only if prior to roadway construction; or
d) Tunneling with vented encasement, but only if installation is not possible by other
means.
3. Gas Transmission, Distribution and Service. Gas pipelines within rights-of-way shall be
constructed, maintained, and operated in a City approved manner and in conformance with
the Federal Code of the Office of Pipeline Safety Operations, Department of
Transportation, Part 192 - Transportation of Natural and Other Gas by Pipeline: Minimum
Federal Safety Standards (49 CFR 192), IDOT's "Standard Specifications for Road and
Bridge Construction," and all other applicable laws, rules, and regulations.
4. Petroleum Products Pipelines. Petroleum products pipelines within rights-of-way shall
conform to the applicable sections of ANSI Standard Code for Pressure Piping. (Liquid
Petroleum Transportation Piping Systems ANSI-B 31.4).
TITLE 3 – TRAFFIC AND PARKING
Page 31
5. Waterlines, Sanitary Sewer Lines, Storm Water Sewer Lines or Drainage Lines. Water
lines, sanitary sewer lines, storm sewer lines, and drainage lines within rights-of-way shall
meet or exceed the recommendations of the current "Standard Specifications for Water and
Sewer Main Construction in Illinois."
6. Ground Mounted Appurtenances. Ground mounted appurtenances to overhead or
underground facilities, when permitted within a right-of-way, shall be provided with a
vegetation-free area extending one (1) foot (305 mm) in width beyond the appurtenance
in all directions. The vegetation-free area may be provided by an extension of the mounting
pad, or by heavy duty plastic or similar material approved by the Engineer. With the
approval of the Engineer, shrubbery surrounding the appurtenance may be used in place of
vegetation-free area. The housing for ground-mounted appurtenances shall be painted a
neutral color to blend with the surroundings.
C. Materials.
1. General Standards. The materials used in constructing facilities within rights-of-way shall
be those meeting the accepted standards of the appropriate industry, the applicable portions
of IDOT's "Standards Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction," the requirements
of the Illinois Commerce Commission, or the standards establish by other official
regulatory agencies for the appropriate industry.
2. Material Storage on Right-of-Wav. All pipe, conduit, wire, poles, cross arms, or other
materials shall be distributed along the right-of-way prior to and during installation in a
manner to minimize hazards to the public or an obstacle to right-of-way maintenance or
damage to the right-of-way and other property. If material is to be stored on right-of-way,
prior approval must be obtained from the City.
3. Hazardous Materials. The plans submitted by the utility to the City shall identify any
hazardous materials that may be involved in the construction of the new facilities or
removal of any existing facilities.
D. Operational Restrictions.
1. Construction operations on rights-of-way may, at the discretion of the City, be required to
be discontinued when such operations would create hazards to traffic or the public health,
safety, and welfare. Such operations may also be required to be discontinued or restricted
when conditions are such that construction would result in extensive damage to the rightof-
way or other property.
2. These restrictions may be waived by the Engineer when emergency work is required to
restore vital utility services.
E. Location of Existing Facilities. Any utility proposing to construct facilities in the City shall contact
J.U.L.I.E. and ascertain the presence and location of existing above-ground and underground
facilities within the rights-of-way to be occupied by its proposed facilities. The City will make its
permit records available to a utility for the purpose of identifying possible facilities. When notified
of an excavation or when requested by the City or by J.U.L.I.E., a utility shall locate and physically
mark its underground facilities within forty-eight (48) hours, excluding weekends and holidays, in
accordance with the Illinois Underground Facilities Damage Prevention Act (220 ILCS 50/1 et
seq.)
SECTION 3-9-17 VEGETATION CONTROL
A. Tree Trimming Permit Required. Tree trimming shall not be considered a normal maintenance
operation, but shall require the application for, and the issuance of, a permit, in addition to any
other permit required under this Section. Under this Section, the Street Department Manager will
issue the permit.
1. Application for Tree Trimming Permit. Applications for tree trimming permits shall
include assurance that the work will be accomplished by competent workers with
TITLE 3 – TRAFFIC AND PARKING
Page 32
supervision who are experienced in accepted tree pruning practices. Tree trimming permits
shall designate an expiration date in the interest of assuring that the work will be
expeditiously accomplished.
2. Damage to Trees. Poor pruning practices resulting in damaged or misshapen trees will not
be tolerated and shall be grounds for cancellation of the tree trimming permit and for
assessment of damages. The City will require compensation for trees extensively damaged
and for trees removed without authorization. The formula developed by the International
Society of Arboriculture will be used as a basis for determining the compensation for
damaged trees or unauthorized removal of trees. The City may require the removal and
replacement of trees if trimming or radical pruning would leave them in an unacceptable
condition.
B. Specimen Trees or Trees of Special Significance. The City may require that special measures be
taken to preserve specimen trees or trees of special significance. The required measures may
consist of higher poles, side arm extensions, covered wire or other means.
C. Chemical Use. Spraying of any type of brush-killing chemicals will not be permitted on rights-ofway
unless the utility demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Engineer that such spraying is the only
practicable method of vegetation control.
SECTION 3-9-18 REMOVAL, RELOCATION, OR MODIFICATIONS OF UTILITY FACILITIES
A. Notice. Within ninety (90) days following written notice from the City, a utility shall, at its own
expense, temporarily or permanently remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any utility
facilities within the rights-of-way whenever the corporate authorities have determined that such
removal, relocation, change or alteration, is reasonably necessary for the construction, repair,
maintenance, or installation of any City improvement in or upon, or the operations of the City in or
upon, the rights-of-way.
B. Removal of Unauthorized Facilities. Within thirty (30) days following written notice from the City,
any utility that owns, controls, or maintains any unauthorized facility or related appurtenances
within the public rights-of-way shall, at its own expense, remove all or any part of such facilities
or appurtenances from the public rights-of-way. A facility is unauthorized and subject to removal
in the following circumstances:
1. Upon expiration or termination of the permittee's license or franchise, unless otherwise
permitted by applicable law;
2. If the facility was constructed or installed without the prior grant of a license or franchise,
if required;
3. If the facility was constructed or installed without prior issuance of a required permit in
violation of this Section; or
4. If the facility was constructed or installed at a location not permitted by the permittee's
license or franchise.
C. Emergency Removal or Relocation of Facilities. The City retains the right and privilege to cut or
move any facilities located within the rights-of-way of the City, as the City may determine to be
necessary, appropriate or useful in response to any public health or safety emergency. If
circumstances permit, the municipality shall attempt to notify the utility, if known, prior to cutting
or removing a facility and shall notify the utility, if known, after cutting or removing a facility.
D. Abandonment of Facilities. Upon abandonment of a facility within the public rights-of-way of the
City, the utility shall notify the City within ninety (90) days. Following receipt of such notice the
City may direct the utility to remove all or any portion of the facility if the City Engineer determines
that such removal will be in the best interest of the public health, safety and welfare. In the event
that the City does not direct the utility that abandoned the facility to remove it, by giving notice of
TITLE 3 – TRAFFIC AND PARKING
Page 33
abandonment to the City, the abandoning utility shall be deemed to consent to the alteration or
removal of all or any portion of the facility by another utility or person.
SECTION 3-9-19 CLEANUP AND RESTORATION
Upon completion of all construction or maintenance of facilities, the utility shall remove all excess material
and restore all turf and terrain in a timely manner and to the satisfaction of the City. This includes restoration
of entrances and side roads. Restoration of roadway surfaces shall be made using materials and methods
approved by the City Engineer. Such cleanup and repair may be required to consist of backfilling, regrading,
reseeding, re-sodding, or any other requirement to restore the right-of-way to a condition substantially
equivalent to that which existed prior to the commencement of the project.
SECTION 3-9-20 MAINTENANCE AND EMERGENCY MAINTENANCE
A. General. Facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within rights-of-way are to be
maintained by or for the utility in a manner satisfactory to the City and at the utility's expense.
B. Emergency Maintenance Procedures. Emergencies may justify non-compliance with normal
procedures for securing a permit:
1. If an emergency creates a hazard on the traveled portion of the right-of-way, the utility
shall take immediate steps to provide all necessary protection for traffic on the highway or
the public on the right-of-way including the use of signs, lights, barricades or flaggers. If a
hazard does not exist on the traveled way, but the nature of the emergency is such as to
require the parking on the shoulder of equipment required in repair operations, adequate
signs and lights shall be provided. Parking on the shoulder in such an emergency will only
be permitted when no other means of access to the facility is available.
2. In an emergency, the utility shall, as soon as possible, notify the City Engineer or his or
her duly authorized agent of the emergency, informing him or her as to what steps have
been taken for protection of the traveling public and what will be required to make the
necessary repairs. If the nature of the emergency is such as to interfere with the free
movement of traffic, the City police shall be notified immediately.
3. In an emergency, the utility shall use all means at hand to complete repairs as rapidly as
practicable and with the least inconvenience to the traveling public.
C. Emergency Repairs. The utility must file in writing with the City of a description of the repairs
undertaken in the right-of-way within forty-eight (48) hours after an emergency repair.
SECTION 3-9-21 VARIANCES
A. Request for Variance. A utility requesting a variance from one (1) or more of the provisions of this
Section must do so in writing to the City Engineer with a copy to the City Clerk as a part of the
permit application. The request shall identify each provision of this Section from which a variance
is requested and the reasons why a variance should be granted.
B. Authority to Grant Variances. The City Engineer shall decide whether a variance is authorized for
each provision of this Section identified in the variance request on an individual basis.
C. Conditions for Granting of Variance. The City Engineer may authorize a variance only if the utility
requesting the variance has demonstrated that:
1. One or more conditions not under the control of the utility (such as terrain features or an
irregular right-of-way line) create a special hardship that would make enforcement of the
provision unreasonable, given the public purposes to be achieved by the provision; and
TITLE 3 – TRAFFIC AND PARKING
Page 34
2. All other designs, methods, materials, locations or facilities that would conform with the
provision from which a variance is requested are impracticable in relation to the requested
approach.
D. Additional Conditions for Granting of a Variance. As a condition for authorizing a variance, the
City Engineer may require the utility requesting the variance to meet reasonable standards and
conditions that may or may not be expressly contained within this Section but which carry out the
purposes of this Section.
SECTION 3-9-22 PENALTIES
Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with any of the provisions of this
Section shall be subject to fine in accordance with the penalty provisions of this Code. There may be times
when the City will incur delay or other costs, including third party claims, because the utility will not or
cannot perform its duties under its permit and this Section. Unless the utility shows that another allocation
of the cost of undertaking the requested action is appropriate, the utility shall bear the City's costs of
damages and its costs of installing, maintaining, modifying, relocating, or removing the facility that is the
subject of the permit. No other administrative agency or commission may review or overrule a permit
related cost apportionment of the City. Sanctions may be imposed upon a utility who does not pay the costs
apportioned to it.
SECTION 3-9-23 ENFORCEMENT
Nothing in this Ordinance shall be construed as limiting any additional or further remedies that the City
may have for enforcement of this Ordinance.
SECTION 3-9-24 SEVERABILITY
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this Section is for any reason held invalid
or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct,
and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof.
(Ord. 2000-10)
TITLE 3 – TRAFFIC AND PARKING
Page 35
TITLE 3 TRAFFIC AND PARKING
CHAPTER 10 MUNICIPAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS INFRASTRUCTURE
MAINTENANCE FEE
3-10-1 Recitals
3-10-2 Definitions
3-10-3 Registration of telecommunications providers
3-10-4 Municipal telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee
3-10-5 Collection, enforcement, and administration of City telecommunications infrastructure
maintenance fees
3-10-6 Compliance with other laws
3-10-7 Existing franchises and licenses
3-10-8 Penalties
3-10-9 Enforcement
3-10-10 Severability
3-10-11 Conflict
3-10-12 Waiver and fee implementation
SECTION 3-10-1 RECITALS
The facts and statements contained in the preamble to this Section are found to be true and correct and are
hereby adopted as part of this Section.
SECTION 3-10-2 DEFINITIONS
As used in this Section, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
Gross charges: means the amount paid to a telecommunications retailer for the act or privilege of
originating or receiving telecommunications within the City, and for all services rendered in connection
therewith, valued in money whether paid in money or otherwise, including cash, credits, services, and
property of every kind or nature, and shall be determined without any deduction on account of the cost of
such telecommunications, the cost of the materials used, labor or service costs, or any other expense
whatsoever. In case credit is extended, the amount thereof shall be included only as and when paid. "Gross
charges" for private line service shall include charges imposed at each channel point within the City, charges
for the channel mileage between each channel point within the City, and charges for that portion of the
interstate inter-office channel provided within the City. However, "gross charges" shall not include:
A. Any amounts added to a purchaser's bill because of a charge made under: (i) the fee imposed by
this Section; (ii) additional charges added to a purchaser's bill under Section 9-221 or 9-222 of the
Public Utilities Act; (iii) amounts collected under Section 8-11-17 of the Illinois Municipal Code;
(iv) the tax imposed by the Telecommunications Excise Tax Act; (v) 911 surcharges; or (vi) the tax
imposed by Section 4251 of the Internal Revenue Code;
B. Charges for a sent collect telecommunication received outside the City;
C. Charges for leased time on equipment or charges for the storage of data or information or
subsequent retrieval or the processing of data or information intended to change its form or content.
Such equipment includes, but is not limited to, the use of calculators, computers, data processing
equipment, tabulating equipment, or accounting equipment and also includes the usage of
computers under a time-sharing agreement;
TITLE 3 – TRAFFIC AND PARKING
Page 36
D. Charges for customer equipment, including such equipment that is leased or rented by the customer
from any source, wherein such charges are disaggregated and separately identified from other
charges;
E. Charges to business enterprises certified under Section 9-222.1 of the Public Utilities Act to the
extent of such exemption and during the period of time specified by the City;
F. Charges for telecommunications and all services and equipment provided in connection therewith
between a parent corporation and its wholly-owned subsidiaries or between wholly-owned
subsidiaries, and only to the extent that the charges between the parent corporation and whollyowned
subsidiaries or between wholly-owned subsidiaries represent expense allocation between
the corporations and not the generation of profit other than a regulatory required profit for the
corporation rendering such services;
G. Bad debts ("bad debt") means any portion of a debt that is related to a sale at retail for which gross
charges are not otherwise deductible or excludable that has become worthless or uncollectible, as
determined under applicable federal income tax standards; if the portion of the debt deemed to be
bad is subsequently paid, the retailer shall report and pay the tax on that portion during the reporting
period in which the payment is made;
H. Charges paid by inserting coins in coin-operated telecommunications devices; or,
I. Charges for telecommunications and all services and equipment provided to the City.
Public right-of-way: means any municipal street, alley, water or public right-of-way dedicated or
commonly used for utility purposes, including utility easements wherein the City has acquired the right and
authority to locate or permit the location of utilities consistent with telecommunications facilities. "Public
right-of-way" shall not include any real or personal City property that is not specifically described in the
previous sentence and shall not include City buildings and other structures or improvements, regardless of
whether they are situated in the public right-of-way.
Retailer maintaining a place of business in this State: or any like term, means and includes any retailer
having or maintaining within the State of Illinois, directly or by a subsidiary, an office, distribution
facilities, transmission facilities, sales office, warehouse, or other place of business, or any agent or other
representative operating within this State under the authority of the retailer or its subsidiary, irrespective of
whether such place of business or agent or other representative is located here permanently or temporarily,
or whether such retailer or subsidiary is licensed to do business in this State.
Sale of telecommunications at retail: means the transmitting, supplying, or furnishing of
telecommunications and all services rendered in connection therewith for a consideration, other than
between a parent corporation and its wholly-owned subsidiaries or between wholly-owned subsidiaries,
when the gross charge made by one such corporation to another such corporation is not greater than the
gross charge paid to the retailer for their use or consumption and not for sale.
Service address: means the location of telecommunications equipment from which telecommunications
services are originated or at which telecommunications services are received. If this is not a defined
location, as in the case of wireless telecommunications, paging systems, maritime systems, air-to-ground
systems, and the like, "service address" shall mean the location of the customer's primary use of the
telecommunications equipment as defined by the location in Illinois where bills are sent.
Telecommunications: includes, but is not limited to, messages or information transmitted through use of
local, toll, and wide area telephone service, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter service,
computer exchange services, private line services, specialized mobile radio services, or any other
transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar means, between or among points by wire,
cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite, or similar facilities. Unless the context clearly requires
otherwise, " telecommunications" shall also include wireless telecommunications as hereinafter defined.
"Telecommunications" shall not include value added services in which computer processing applications
TITLE 3 – TRAFFIC AND PARKING
Page 37
are used to act on the form, content, code, and protocol of the information for purposes other than
transmission. "Telecommunications" shall not include purchase of telecommunications by a
telecommunications service provider for use as a component part of the service provided by him or her to
the ultimate retail consumer who originates or terminates the end-to-end communications. Retailer access
charges, right of access charges, charges for use of intercompany facilities, and all telecommunications
resold in the subsequent provision and used as a component of, or integrated into, end-to-end
telecommunications service shall not be included in gross charges as sales for resale.
"Telecommunications" shall not include the provision of cable services through a cable system as defined
in the Cable Communications Act of 1984 (47 U.S.C. Sections 521 and following) as now or hereafter
amended or cable or other programming services subject to an open video system fee payable to the City
through an open video system as defined in the Rules of the Federal Communications Commission (47
C.D.F. 76.1550 and following) as now or hereafter amended.
Telecommunications provider: means (1) any telecommunications retailer; and (2) any person that is not
a telecommunications retailer that installs, owns, operates, or controls equipment in the public right-of-way
that is used or designed to be used to transmit telecommunications in any form.
Telecommunications retailer: or "retailer" or "carrier" means and includes every person engaged in the
business of making sales of telecommunications at retail as defined in this Section. The City may, in its
discretion, upon application, authorize the collection of the fee hereby imposed by any retailer not
maintaining a place of business within this State, who, to the satisfaction of the City, furnishes adequate
security to ensure collection and payment of the fee. When so authorized, it shall be the duty of such retailer
to pay the fee upon all of the gross charges for telecommunications in the same manner and subject to the
same requirements as a retailer maintaining a place of business within the City.
Wireless telecommunications: includes cellular mobile telephone services, personal wireless services as
defined in Section 704(C) of the Telecommunications Act of 1996 (Public Law No. 104-104), 42 U.S.C.
§332(c)(7), as now or hereafter amended, including all commercial mobile radio services, and paging
services.
SECTION 3-10-3 REGISTRATION OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDERS
A. Every telecommunications provider as defined by this Section shall register with the City within
thirty (30) days after the effective date of this Ordinance or becoming a telecommunications
provider, whichever is later, on a form to be provided by the City; provided, however, that any
telecommunications retailer that has filed a return pursuant to Section Five of this Section shall be
deemed to have registered in accordance with this Section
B. Every telecommunications provider who has registered with the City pursuant to this Section has
an affirmative duty to submit an amended registration form or current return as required by Section
Five of this Section, as the case may be, to the City within thirty (30) days from the date of the
occurrence of any changes in the information provided by the telecommunications provider in the
registration form or most recent return on file with the City.
SECTION 3-10-4 MUNICIPAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS INFRASTRUCTURE MAINTENANCE
FEE
A. City telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee is hereby imposed upon all
telecommunications retailers in the amount of one percent (1%) of all gross charges charged by the
telecommunications retailer to service addresses within the City for telecommunications
originating or received in the City.
B. Upon the effective date of the City telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee authorized
in this Section, the City telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee authorized hereunder
shall be the only fee or compensation for the use of all public rights-of-way within the City by
TITLE 3 – TRAFFIC AND PARKING
Page 38
telecommunications retailers. Imposition of the City telecommunications infrastructure
maintenance fee provided under this Section does not, however, serve as a limitation on the levying
of any taxes or imposition of any fees otherwise authorized by law.
C. The City telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee authorized by this Section shall be
collected, enforced, and administered as set forth in Section Five of this Section.
SECTION 3-10-5 COLLECTION, ENFORCEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION OF CITY
TELECOMMUNICATIONS INFRASTRUCTURE MAINTENANCE FEES
A. A telecommunications retailer shall charge to and collect from each customer an additional charge
in an amount equal to the City telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee attributable to
that customer's service address.
B. Unless otherwise approved by the City, the City telecommunications infrastructure maintenance
fee shall be remitted by the telecommunications retailer to the City not later than the last day of the
month subsequent to the month in which a bill is issued to the customer; provided, however, that
the telecommunications retailer may retain an amount not to exceed two percent (2%) of the City
telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee collected by it to reimburse itself for expenses
incurred in accounting for and remitting the City telecommunications infrastructure maintenance
fee.
C. Remittance of the City telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee to the City shall be
accompanied by a return, in a form to be prescribed by the City, which shall contain such
information as the City may reasonably require.
D. Any City telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee required to be collected pursuant to
this Section and any such City telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee collected by
such telecommunications retailer shall constitute a debt owed by the telecommunications retailer
to the City. The charge imposed under Section Four of this Section by the telecommunications
retailer pursuant to this Section shall constitute a debt of the purchaser to the telecommunications
retailer who provides such services until paid and, if unpaid, is recoverable at law in the same
manner as the original charge for such services.
E. If it shall appear that an amount of City telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee has
been paid that was not due under the provisions of this Section, whether as a result of a mistake of
fact or an error of law, then such amount shall be credited against any City telecommunications
infrastructure maintenance fee due, or to become due, under this Section, from the
telecommunications retailer who made the erroneous payment; provided, however, the City may
request, and telecommunications retailer shall provide, written substantiation for such credit.
However, no claim for such credit may be made more than three (3) years after the date of the
erroneous payment unless, (1) the credit is used only to offset a claim of underpayment made by
the City within the applicable statutory period of limitations; and (2) the credit derives from an
overpayment made by the same telecommunications retailer during the applicable statutory period
of limitations.
F. Amounts paid under this Section by telecommunications retailers shall not be included in the tax
base under any of the following acts as described immediately below:
1. "gross charges" for purposes of the Telecommunications Excise Tax Act;
2. "gross receipts" for purposes of the municipal utility tax as prescribed in Section 8-11-2 of
the Illinois Municipal Code;
3. "gross charges" for purposes of the municipal telecommunications tax as prescribed in
Section 8-11-17 of the Illinois Municipal Code;
4. "gross revenue" for purposes of the tax on annual gross revenue of public utilities
prescribed in Section 2-202 of the Public Utilities Act.
TITLE 3 – TRAFFIC AND PARKING
Page 39
G. The City shall have the right, in its discretion, to audit the books and records of all
telecommunications retailers subject to this Section to determine whether the telecommunications
retailer has properly accounted to the City for the City telecommunications infrastructure
maintenance fee. Any underpayment of the amount of the City telecommunications infrastructure
maintenance fee due to the City by the telecommunications retailer shall be paid to the City plus
five percent (5%) of the total amount of the underpayment determined in an audit, plus any costs
incurred by the City in conducting the audit, in an amount not to exceed five percent (5%) of the
total amount of the underpayment determined in an audit. Said sum shall be paid to the City within
twenty-one (21) days after the date of issuance of an invoice for same.
H. The City may promulgate such further or additional regulations concerning the administration and
enforcement of this Section, consistent with its provisions, as may be required from time to time
and shall notify all telecommunications retailers that are registered pursuant to Section Three of
this Section of such regulations.
SECTION 3-10-6 COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER LAWS
Nothing in this Section shall excuse any person or entity from obligations imposed under any law,
including, but not limited to:
A. Generally applicable taxes; and,
B. Standards for construction on, over, under, or within, use of or repair of the public rights-of-way,
including standards relating to free standing towers and other structures upon the public rights-ofway,
as provided; and,
C. Any liability imposed for the failure to comply with such generally applicable taxes or standards
governing construction on, over, under, or within, use of or repair of the public rights-of-way; and,
D. Compliance with any ordinance concerning uses or structures not located on, over, or within the
right-of-way.
SECTION 3-10-7 EXISTING FRANCHISES AND LICENSES
Any franchise, license, or similar agreements between telecommunications retailers and the City entered
into before the effective date of this Ordinance regarding the use of public rights-of-way shall remain valid
according to and for their stated terms except for any fees, charges, or other compensation to the extent
waived.
SECTION 3-10-8 PENALTIES
Any telecommunications provider who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects, or refuses to comply with any
of the provisions of this Section shall be subject to a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00)
for each and every offense.
SECTION 3-10-9 ENFORCEMENT
Nothing in this Section shall be construed as limiting any additional or further remedies that the City may
have for enforcement of this Section.
SECTION 3-10-10 SEVERABILITY
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this Section is for any reason held invalid
or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct,
and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof.
TITLE 3 – TRAFFIC AND PARKING
Page 40
SECTION 3-10-11 CONFLICT
This Ordinance supersedes all ordinances or parts of ordinances adopted prior hereto which are in conflict
herewith, to the extent of such conflict. (Ord. 1998-03)
SECTION 3-10-12 WAIVER AND FEE IMPLEMENTATION
A. The City hereby waives all fees, charges, and other compensation that may accrue, after the
effective date of the waiver, to the City by a telecommunications retailer pursuant to any existing
City franchise, license, or similar agreement with a telecommunications retailer during the time the
City imposes the City telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee. This waiver shall only
be effective during the time the City telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee provided
for in this Section is subject to being lawfully imposed on the telecommunications retailer and
collected by the telecommunications retailer from the customer.
B. The City Clerk shall send a notice of the waiver by certified mail/return receipt requested to each
telecommunications retailer with whom the City has a franchise.
C. The City telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee provided for in this Section shall
become effective and imposed on the first day of the month not less than ninety (90) days after the
City provides written notice by certified mail to each telecommunications retailer with whom the
City has an existing franchise, license, or similar agreement that the City waives all compensation
under such existing franchise, license, or similar agreement during such time as the City
telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee is subject to being lawfully imposed and
collected by the retailer and remitted to the City. The City telecommunications infrastructure
maintenance fee shall apply to gross charges billed on or after the effective date as established in
the preceding sentence.
(Ord. 1998-03)
TITLE 4 – SAFETY
TITLE 4: SAFETY
CHAPTER 1 - GARBAGE, WEEDS AND DEBRIS
CHAPTER 2- INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLES
CHAPTER 3 - UNSAFE, DANGEROUS AND ABANDONED BUILDINGS
CHAPTER 4 - ANIMALS - REGULATION OF DOGS, CATS, AND OTHER ANIMALS
CHAPTER 5 - SWIMMING POOLS- RULES AND REGULATION
CHAPTER 6 - NUISANCE NOISES
CHAPTER 7 - FIREWORKS
CHAPTER 8 - TREES
CHAPTER 9 - CURFEW
CHAPTER 10 - OPEN BURNING POLICY
CHAPTER 11 - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE & OCCUPANCY CODE
CHAPTER 12 - DISCHARGE OF WEAPONS
CHAPTER 13 - CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES
CHAPTER 14 - VACANT AND FORECLOSED PROPERTY REGISTRATION
TITLE 4 – SAFETY
Page 1
TITLE 4 SAFETY
CHAPTER 1 GARBAGE, WEEDS AND DEBRIS
4-1-1 Disposition of Garbage
4-1-2 Definitions
4-1-3 Garbage and Debris as Nuisance
4-1-4 Regulation of Garbage and Debris Generally
4-1-5 Regulation of Containers for Garbage and Debris
4-1-6 Declaration of Weeds as a Nuisance
4-1-7 Regulation of Vegetation
4-1-8 Enforcement
4-1-9 Determination of Violation
4-1-10 Notice of Violation
4-1-11 Removal of Violation
4-1-12 Penalty for Violation
SECTION 4-1-1 EXCLUSIVE METHOD FOR THE DISPOSITION OF GARBAGE, REFUSE, AND
ASHES TO BE ALLOWED WITHIN THE CITY OF WEST PEORIA
The City of West Peoria hereby provides that the exclusive method for the disposition of garbage, refuse,
and ashes to be allowed within the City of West Peoria shall be through the services of Waste Management
of Illinois, Inc. The terms and conditions of such exclusive method for the disposition of garbage, refuse
and ashes shall be as stated in the contract for the collection, transportation and disposal of residential waste
by and between the City of West Peoria and Waste Management of Illinois, Inc., a copy of said contract
being on file at the West Peoria City Hall. (Ord. 2002-15)
SECTION 4-1-2 DEFINITIONS
The following phrases, terms, and words shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this Section, except
where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Approved Container: shall mean as follows:
A. For Household Waste:
1. Bundle: An accumulation of securely tied (if appropriate) Household Waste not exceeding
four (4) feet in length nor fifty (50) pounds in weight.
2. Can: A durable and reusable metal or plastic container, commonly referred to as a “garbage
can”, that has a capacity of not less than four (4) gallons, not more than thirty-two (32)
gallons and a weight of not more than fifty (50) pounds and that is animal proof, watertight,
and equipped with handles so that it may be lifted by one (1) person and a tight-fitting
cover or lid.
3. Dumpster: a metal container, commonly referred to as a “dumpster”, that has a volume of
one (1) cubic yard or more and that is animal proof, watertight, equipped with an attached
and tight-fitting cover or lid, designed for handling by mechanical means, and compatible
with the equipment of the Contractor engaged by the City to provide Residential Waste
collection, transportation, and disposal services.
4. Toter: A wheeled cart, commonly referred to as a “toter”, that has a capacity of ninety-six
(96) gallons or sixty-four (64) gallons and that is animal proof, watertight, equipped with
an attached and tight fitting cover or lid, and compatible with the equipment of the
TITLE 4 – SAFETY
Page 2
Contractor engaged by the City to provide Residential Waste collection, transportation, and
disposal services. (Ord. 2012-21)
B. For Landscape Waste:
1. A two (2) ply, fifty (50) pound wet strength, self-opening, flat-bottom, compostable paper
bag for the collection of Landscape Waste with a capacity of not more than thirty-two (32)
gallons.
2. A bundle not exceeding four (4) feet in length nor fifty (50) pounds in weight of limbs,
branches, and/or brush not exceeding six (6) inches in diameter securely tied using
biodegradable cord, rope, string, or twine;
C. For Recyclable Waste:
1. An approved, durable, reusable, hard-walled plastic bin or container with a capacity of not
more than eighteen (18) gallons designed and intended solely for the containment of
Recyclable Waste.
2. A bundle not exceeding four (4) feet in length nor fifty (50) pounds in weight of broken
down-corrugated cardboard securely tied using biodegradable cord, rope, string, or twine.
(Ord. 1996-14)
Ashes: shall mean the residue from fires used for cooking and for heating buildings.
Bulky Waste: shall mean any item otherwise defined as Household Waste but whose weight is greater than
fifty (50) pounds or whose shape and/or size is such that it cannot be readily lifted by one (1) adult.
Dwelling Unit: shall mean a living space designed and intended to accommodate a single family.
Garbage and debris: shall mean the following:
A. Wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food; wastes from
the handling, storage and sale of produce.
B. Ashes, Litter, Refuse, or Residential Waste, as defined herein.
C. Dirt, animal feces or any other offensive or nauseous substance, discarded newspaper, paper
products, food, wood, discarded items, any motor vehicle parts, and any type of debris or refuse,
unless necessary for the operation of a business enterprise lawfully conducted.
D. Garbage and debris shall not include wood, which is appropriately stacked and stored for use as
fuel.
Household Construction and Demolition Waste: shall mean waste materials resulting from the
construction, exterior and interior rehabilitation, remodeling, and repair; and, demolition of Dwelling Units.
Household Waste: shall mean any and all accumulations of waste material resulting from the operation of
a Dwelling Unit.
Landscape Waste: (also known as “Yard Waste”) shall mean all accumulations of grass or shrubbery
cuttings, leaves, tree limbs, and other materials accumulated as the result of the care of lawns, shrubbery,
vines, and trees, but shall not include sod.
Litter: shall mean any discarded, used, or unconsumed substance or waste. “Litter” may include, but is
not limited to any garbage, trash, refuse, debris, rubbish, grass clippings or other lawn or garden waste,
newspaper, magazines, glass, metal, plastic or paper containers or other packaging construction material,
abandoned vehicle (as defined in Section 4-100 of the Illinois Vehicle Code), motor vehicle parts, furniture,
oil, carcass of a dead animal, nauseous or offensive matter of any kind, any object likely to injure any person
or create a traffic hazard, potentially infectious medical waste as defined in Section 3.84 of the
Environmental Protection Act, or anything else of an unsightly or unsanitary nature, which has been
discarded, abandoned, or otherwise disposed of improperly.
TITLE 4 – SAFETY
Page 3
Person: shall mean the owner, lessee, or occupant of any premises, including any association, company,
co-partnership, corporation, estate, firm, individual, joint stock company, organization, partnership, trust,
or any other legal entity, or their legal representative, agent, or assigns.
Premises: shall mean any real property owned, leased, or occupied by any person, including any applicable
yard or common area.
Properly contained: shall mean contained in Approved Container.
Property owner: shall mean any person, including any association, company, co-partnership, corporation,
estate, firm, individual, joint stock company, organization, partnership, trust, or any other legal entity, who
alone, jointly, or severally with others has a legal or equitable interest in a property, except those with
merely a leasehold interest.
Public place or Public way: shall mean any and all alleys, boulevards, public buildings, public grounds,
sidewalks, and streets.
Public right-of-way: shall mean any and all public property dedicated for a public purpose, such as
vehicular traffic.
Recyclable Waste: shall mean the following:
A. Corrugated cardboard
B. Clear and colored glass bottles/containers.
C. Aluminum, bi-metal, steel, and tin cans.
D. Newspapers.
E. All high-density polyethylene (H.D.P.E.), low-density polyethylene (L.D.P.E.), and polyethylene
terephthalate (P.E.T.) plastics.
F. Any other items that the City and the Contractor engaged by the City to provide Residential Waste
collection, transportation, and disposal services may agree to recycle in the future.
Refuse: shall mean combustible trash, including, but not limited to, paper, cartons, boxes, barrels, wood,
excelsior, tree branches, yard trimmings, wood furniture, bedding; noncombustible trash, including, but not
limited to, metals, tin cans, metal furniture, dirt, small quantities of rock and pieces of concrete, glass,
crockery, other mineral waste; street rubbish, including, but not limited to, street sweepings, dirt, leaves,
catch-basin dirt, contents of litter receptacles, but refuse does not mean earth and wastes from building
operations, nor shall it include solid wastes resulting from industrial processes and manufacturing
operations such as food processing wastes, boiler-house cinders, lumber, scraps and shavings.
Residential Unit: shall mean a residential building with four (4) or fewer Dwelling Units.
Residential Waste: shall mean Bulky Waste, Household Construction and Demolition Waste, Household
Waste, Landscape Waste, Recyclable Waste, and White Goods, however, to the extent State law does not
require the aforesaid requisite exclusive method for any of these categories, the exclusive method shall be
optional.
Tenant: shall mean a person with a leasehold interest in a Dwelling Unit or a Residential Unit.
Vegetation: shall mean any plant life.
Weeds: shall mean all noxious vegetation and all grasses, annual plants, and other vegetation which exceed
a height or length of (9) inches; provided, however, this term shall not include bushes, cultivated flowers,
cultivated gardens, ornamental plants, shrubs, trees, or vegetables. (Ord. 2005-06)
TITLE 4 – SAFETY
Page 4
White Goods: shall mean white goods as defined in the Illinois Environmental Protection Act, 415 ILCS
5/1 et seq; as amended, or in rules promulgated thereunder. (Ord. 1996-14)
SECTION 4-1-3 DECLARATION OF GARBAGE AND DEBRIS AS NUISANCE
A. All Garbage and Debris accumulated, buried, deposited, dumped, placed, stored, swept, or thrown
in any structure or upon any private or public real property, improved or vacant, or upon any public
place, public right-of-way, except as provided herein, is hereby declared to constitute a public
nuisance.
B. All Garbage and Debris, not including Landscape Waste, burned in any structure or upon any
private or public real property, improved or vacant, or upon any public place, public right-of-way,
or public way, except as provided herein, is hereby declared to constitute a public nuisance.
(Ord. 1996-14)
SECTION 4-1-4 REGULATION OF GARBAGE, WEEDS AND DEBRIS GENERALLY
A. No person shall cause or permit the accumulation, burying, depositing, dumping, placement,
storage, or throwing of any Garbage and Debris in any structure or upon any private or public real
property, improved or vacant, or upon any public place, public right-of-way, or public way within
the City, except as otherwise permitted by this Title.
B. No person shall cause or permit the burning of any Garbage or Debris, not including Landscape
waste, in any structure or upon any private or public real property; improved or vacant, or upon any
public place, public right-of-way, or public way within the City.
C. Every property owner shall have the Household Waste removed from their premises by the
Contractor engaged by the City to provide Residential Waste collection, transportation, and
disposal services at least once weekly
D. Every person shall keep their premises and the sidewalk and any public right-of-way bordering
their premises free and clean from Garbage and Debris at all times.
E. No person, except the Contractor engaged by the City to provide Residential Waste collection,
transportation, and disposal services, shall remove any Recyclable Waste placed for collection upon
any private or public real property or upon any public place, public right-of-way, or public way.
(Ord. 1996-14)
SECTION 4-1-5 REGULATION OF CONTAINERS FOR GARBAGE, WEEDS AND DEBRIS
A. Every person shall cause all Household Waste, Landscape Waste, and Recyclable Waste
accumulated and produced in or on the premises to be placed in an Approved Container as soon as
practicable after such Household Waste, Landscape Waste, or Recyclable Waste is produced.
B. Every person shall ensure that their Approved Containers are tightly sealed at all times, except
when adding to or emptying the contents therein and during the period of time containers are
allowed to be placed out for pickup, so that no Garbage and Debris protrudes from any container
at any time and that their containers are maintained in good order and repair at all times.
C. Every property owner shall provide Approved Containers of a sufficient number and capacity to
accommodate and contain all Garbage and Debris accumulated and produced in or on the premises.
D. All Approved Containers shall be stored in a garage or other suitable structure or alongside such
structure, provided that the containers are placed inside the boundaries of the property at all times,
except as otherwise provided herein, and so as not to cause a nuisance to adjacent residents.
TITLE 4 – SAFETY
Page 5
E. Every person subscribing to any curbside collection service shall be responsible for placing
Approved Containers for Garbage and Debris for collection, Approved Containers for Garbage and
Debris shall not be placed in the public right-of-way prior to 6:00 PM of the day before the
scheduled pickup day and shall be removed from the public right-of-way prior to 10:00 PM of the
scheduled pickup day. (Ord. 1996-14, 2012-21)
SECTION 4-1-6 DECLARATION OF WEEDS AS A NUISANCE
All weeds and grass in excess of nine (9) inches in height are hereby declared to constitute a public
nuisance. (Ord. 1996-14,2005-06)
SECTION 4-1-7 REGULATION OF VEGETATION
A. No person shall cause or permit weeds to grow or remain upon their premises, including all
parkways, sidewalks, and waterways found thereon. When a parcel or public right-of-way, because
of dangerously steep gradient or for other similar reasons, has growth in a natural state and has not
been previously graded, improved, or otherwise maintained, enforcement of the height requirement
shall be waived, unless noxious growths which adversely affect health or obstruction to traffic
safety are present.
B. No person shall cause or permit the encroachment of vegetation to encumber any public place,
public right-of-way, or public way. (Ord. 1996-14)
SECTION 4-1-8 ENFORCEMENT
It shall be the duty of the Code Enforcement Officer to enforce the provisions of this Title. (Ord. 1996-14)
SECTION 4-1-9 DETERMINATION OF VIOLATION
The Code Enforcement Officer, the Mayor, or the City Council by a majority vote of the members present
are hereby authorized to make a determination of whether or not a violation of this Title exists. (Ord. 1996-14)
SECTION 4-1-10 NOTICE OF VIOLATION
When it has been determined that a violation of this Title exists, the Code Enforcement Officer or the City
Attorney shall send written notice by certified mail with a return receipt requested commanding compliance
within five (5) days from the date of the mailing of the notice of violation to the property owner and any
tenant, if applicable, found to be in violation of this Title. (Ord. 1996-14)
SECTION 4-1-11 REMOVAL OF VIOLATION
After five (5) days from the date of the mailing of the notice of violation, if the property owner(s) refuse(s)
or neglect(s) to comply with the provisions of this Title, the City may provide for the removal of garbage
and debris or the cutting of the weeds and collect from the owner(s) the reasonable cost thereof, including
attorneys’ fees and court costs. The cost is a lien upon the real estate affected superior to all subsequent
liens and encumbrances, except tax liens. The City shall have the right to file a notice of lien in the County
Recorder's Office and place a lien on the property involved for all costs and expenses incurred, including
attorney's fees and court costs. After the cutting of said Weeds, but before the filing of the Notice of Lien,
the Code Enforcement Officer or the City Attorney shall send a Notice by Certified Mail to the person who
was sent the tax bill for the general taxes on the property for the last preceding tax year describing state law
on the subject and this Title in identifying the property by common description and the location of the
weeds to be cut. (Ord. 1996-14, 2013-08)
TITLE 4 – SAFETY
Page 6
SECTION 4-1-12 PENALTY FOR VIOLATION
A. Every person convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this Title shall be punished by a
fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each
offense, plus attorneys’ fees and court costs. Each day such a violation is committed or permitted
to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder.
B. Every person convicted of three (3) or more violations of any of the provisions of this Title within
a twelve (12) month period of time shall be punishable by a fine of not less than two hundred fifty
dollars ($250.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), plus attorneys’ fees and courts
costs. (Ord. 1996-14)
TITLE 4 – SAFETY
Page 7
TITLE 4 SAFETY
CHAPTER 2 INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLES
4-2-1 Definitions
4-2-2 Declaration of Nuisance
4-2-3 Abandonment of Vehicles
4-2-4 Inoperable Motor Vehicles
4-2-5 Removal of Inoperable Motor Vehicles
4-2-6 Impounding
4-2-7 Penalties for Violations and Towing
SECTION 4-2-1 DEFINITIONS
Person: shall mean any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, or organization of
any kind.
Vehicle: shall mean a machine propelled by power designed to travel along the ground by use of wheels,
treads, runners, or slides, and transport persons or property or pull machinery and shall include, without
limitation, automobile, truck, trailer, motorcycle, tractor, buggy, and wagon.
Street or highway: shall mean the entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly
maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel.
Property: shall mean any real property within the Village which is not a street or highway.
Inoperable motor vehicle: shall mean any motor vehicle from which, for a period of at least seven (7)
days, any part including but not limited to the engine wheels, or frame have been removed, altered,
damaged, or otherwise so treated that the vehicle is incapable of being driven under its own motor power.
It shall also include any vehicle that is unlicensed or has been under repair for a period of seven (7) days.
Inoperable motor vehicle: shall not include a motor vehicle which has been rendered temporarily
incapable of being driven under its own power in order to perform ordinary service or repair operations nor
to any motor vehicles that are kept within a building when not in use, to historic vehicles over twenty-five
(25) years age, which are licensed pursuant to Section 3-804 of the Illinois Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/3-
804).
Abandoned Vehicle: shall mean any vehicle which is left at any place for such time and under such
circumstances as to cause such vehicle reasonably to appear to have been abandoned.
SECTION 4-2-2 DECLARATION OF NUISANCE
It is hereby declared a menace to the public safety and welfare and a public nuisance for any person to
cause, permit, or allow to remain in the open in view of the general public or on any City street or any
publicly or privately-owned premises or land any abandoned vehicle or any inoperable motor vehicle.
SECTION 4-2-3 ABANDONMENT OF VEHICLES
It shall be unlawful for any person to leave an abandoned vehicle anywhere within the City for such time
and under such circumstances as to cause such vehicle reasonably to appear to have been abandoned.
TITLE 4 – SAFETY
Page 8
SECTION 4-2-4 INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLES
It shall be unlawful for any person to permit or allow any damaged or inoperable motor vehicle to be stored
or parked in the open and in the view of the general public upon the owner’s property within the City. It
shall also be unlawful for any owner of any damaged or inoperable motor vehicle to permit or allow said
motor vehicle to be stored or parked in the open anywhere within the City, including all streets, highways
and other public ways.
SECTION 4-2-5 REMOVAL OF INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLES
All persons found to be in violation of this Section are required to dispose of any abandoned or inoperable
motor vehicles under their control or on their property within seven (7) days upon written notice received
from the City Council commanding such disposition of said vehicles.
SECTION 4-2-6 IMPOUNDING
The corporate authorities are hereby authorized to remove or have removed any vehicle left at any place
within the City which reasonably appears to be in violation of this Section or which reasonably appears to
be lost, stolen or unclaimed, or which is an inoperable motor vehicle as defined herein. Such vehicle shall
be impounded until lawfully claimed or disposed of in accordance with applicable law. Such vehicles shall
be impounded as follows: Inoperable motor vehicles may be removed by a towing service authorized by
the City Council seven (7) days after issuance of municipal notice to the owner of the vehicle and the owner
of the property. If the owner of the vehicle cannot be determined, notice shall be given in the form of a
sticker placed on the vehicle. The notice provided for shall include the right to a hearing and shall be
substantially as follows:
Notice of Inoperable Motor Vehicle
Description of vehicle
Location of vehicle
You are hereby notified that the City of West Peoria has determined that the above-described motor vehicle
is an inoperable vehicle in violation of Section ____________. You have seven (7) days from the date of
this Notice to remove the vehicle or it shall be subject to towing. You may also be subject to a fine.
If you so desire, you are entitled to a hearing on this matter before the West Peoria City Council. Your
written request for a hearing must be delivered to the City Clerk prior to seven (7) days from the date of
this Notice.
By Order of the Mayor of the City of West Peoria
SECTION 4-2-7 PENALTIES FOR VIOLATIONS AND TOWING
A. Every person violating any of the provisions of this Section shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined in an amount not less than Fifty Dollars
($50.00) and not more than Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00), plus attorneys’ fees and Court costs
and also towing and storage fees. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue
shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder.
B. Abandoned vehicles may be removed by a towing service authorized by the City Council as
follows:
TITLE 4 – SAFETY
Page 9
1. When an abandoned vehicle may be removed by a towing service authorized by the City
Council as follows:
2. An abandoned vehicle on private property may be removed after seven (7) days' notice as
provided above in Section 6 or, if a hearing is requested, seven (7) days after the hearing if
the City Council determines the vehicle is abandoned or inoperable. (Ord. 1994-03)
TITLE 4 – SAFETY
Page 10
TITLE 4 SAFETY
CHAPTER 3 UNSAFE, DANGEROUS AND ABANDONED BUILDINGS
4-3-1 Dangerous Buildings Generally
4-3-2 Definition of Unsafe, Dangerous, or Abandoned Buildings
4-3-3 Enforcements Powers
4-3-4 Notice of Unsafe Condition of Buildings
4-3-5 Lis Pendens
4-3-6 Placarding of Building or Structure
4-3-7 Demolition Lien; Personal Judgment
4-3-8 Nuisance Structures
4-3-9 Sanitation
4-3-10 Maintenance
4-3-11 Basic Equipment and Facilities
SECTION 4-3-1 DANGEROUS BUILDINGS GENERALLY
It shall be unlawful for an owner or agent thereof to keep or maintain any building or structure or part
thereof in any unsafe, abandoned, or dangerous condition. The word “building” as used in this article, shall
describe any walled or roofed structure including mobile homes, commercial establishments, dwellings,
and any accessory structures. (Ord. 1994-13)
SECTION 4-3-2 DEFINITIONS OF UNSAFE, DANGEROUS, OR ABANDONED BUILDINGS
For the purpose of this article, any building or structure which has any of the following defects or is in any
of the conditions hereinafter described shall be deemed a “dangerous building” and any conditions
hereinafter described shall be deemed unsafe:
A. Whenever any door, aisle, passageway, stairway, or other means of exit is not of sufficient width
or size or is not so arranged as to provide safe and adequate means of exit in case of fire or panic
for all persons housed or assembled therein who would be required to or might use such door, aisle,
passageway, stairway or other means of exit.
B. Whenever any portion thereof has been damaged by wind, flood, fire, or by any other cause in such
a manner that the structural strength or stability thereof is appreciably less than it was before the
catastrophe and is less than the minimum requirements of this article.
C. Whenever any portion or member or appurtenance thereof is likely to fail or to become detached
or dislodged or to collapse and thereby injure persons or damage property.
D. Whenever any portion thereof settled to such an extent that walls or other structural portions have
materially less resistance to winds that is required in the case of new construction.
E. Whenever any building or structure or any part thereof, because of dilapidation, deterioration,
decay, faulty construction, or because of the removal or movement of some portion of the ground
necessary for the purpose of supporting such building or portion thereof, or for other reason, is
likely to partially or completely collapse; or some portion of the foundation or underpinning is
likely to fall or give away.
F. Whenever, for any reason whatsoever, the building or structure or any portion thereof is manifestly
unsafe for the purpose for which it is used.
TITLE 4 – SAFETY
Page 11
G. Whenever the building or structure has been so damaged by fire, wind or flood, or has become so
dilapidated or deteriorated as to become an attractive nuisance to children who might play in or
about the building structure to their danger.
H. Whenever the building or structure has been so damaged by fire, wind or flood, or has become so
dilapidated or deteriorated as to afford a harbor for trespassers, or as to enable persons to resort
thereto for the purpose of committing a nuisance or unlawful acts.
I. Whenever a building or structure used or intended to be used for dwelling purposes because of
dilapidation, decay, damage, or faulty construction or arrangement is unsanitary or unfit for human
habitation and is likely to work injury to the health, safety, or general welfare of those living within.
J. Whenever a building or structure is infested with rodents, insects, pests, or other vermin; or is likely
to cause sickness or disease when so determined by the health inspector of the Peoria County Health
Department.
K. Whenever any building shall become vacant, dilapidated, or open at door or window, leaving the
interior of the building exposed to the elements or accessible to entrance by trespassers.
L. Whenever any unoccupied building or structure is deemed a nuisance and the structure or building
has been secured by the owner or his agents by covering up the windows and exits with lumber or
materials other than glazing materials for a period of thirty (30) days or more, thereby causing a
blighting influence on a neighborhood. (Ord. 1994-13)
SECTION 4-3-3 ENFORCEMENT POWERS
A. The Corporate Authorities shall have full power to pass any question arising under the provisions
of this Article, subject to the conditions, modifications, and limitations contained in this chapter.
B. The Corporate Authorities are hereby authorized to demolish or repair or cause the demolition or
repair of dangerous buildings or uncompleted buildings or abandoned buildings within the
territorial limits of the City.
C. The Corporate Authorities are further authorized, when removing or causing the demolition of a
dangerous building, uncompleted building or abandoned building from a lot, to remove all private
sidewalks, fences, concrete foundations and driveways located on the lot with such building.
(Ord. 1994-13)
SECTION 4-3-4 NOTICE OF UNSAFE CONDITION OF BUILDINGS; MEANS OF SERVICE
A. When a building or structure within the City is found to be a “dangerous building” or contains an
unsafe condition, the Corporate Authorities shall issue and mail a notice thereof upon all owners
of record or persons having an interest therein as shown by documents recorded in the office of the
County Recorder of Deeds and upon the persons in apparent possession of the premises.
B. The notice shall briefly and concisely specify the conditions and factors of the building or structure
which render it dangerous and unsafe. The notice shall further specify that the owners make the
building safe (by complete elimination of any unsafe conditions) or commence demolition at
owner’s costs within fifteen (15) days of such notice. The notice shall further specify that:
1. Repairs or demolition shall commence no later than fifteen (15) days of such notice, and
2. A date for completion of demolition or repairs.
The date for completion shall be reasonably set in light of the nature of the building, weather
conditions, and other related factors. The fifteen (15) day time period shall commence upon receipt
of the notice.
TITLE 4 – SAFETY
Page 12
C. The notice authorized by this section shall be served by either personal service or by certified mail
with return receipt.
D. When, upon diligent search, the identity or whereabouts of the owner or owners of any such
building, including the lien-holders of record is not ascertainable, notice mailed to the person or
persons in whose name such real estate was last assessed for general real estate taxes is sufficient
notice under this section.
E. In the event the owner fails to comply with any time period set forth in the notice, the City Attorney
is authorized to commence a civil action in the Circuit Court of the County seeking a court order
authorizing demolition or repair of the building or structure subject to the notice provided by this
section and to create the lien described in Section 6. It shall not be a defense to this cause of action
that the building is boarded up or otherwise enclosed. It further shall not be a defense that the
building is put in a safe condition during the pendency of the civil action. (Ord. 1994-13)
SECTION 4-3-5 LIS PENDENS
Upon the commencement of the civil action set forth in Section 3, a lis pendens designating the property
upon which the subject building is located shall be filed with the Recorder of Deeds. Failure to file or the
improper filing of the lis pendens does not, however, effect the civil action for demolition. Any person
obtaining or recording in such office an interest in the property after such filing may become party to the
civil action only if he intervenes by order of the Court. (Ord. 1994-13)
SECTION 4-3-6 PLACARDING OF BUILDING OR STRUCTURE
A. Whenever any dwelling or building has been designated a dangerous building or contains unsafe
conditions, the Corporate Authorities shall placard the building indicating that the condition is
dangerous and unsafe. It shall be unlawful for any person to rent, to cause to rent, to occupy or
allow another to occupy any premises, knowing that such premises has been designated a dangerous
building.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, cause to remove or cover up in any way any placard
designating a building or structure a “dangerous building.” A violation of this section shall be
punishable by a fine not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and not more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00).
(Ord. 1994-13)
SECTION 4-3-7 DEMOLITION LIEN; PERSONAL JUDGMENT
A. The cost of demolition or repair incurred by the City, including court costs, attorney’s fees, and
other costs related to the enforcement of this article is recoverable from the owner or owners of the
real estate and is a lien thereon, which lien shall be superior to all prior existing liens and
encumbrances, except taxes; provided, however, that within sixty (60) days after completion of
the demolition or repair, the City Attorney shall file a notice of lien for the cost and expense
incurred by the City, in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of the County. Upon payment of such
cost of demolition by the owner or any person who has an interest in the property, the lien shall be
released by the City Attorney. The City shall have the right, but not the duty, to waive such lien
where the cost of demolition is an extreme financial hardship to the owner and where demolition
is agreed to by the owner.
B. The lien may be enforced by proceedings to foreclose as in case of mortgages or mechanics liens.
Suit to foreclose this lien shall be commenced by the corporation counsel within three (3) years
after the date of filing of Notice of Lien.
TITLE 4 – SAFETY
Page 13
C. If payment of the City’s cost of demolition is not paid to the City within fifteen (15) days of the
filing of the Notice of Lien, the City Attorney may commence proceedings in the Circuit Court
seeking a personal judgment from the owner of the subject property at the time the complaint for
demolition was filed with the Circuit Clerk in the amount of such costs. The action authorized by
this subsection shall be in addition to, and without waiver of, any other remedies.
(Ord. 1994-13)
SECTION 4-3-8 NUISANCE STRUCTURES
A. Any unsafe, dilapidated, or abandoned building, house, barn, or other structure situated within the
limits of the City is, and the same is hereby declared to be, a nuisance.
B. The penalty for maintaining a nuisance shall be a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00)
for each offense, and each and every day that such nuisance remains unabated shall constitute a
new and separate offense.
(Ord. 1994-13)
SECTION 4-3-9 SANITATION
No dwelling or dwelling unit not in compliance with any subsection of this Section will be considered safe
and may be construed, ipso facto, to be unsafe and/or dangerous to human habitation
A. No owner or other person shall occupy or let to another person any dwelling unit unless it and the
premises are clean, sanitary, fit for human occupancy, and comply with all applicable legal
requirements of the state, county, and this Title.
B. Every owner of a dwelling unit containing two (2) or more dwelling units shall maintain in a clean
and sanitary condition the shared or public areas of the dwelling and premises thereof.
C. Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall maintain in a clean and sanitary condition that
part or those parts of the dwelling, dwelling unit and premises thereof that he occupies and controls.
D. Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall store and dispose of all his rubbish, garbage,
and any other organic waste in a clean, sanitary, and safe manner consistent with City Title 96-14
and subsequent additions and amendments to same.
E. Every owner and occupant, with equal liability, of a dwelling shall provide facilities appropriate
for the implementation of item 10-A-4.
F. Every occupant of a single dwelling or the occupant of a dwelling unit shall be responsible for
extermination of rats and/or insects infesting said unit and premises. The owner of a multi-dwelling
unit shall be responsible for such in common and public areas of a multiple unit dwelling and, if
multiple units are infested simultaneously, all units infested. No occupant or owner of any dwelling
unit shall store, place, or allow to accumulate any materials that may serve as food for rats in a site
accessible to rats.
G. No owner or occupant of a dwelling unit shall accumulate, or allow to accumulate rubbish, boxes,
lumber, scrap metal, or any other materials in such a manner that may provide a rat harborage in or
about any dwelling unit. Stored materials, including firewood, shall be stacked neatly in piles
elevated at least eighteen (18) inches above the ground or floor.
(Ord. 2000-05)
SECTION 4-3-10 MAINTENANCE
A. The owner of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall be responsible for providing and hanging all screens
and double or storm doors and windows whenever the same are required under the provisions of
TITLE 4 – SAFETY
Page 14
this Title. The maintenance of such shall become the responsibility of the occupant unless agreed
to in writing by the owner and occupant.
B. At all times when the temperature outside of the building has dropped to sixty-five (65) degrees
Fahrenheit, and at all times when below such temperature, in every dwelling unit and/or rooming
unit when the control of the supplied heat is the responsibility of a person other than the occupant,
a temperature of at least sixty-eight (68) degrees Fahrenheit shall be maintained in all habitable
rooms, bathrooms, and water closet compartments at a distance of eighteen (18) inches above the
floor level, and in all other areas a temperature of at least sixty (60) degrees.
C. No owner, operator, or occupant shall cause any service, facility, equipment, or utility which is
required under this Title to be removed or shut off from or discontinued for any occupied dwelling
or dwelling unit let or occupied by him; except for such temporary interruptions as may be
necessary while actual repairs or alterations are in process, or during temporary emergencies when
discontinuance of service is approved by the appropriate authority.
(Ord. 2000-05)
D. Every owner of a dwelling unit containing two (2) or more dwelling units shall maintain in a clean
and sanitary condition the shared or public areas of the dwelling and premises thereof.
SECTION 4-3-11 BASIC EQUIPMENT AND FACILITIES
A. In order to be considered safe and habitable, a dwelling or dwelling unit shall have working
facilities for cooking, including at least a stove, storage areas appropriate for foodstuffs, a
refrigerator and a kitchen sink; bathing, including at least a working flush water closet, a bathroom
sink, and a bathtub or shower; dual means of egress with a minimum headroom of at least six (6)
feet and six (6) inches leading to safe and open space at ground level; handrails on all stairways of
more than five (5) steps or rising over three (3) feet; working locks on all outside doors at least one
(1) of which shall not pass through any other dwelling unit; and a safe place appropriate for storing
medicinal drugs and household poisons. All these shall be provided by the owner and maintained
in working order by the occupant unless there is a written agreement between owner and occupant
stating otherwise.
(Ord. 2000-05)
TITLE 4 – SAFETY
Page 15
TITLE 4 SAFETY
CHAPTER 4 ANIMALS-REGULATION OF DOGS, CATS, AND OTHER
ANIMALS
4-4-1 Definitions
4-4-2 Prohibition of animals running at large
4-4-3 Prohibition of keeping wild animals
4-4-4 Prohibition of farm animals
4-4-5 Rabbit restrictions
4-4-6 Humane care of animals
4-4-7 Prohibition of abandonment
4-4-8 Prohibition of acts of cruelty to animals
4-4-9 Impoundment of victimized animals
4-4-10 Diseased and injured animals
4-4-11 Dead animals prohibited
4-4-12 Required reporting of animal bites
4-4-13 Disposal of wild animals which have bitten persons
4-4-14 Harboring stray animal restrictions
4-4-15 Liberation of owned animals prohibited
4-4-16 Liberation of impounded or captured animals prohibited
4-4-17 Interference with personnel
4-4-18 Trapping prohibited
4-4-19 Provoking animals prohibited
4-4-20 Removal of waste
4-4-21 Animal considered a nuisance
4-4-22 Dangerous animals
4-4-23 Impoundment of animals running at large
4-4-24 Penalties
4-4-25 Liability of animal owners
4-4-26 Keeping certain animals in dwelling units prohibited
4-4-27 Inoculation required
4-4-28 Registration required
4-4-29 Collar required
4-4-30 Attachment of registration tags
4-4-31 Removal of collar or tags restricted
4-4-32 Disposition of dog or cat suspected of having rabies
4-4-33 Confinement of female dog or cat in heat
4-4-34 Duties of driver of motor vehicle striking animal
4-4-35 Multiple-pet license
4-4-36 Multiple-pet owner licensee requirements
4-4-37 Revocation of multiple-pet license
4-4-38 Impoundment of multiple pets
4-4-39 Beekeeping
SECTION 4-4-1 DEFINITIONS
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this Title, shall have the meanings ascribed to them
in this Section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
TITLE 4 – SAFETY
Page 16
Animal: shall mean every nonhuman species of animal, both domestic and wild.
At large: shall mean any animal when it is off the premises of its owner’s real property and not restrained
by a competent person.
Cat: shall mean all domestic members of the feline family Felis Catus.
City: shall mean the City of West Peoria, Illinois.
Competent person: shall mean a person eleven (11) years of age or older capable of physically controlling
the animal in question and to whose command the animal is obedient.
Confine: shall mean the physical restraint of an animal by a fence, structure, chain, rope, or other means
of a sufficient strength or construction to restrain the animal in question.
County: shall mean the County of Peoria, Illinois.
Dog: shall mean all domestic members of the canine family Canis Familiaris.
Domestic animal: shall mean the following:
A. Dogs (not including hybrids of dogs).
B. Cats (not including hybrids of cats).
C. Domestic rodents (guinea pigs, hamsters, white rats, white mice, and gerbils).
D. Farm animals (any member of the swine family (with the exception of pot-bellied pigs), ovine,
caprine, bovine, or equine families, poultry, or rabbit.
E. Non-life-threatening, nonpoisonous reptiles or amphibians.
F. Nonpoisonous, non-life-threatening fish.
G. All birds, except those protected as wild birds by State or Federal Statutes.
Dwelling unit: shall mean a single unit providing complete, independent living facilities for one (1) or
more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation.
Exotic animal: shall mean any nondomestic animal not native to the State.
Multiple-pet owner: shall mean any person who harbors more than four (4) dogs or cats, or any
combination thereof, over four (4) months of age in a dwelling unit.
Owner: shall mean any person seventeen (17) years of age or older, or parent or guardian of any person
under the age of seventeen (17) years, or parent or guardian of an incapacitated person having a right of
property in an animal, or who acts as custodian, cares for, keeps, feeds, or knowingly permits an animal to
remain on or about any premises occupied by such person, or a person who registers an inoculation
certificate for an animal with the County.
Poultry: shall mean domesticated birds raised for show, eggs, or meat.
Restraint: shall mean any animal that is not found on the property of its owner when it is:
A. Controlled by a line or leash not more than six (6) feet in length when such line or leash is held by
a competent person.
B. Controlled by a leash of fifty (50) feet or less during a training session conducted by a competent
person.
C. Confined within a motor vehicle.
D. Confined in a cage or other animal carrier.
TITLE 4 – SAFETY
Page 17
Secure enclosure: shall mean a structure of sufficient height and construction that does not allow contact
between the animal confined and other animals or persons.
State: shall mean the State of Illinois.
Wild animal: shall mean any living member of the animal kingdom (including exotic animals) other than
a domestic animal.
(Ord. 1998-15)
SECTION 4-4-2 ANIMALS RUNNING AT LARGE PROHIBITED
The owner of any animal shall keep such animal confined or under restraint at all times when it is off the
premises of the owner’s real property and shall not permit such animal to be at large. Dogs trained for law
enforcement under the control of a peace officer in the performance of duty shall not be required to be
confined or under restraint.
(Ord. 1998-15)
SECTION 4-4-3 KEEPING WILD ANIMALS PROHIBITED
No person shall keep, harbor, possess, act as custodian, or have a right of property in a wild animal except
zoos, veterinary hospitals, animal shelters, pet shops, or individuals, all of which must be legally licensed
by Federal and/or State statutes. Individuals owning or fostering animals trained, or to be trained, for
service to persons with disabilities are excepted. Any individual keeping a service animal must provide
documentation of fostering and training from a certified training organization. (Ord. 1998-15)
SECTION 4-4-4 FARM ANIMALS PROHIBITED
Except as provided in Section 4-4-5, all farm animals, including, but not limited to, members of the swine,
ovine, bovine, caprine, or equine families, poultry, and rabbits, shall be prohibited. (Ord. 1998-15, 2015-24)
SECTION 4-4-5 RABBITS RESTRICTED
A. Possession of rabbits within the City is a violation of the law except under the following conditions:
1. The owner shall provide a cage of at least eight (8) cubic feet, with no dimension less than
one (1) foot for each animal.
2. Each cage or structure shall be placed at least ten (10) feet from all property lines.
3. The total number of rabbits shall be no more than five (5).
B. For the purpose of this Section, any rabbit over six (6) weeks old shall be counted.
(Ord. 1998-15)
SECTION 4-4-6 HUMANE CARE OF ANIMALS
No owner shall fail to provide his animal with sufficient food, water, clean proper shelter, protection from
the weather, and sufficient veterinary care when needed to prevent suffering and/or maintain health.
(Ord. 1998-15)
SECTION 4-4-7 ABANDONMENT PROHIBITED
It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon any animal within the City. (Ord. 1998-15)
SECTION 4-4-8 ACTS OF CRUELTY TO ANIMALS PROHIBITED
No person shall:
TITLE 4 – SAFETY
Page 18
A. Kill, wound, or attempt to kill or wound any domestic animal.
B. Put to death any domestic animal except by euthanasia under the supervision of a licensed
veterinarian of the State.
C. Beat, cruelly ill-treat, torment, overload, overwork, or otherwise abuse a domestic animal.
D. Cause, instigate, permit, or attend any dogfight, cockfight, bullfight, or other combat between
animals and between animals and humans.
E. Crop an animal’s ears, dock an animal’s tail, or perform similar surgeries, except a licensed
veterinarian of the State.
F. Allow any animal to remain unattended by a competent person in a motor vehicle when the animal’s
life, health, or safety is threatened.
(Ord. 1998-15)
SECTION 4-4-9 IMPOUNDMENT OF VICTIMIZED ANIMALS
In the event that the City or its authorized agent finds a domestic animal to be a victim of cruelty, neglect,
or abandonment as defined by Sections Eight, Nine, and Ten of this Title, the City or its authorized agent
shall have the right to forthwith remove or cause to have removed any such animal to a safe place for care
or to euthanize such animal when necessary to prevent further suffering, all at the owner’s expense. Return
to the owner may be denied or withheld until the owner shall have made full payment for all expenses
incurred. Treatment of an animal by any method specified in this Section does not relieve the owner of
liability for violations and for any accrued charges. (Ord. 1998-15)
SECTION 4-4-10 DISEASED AND INJURED ANIMALS
A. No diseased or sickly horse, cow, hog, dog, cat, or other animal, nor any that has been exposed to
any disease that is contagious among such animals, shall be brought into the City unless under
veterinary care.
B. Any animal, being in any street or public place within the City, appearing, in the estimation of the
City or its authorized agent or any inspector of the County health Department within one (1) hour
after being found or left in such condition, may be deprived of life by the City or its authorized
agent or such inspector of the County Health Department or as directed by same.
C. No person, other than personnel of the City or its authorized agent, inspectors or officers of the
County Health Department, law enforcement officers, or persons authorized by contract or
otherwise, shall in any way interfere with the removal of such dead, sick, or injured animal in such
street or public place. No person shall skin or wound such animal in any street or public place,
unless to terminate its life as herein authorized; except that the owner or person having control of
such animal may terminate the life thereof in the presence and by the consent of a law enforcement
officer, an inspector of the county health Department, or personnel of the city or its authorized
agent. (Ord. 1998-15)
SECTION 4-4-11 DEAD ANIMALS PROHIBITED
No person shall:
A. Allow the body, or any part thereof, of any dead animal to decompose and putrefy by remaining on
his property.
TITLE 4 – SAFETY
Page 19
B. Skin, dismember, butcher, dress, or exhibit any dead animals in view of the public in residentially
used areas of the City. (Ord. 1998-15)
C. The owner of an animal shall be responsible for the disposal of such animal’s remains on its death
from whatever cause and regardless of the location of such animal’s remains. (Ord. 1998-15)
SECTION 4-4-12 REQUIRED REPORTING OF ANIMAL BITES
Persons having knowledge of someone being bitten by an animal must report such information to the City
or its authorized agent or the Peoria County Sheriff’s Department within twenty-four (24) hours.
(Ord. 1998-15)
SECTION 4-4-13 DISPOSAL OF WILD ANIMALS WHICH HAVE BITTEN PERSONS
Every wild animal which has bitten a person shall be humanely destroyed immediately and a necropsy
performed. (Ord. 1998-15)
SECTION 4-4-14 HARBORING STRAY ANIMAL RESTRICTED
No person shall harbor, keep, care for, feed, or allow to remain on their property any stray domestic animal
without notifying the City or its authorized agent within forty-eight (48) hours. (Ord. 1998-15)
SECTION 4-4-15 LIBERATION OF OWNED ANIMALS PROHIBITED
No person shall remove from restraint or release from confinement any animal belonging to another person,
unless in an emergency or with the consent of the owner. (Ord. 1998-15)
SECTION 4-4-16 LIBERATION OF IMPOUNDED OR CAPTURED ANIMALS PROHIBITED
It shall be unlawful for any person to liberate or to attempt to liberate any animal impounded under the
provisions of this Title from a place of confinement or from within a vehicle used for confinement and
conveyance. (Ord. 1998-15)
SECTION 4-4-17 INTERFERENCE WITH PERSONNEL
It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct, impede, or interfere with the personnel of the City or its
authorized agent or the Peoria County Sheriff’s Department in the performance of their duties, or to prevent
or attempt to prevent the personnel of the City or its authorized agent or the Peoria County Sheriff’s
Department from capturing or impounding any animal within the City. (Ord. 1998-15)
SECTION 4-4-18 TRAPPING PROHIBITED
No person shall set any trap to catch any animal, permit any trap owned by him or in his control to be set
to catch any animal, or allow a trap to be set to catch an animal in his property, unless approved by the City
or its authorized agent. The indoor trapping of rats and mice is permitted. Live traps, which do not injure
any animal, will be permitted, unless there is a designated trapping season which prevents them.
(Ord. 1998-15)
TITLE 4 – SAFETY
Page 20
SECTION 4-4-19 PROVOKING ANIMALS PROHIBITED
It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally provoke any animal so as to create a nuisance to the
neighborhood or cause a violation of any provisions of this Title. (Ord. 1998-15)
SECTION 4-4-20 REMOVAL OF WASTE
The owner of any animal shall promptly remove an accumulation of such animal’s waste wherever it may
exist in the City. (Ord. 1998-15)
SECTION 4-4-21 ANIMAL CONSIDERED A NUISANCE
A. No person owning, possessing, or harboring any animal within the City shall permit such animal
to become a nuisance, except a person whose such animal has been provoked under Section
Twenty-one of this Title. An animal, other than a dog trained for law enforcement in the
performance of its duty, shall be considered a nuisance if such animal:
1. Substantially damages property other than the owner’s.
2. Causes unsanitary, dangerous, or unreasonably offensive conditions.
3. Causes a disturbance by excessive barking, caterwauling, or other noisemaking.
4. Chases vehicles.
5. Chases, molests, attacks, bites, or interferes with any person while on or off the premises
of the owner.
6. Chases, molests, attacks, bites, or interferes with other animals while off the premises of
the owner.
B. The City or its authorized agent, upon reasonable grounds, shall impound any animal creating a
nuisance by being in violation of Subsection (A)(5) of this Section and not restrained by a
competent person.
(Ord. 1998-15)
SECTION 4-4-22 DANGEROUS ANIMALS
A. Any dog, cat, or other animal running at large within the City which endangers the safety of any
person or animal may be slain by the City or its authorized agent or a law enforcement officer.
B. The City or its authorized agent may impound any cat, dog, or other animal found within the City
limits upon determining that the City or its authorized agent has probable cause through reliable
information or reports that it is a dangerous animal.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to own, act as a custodian for, care for, or keep a dangerous
animal for another.
D. It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly sell, trade, give away, or otherwise dispose of a
dangerous animal except by humane destruction by a licensed veterinarian or at an animal shelter.
E. A dog trained for law enforcement while in the performance of its duty shall be exempt from the
requirements of this Section.
F. Before any animal is disposed of under paragraph (D) above, an administrative hearing to determine
if the animal is dangerous should be held. The notice of the administrative hearing to determine if
the animal is dangerous shall be in writing and inform the owner of the nature of the charge. Service
of this notice shall be made upon the alleged dangerous animal’s owner by certified mail delivered
to the address of the owner of the animal, or hand-delivered to the address of the animal shelter
manager or delegate personally, at least three days prior to the hearing date. The hearing officer
shall not proceed to an administrative hearing to determine whether the animal is a dangerous
TITLE 4 – SAFETY
Page 21
animal, unless the hearing officer determines that proper notice was given, or that the owner is
avoiding service despite good-faith efforts to serve the notice by the animal shelter manager or
delegate.
(Ord. 1998-15)
SECTION 4-4-23 IMPOUNDMENT OF ANIMALS RUNNING AT LARGE
Every animal running at large or stray animal within the City may be impounded by the City or its
authorized agent, the Peoria County Sheriff’s Department, or private citizen.
(Ord. 1998-15)
SECTION 4-4-24 PENALTIES
Anyone convicted in a court of law of a violation of any act prohibited or declared to be unlawful by this
Title shall be punished by a fine of not more than seven hundred-fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense.
Each day an offense is committed shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 1998-15)
SECTION 4-4-25 LIABILITY OF ANIMAL OWNERS
Owners of animals shall be liable for any damage done by their animals to persons, other domestic animals,
or other person’s property.
(Ord. 1998-15)
SECTION 4-4-26 KEEPING CERTAIN ANIMALS IN DWELLING UNITS PROHIBITED
No person shall keep, harbor, possess, or act as custodian of any of the animals described below, within a
dwelling unit, or within the yard or accessory structure of a dwelling unit:
Any member of the family Felidae (except the species Felis Catus, domestic cat), all members of the family
Ursidae, all members of the family Hyaenidae, any member of the family Canidae (except the species Canis
Familiaris, domestic dog), all members of the Family Elephantidae, any non-human primate, or any hybrids
thereof.
Individuals owning or fostering animals to be trained for service to persons with disabilities are excepted.
Any individual keeping a service animal must provide documentation of fostering and training from a
certified training organization.
(Ord. 1998-15)
SECTION 4-4-27 INOCULATION REQUIRED
A. No person shall own, possess, keep, maintain, or harbor any dog or cat over the age of four (4)
months of age without causing such dog or cat to be inoculated against rabies as required by the
Code of Peoria County. Such inoculation shall be required, regardless of whether the dog or cat is
confined at all times to an enclosed area.
B. If an animal is not inoculated against rabies after its owner has been found to be in violation of this
Section two (2) times within a twelve (12) month period, such animal shall be impounded by the
City or its authorized agent.
(Ord. 1998-15)
SECTION 4-4-28 REGISTRATION REQUIRED
No person shall own, possess, keep, maintain, or harbor any dog or cat over the age of four (4) months
without registering such certificate of the inoculation with the office of the administrator of the county
TITLE 4 – SAFETY
Page 22
rabies control program, as prescribed by the Code of Peoria county. The registration of the rabies
vaccination certificate may be transferred from one owner to another, but not from one animal to another.
(Ord. 1998-15)
SECTION 4-4-29 COLLAR REQUIRED
No person shall own, possess, keep, maintain, or harbor any dog or cat over four (4) months of age within
the City without providing such dog or cat with a collar to be worn when said animal is outside a secure
enclosure. Collars for dogs shall be of sufficient strength to control and restrain the animal without injury
to the animal. Animals restrained by rope or chains must have collars.
(Ord. 1998-15)
SECTION 4-4-30 ATTACHMENT OF REGISTRATION TAGS
The registration tag, issued pursuant to the Code of Peoria County requiring inoculation by a licensed
veterinarian, shall be attached to the collar as required by Section Thirty-one of this Title.
(Ord. 1998-15)
SECTION 4-4-31 REMOVAL OF COLLAR OR TAGS RESTRICTED
No person shall, without the consent of the owner or keeper of any dog or cat, take away or otherwise
remove the registration tag, identification tag, or collar from any dog or cat.
(Ord. 1998-15)
SECTION 4-4-32 DISPOSITION OF DOG OR CAT SUSPECTED OF HAVING RABIES
Any dog or cat suspected of being afflicted with rabies may be slain by the City or its authorized agent or
a law enforcement officer if it is deemed essential to the safety of any person or necessary to prevent its
escape. The head of such animal shall be preserved and delivered to the County veterinarian or delegate in
order that a necropsy can be conducted to determine if such animal was rabid.
(Ord. 1998-15)
SECTION 4-4-33 CONFINEMENT OF FEMALE DOG OR CAT IN HEAT
The owner of any female dog or cat in heat shall confine such animal in a building or secure enclosure. The
failure to do so is a violation of law and will allow the City or its authorized agent to impound such animal.
(Ord. 1998-15)
SECTION 4-4-34 DUTIES OF DRIVER OF MOTOR VEHICLE STRIKING ANIMAL
Any person whose motor vehicle strikes a dog or cat within the City shall promptly report such occurrence
to the City or its authorized agent or Peoria County Sheriff’s Department with a description of the animal
struck, condition of the animal, and the location of the striking.
(Ord. 1998-15)
SECTION 4-4-35 MULTIPLE-PET LICENSE
Multiple-pet owners shall obtain an annual license from the City or its authorized agent upon payment of a
fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00). Such license shall be obtained no later than thirty (30) days after
assuming ownership of a fifth animal and must be renewed annually by January 1. The annual renewal fee
shall be ten dollars ($10.00) if the owner receives an inspection rating of excellent. Payment by a multiplepet
owner shall not exempt such licensee from payment of County registration fees for each dog or cat
owned by him.
(Ord. 1998-15)
TITLE 4 – SAFETY
Page 23
SECTION 4-4-36 MULTIPLE-PET OWNER LICENSEE REQUIREMENTS
An applicant for a multiple-pet license shall consent to the inspection of the premises where his animals are
kept or maintained. Such inspection shall be performed before issuance of the license or upon receipt of a
complaint. Annual inspections may be required for multiple-pet owners with marginally acceptable
standards. Such inspection may be performed by the City or its authorized agent. Failure to comply with a
request for inspection is a violation of this Title. Holders of multiple-pet owner licenses shall conform to
the following requirements:
A. All dogs and/or cats over four (4) months of age must be inoculated against rabies and registered
pursuant to this Title.
B. All dogs and/or cats must be provided with a continuous supply of fresh water, sufficient food to
maintain acceptable body weight, proper shelter, protection from weather, and sufficient veterinary
care to prevent suffering.
C. If dogs and/or cats are kept or maintained within a structure or building, such structure or building
shall:
1. Meet County and City health standards.
2. Be kept clean, free of feces and urine.
3. Not constitute a nuisance or danger to the health and welfare of its inhabitants nor
surrounding residents.
D. If the dogs and/or cats are maintained outside a building during a substantial portion of the day
and/or night:
1. A shelter of sufficient height and width to permit such animal to stand up and turn around
inside when fully grown shall be provided.
2. The shelter provided shall provide shade from the sun and shall be located a distance equal
to one and one-half (1 ½) times the width of the shelter from any residence located on lots
or parcels of and contiguous to the property occupied by the shelter.
E. The dogs and/or cats shall be prevented from running at large.
F. The dogs and/or cats shall be prevented from causing a nuisance pursuant to Section Twenty-three
of this Title.
G. The owner’s property shall be kept free of all feces and urine to prevent its accumulation from
constituting a health hazard or an odorous nuisance.
(Ord. 1998-15)
SECTION 4-4-37 REVOCATION OF MULTIPLE-PET LICENSE
A. Upon conviction of a second violation of the requirements pursuant to this Title, the City or its
authorized agent shall revoke the multiple—et license for a period of not less than three (3) months
nor more than two (2) years, the length of such revocation period to be determined by the number
and severity of the violations. After expiration of the revocation period, the license shall not
automatically be reinstated. The former licensee must reapply for the license and show an ability
to conform to the existing Titles before he may be issued a multiple-pet license.
B. During the revocation period, the owner shall either relinquish ownership of his animals to the City
or its authorized agent or place his animals in the care of another person after that person’s facility
for such animals has been inspected and approved by the City or its authorized agent.
(Ord. 1998-15)
TITLE 4 – SAFETY
Page 24
SECTION 4-4-38 IMPOUNDMENT OF MULTIPLE PETS
The City or its authorized agent may impound the dogs and cats of any multiple-pet owner if such owner
does not hold a multiple-pet license. (Ord. 1998-15, 2015-24 (4-1-1 to 4-1-38)
SECTION 4-4-39 BEEKEEPING
No person shall keep, harbor, possess, act as custodian, or have as a right of property to maintain an apiary
or to keep any colony of domestic honey bee (Apis Mellifera species) on any property within the City of
West Peoria city limits. (Ord. No. 2016-10)
(Re-adding of Chapter 4 Animals and deleting of Peoria County's Chapter 5 (Animals) per Ord. 2015-24)
TITLE 4 – SAFETY
Page 25
TITLE 4 SAFETY
CHAPTER 5 SWIMMING POOLS- RULES AND REGULATION
4-5-1 General Provisions
4-5-2 Definitions
4-5-3 Location and Setbacks
4-5-4 Permits, Plans and Fees
4-5-5 Fences
4-5-6 Inspections and Enforcements
4-5-7 Exemptions
4-5-8 Variances
4-5-9 Existing Private Swimming Pools
4-5-10 Validity of Permit
4-5-11 Penalty
SECTION 4-5-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS
The purpose of this Title is to prescribe rules and regulations controlling the construction, maintenance, and
operation of private swimming pools located within the corporate limits of the City of West Peoria to protect
the public health, safety, and welfare from the dangers, which are often associated with a private swimming
pool. It shall be the duty of the owner of a private swimming pool to comply with the provisions set forth
in this Title as such provisions now exist or may hereinafter be amended.
SECTION 4-5-2 DEFINITIONS
The following phrases, terms, words, and their derivations shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this
Section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Building: shall mean any structure designed or intended for the support, enclosure, shelter, or protection
of persons, animals, or property.
City: shall mean the City of West Peoria, Illinois.
Diagonal setback: indicates a measurement for setback that is calculated by measuring from the water
surface at the private swimming pool’s edge to the lowest overhead electrical service line.
Dwelling: shall mean any building, structure, or improvement consisting of not more than four (4) dwelling
units.
Dwelling unit: shall mean a building, structure, or improvement used or designed for occupancy by one
(1) family.
Family: shall mean an individual person or two (2) or more persons who are related by blood, marriage, or
adoption or who maintain a common household in a dwelling unit.
Fence: shall mean an artificially constructed barrier of any material or combination of materials erected to
enclose a private swimming pool.
Linear: shall mean a straight and horizontal measurement between points.
Private swimming pool: shall mean a body of water in an artificial or partly artificial receptacle or other
container whether installed or constructed above or below ground elevation with a minimum depth of two
(2) feet and a minimum surface area of one hundred twenty-five (125) square feet to be used for swimming,
TITLE 4 – SAFETY
Page 26
wading, diving, or recreational bathing and located on private residential property for the use of the
property’s owner and guests. (Ord. 1996-10)
Temporary Pools: shall mean any pool which is not constructed of concrete, tile, or steel that could contain
water over eighteen (18) inches and does not otherwise qualify as a private “swimming pool” as defined
above.
Private residential property: shall mean any real property, building, or portions thereof used for dwelling
purposes.
Zoning Title: shall mean the Zoning Title for the City of West Peoria, Illinois, as it presently exists or as
it may hereinafter be amended.
SECTION 4-5-3 LOCATION AND SETBACKS
A. The owner of the proposed private swimming pool or his representative or agent shall install the
same in conformance with the applicable requirements set forth in the Zoning Title as well as
setback from appurtenances, lot lines, buildings, walks, fences, and overhead electrical service
lines. If a conflict arises between the requirements of the Zoning Title and the provisions of this
Section, the more restrictive requirements shall apply.
B. The location of the private swimming pool shall adhere to the following minimum setbacks:
1. Five (5) feet from walls, landscaping elements or structures, trees, and other appurtenances.
2. Ten (10) feet linear and eighteen (18) feet diagonally from overhead electrical service lines
(it is recommended that such electrical service lines be placed underground to provide
additional safety).
3. Ten (10) feet from principle or accessory structures, excluding decks.
4. Property and building line setbacks as stipulated in the Zoning Title.
SECTION 4-5-4 PERMITS, PLANS, AND FEES
A. Prior to the commencement of the construction, alteration, addition, remodeling, or improvement
of or to a private swimming pool, the owner of the proposed or existing private swimming pool or
his representative or agent shall submit an application for a permit to the Zoning Officer. The
application shall be in duplicate and include two (2) copies of the plans and specifications. No
construction shall begin until the Zoning Officer has granted approval of the proposed plans and
specifications. The issuance of a permit by the Zoning Officer to the applicant shall be evidence
of approval of the proposal plans and specifications.
The owner shall obtain such a permit from the Zoning Officer prior to obtaining any other permit.
In addition to such a permit issued by the Zoning Officer, the owner of a proposed private
swimming pool shall be responsible for obtaining any and all other permits required by the City or
other regulatory agencies. The applicant shall not commence construction until all the required
permits are issued.
The owner of a private swimming pool shall notify the Zoning Officer upon completion of the
construction, alteration, addition, or improvement and prior to filling the private swimming pool
and upon completion of the construction of the fence. The owner shall not fill the private swimming
pool until the private swimming pool and fence are inspected by the Zoning Officer and found to
be in compliance with the terms of this Title.
B. The plans and specifications required by paragraph A of this Section shall include the following
information, plus such other data as may be reasonably requested by the Zoning Officer:
TITLE 4 – SAFETY
Page 27
1. A site plan drawn to scale which indicates the location of the proposed private swimming
pool in relation to the following items, and which meets or exceeds the established
minimum setbacks:
2. Property lines, building(s) lines, fences, walls, landscaping elements or structures, trees,
and other appurtenances.
3. Overhead electrical service lines.
4. Principle or accessory structures, excluding decks.
5. The site plan shall also include a diagram of the fence drawn to scale that includes a cross
section of the proposed fence indicating:
6. Type of materials to be used in the fence constructions.
7. Dimensions of members and other structural elements, including spaces between members
and other structural information.
8. Type and location of gates and latches, including the vertical distance from grade to the
location of handles and other latch components.
C. The applicant for a permit required by Paragraph A of this Section shall accompany the application
for a permit with payment of the appropriate fee, which shall be set by the City Council by
resolution as it shall deem necessary from time to time. See Title 11, Fee Schedule.
SECTION 4-5-5 FENCES
A. It shall be the duty of the owner of a private swimming pool to either:
1. Install a fence not less than forty-two (42”) inches in height which shall completely
surround the private swimming pool except for those portions of the enclosure where
there is a building that would serve as a five-foot (5’) barrier; or (Ord. 2006-06)
2. Install a barrier, which may include the sides of the private swimming pool structure of
aboveground private swimming pools, not less than forty-two (42”) inches in height which
shall completely surround the private swimming pool except for those portions of the
enclosure where there is a building that would serve as a forty-two (42”) inches barrier.
(Ord. 2006-06)
B. The following requirements shall apply to all private swimming pools owners:
1. Each fence shall be equipped with a gate with self-closing and self-latching devices placed
at the top of the gate. Such self-closing and self-latching devices shall be installed at such
a height so as to be inaccessible to small children, but in no case shall such devices be
installed at a height lower than forty-two (42”) inches as measured from grade.
2. All private swimming pool fence gates shall be closed and locked when the private
swimming pool is not in use.
3. There shall be no fixed objects, tree limbs, etc., within five (5) feet adjacent or extending
over the fence that may be used to climb over the fence top, unless such limbs or other
objects are five (5) feet above the top of the fence and which are not closer to grade than
ten (10) feet, as measured vertically from grade.
4. The maximum vertical clearance between grade and the bottom of the barrier shall be two
(2) inches.
5. Openings in the barrier shall not allow passage of a four (4) inch diameter sphere.
6. Solid barriers which do not have openings, such as a masonry or stone wall, shall not
contain indentations or protrusions except for normal construction tolerances and tooled
masonry joints.
7. Where the barrier is composed of horizontal and vertical members and the distance between
the tops of the horizontal members is less than forty-five (45) inches, the horizontal
members shall be located on the private swimming pool side of the fence. Spacing between
vertical members shall not exceed one and seven-eighths (1 7/8) inches in width. Where
TITLE 4 – SAFETY
Page 28
there are decorative cutouts within vertical members, spacing within the cutouts shall not
exceed one and three-fourths (1 ¾) inches in width.
8. Where the barrier is composed of horizontal and vertical members and the distance between
the tops of the horizontal members is forty-five (45) inches or more, spacing between
vertical members shall not exceed four (4) inches. Where there are decorative cutouts
within vertical members, spacing within the cutouts shall not exceed one and three-fourths
(1 ¾) inches in width.
9. Where a chain-link fence is provided, the openings between the links shall not exceed two
and three-eighths (2 ¾) inches.
10. Where the barrier is composed of diagonal members, such as a lattice fence, the maximum
opening formed by the diagonal members shall be no more than one and three-fourths (1
¾) inches.
11. All fencing shall comply with setback requirements as established in the Zoning Title.
C. Once construction of the private swimming pool is complete it shall be the responsibility of the
property owner or tenant in control to ensure that a temporary barrier be placed around the private
swimming pool until all permit requirements have been met and approved by the Zoning Officer,
and such temporary barrier shall adhere to the following minimum standards:
1. Forty-two (42”) inches in height, as measured vertically from grade.
2. Supporting poles or members shall be placed at intervals which maintain the barrier in a
vertically upright position; however, such poles or supporting members shall not be placed
less than every ten (10) feet.
D. Once construction of the temporary swimming pool is complete it shall be the responsibility of the
property owner or tenant in control to ensure that a temporary barrier be placed around the
temporary swimming pool until all permit requirements have been met and approved by the Zoning
Officer, and such temporary barrier shall adhere to the following minimum standards:
1. Install a fence or temporary fence not less than forty-two (42”) inches in height which shall
completely surround the Temporary Swimming Pools except for those portions of the
enclosure where there is a building that would serve as a five (5) foot barrier; or
(Ord. 2006-06)
2. Install a barrier, which may include the sides of the Temporary Swimming Pools structure
of above Temporary Swimming Pools, not less than forty-two (42”) inches in height which
shall completely surround the Temporary Swimming Pools except for those portions of the
enclosure where there is a building that would serve as a five-foot barrier. (Ord. 2006-06)
3. Temporary Fences see Section 2-2-10 Fence Requirements in Residential Districts.
SECTION 4-5-6 INSPECTIONS AND ENFORCEMENTS
A. The Zoning Officer shall inspect or cause to be inspected all private swimming pools within the
City at such times as the Zoning Officer may deem necessary to carry out the intent of this Title.
The Zoning Officer is hereby authorized to enter upon any premise to perform such inspections
during reasonable hours.
B. In the event the Zoning Officer determines that a violation of this Title has occurred, the Zoning
Officer shall give written notice to the owner that such a violation exists. Whenever such private
swimming pool, by violating the terms of this Title, constitutes a menace to public safety, the
Zoning Officer shall have the power to require that such private swimming pool be drained to a
level not to exceed eighteen (18) inches until such time as the same is in the opinion of the Zoning
Officer no longer a menace or hazard to the health or safety of the public
TITLE 4 – SAFETY
Page 29
SECTION 4-5-7 EXEMPTIONS
The provisions of this Title shall apply only to owners of private swimming pools where such owner’s
property is in a platted subdivision or located within six hundred (600) feet measured from the swimming
pool to the nearest property line from another private residential property on which a dwelling is located.
SECTION 4-5-8 VARIANCES
A. Whenever in a specified case the strict application of the regulations of this Title would result in
practical difficulties or particular hardship in carrying out the strict letter of such regulations, the
City Council shall have the power to vary their applications in harmony with their general purpose
and intent.
B. The procedure for variance shall be the same as for variances under the Zoning Title.
C. The applicant for a variance under this Section shall accompany the application for variation with
payment of the appropriate fee, which shall be the same fee as for an application for variation under
the Zoning Title, which shall be set by the City Council by resolution as it shall deem necessary
from time to time.
SECTION 4-5-9 EXISTING PRIVATE SWIMMING POOLS
A. The owner of an existing unfenced private swimming pool constructed and located in the City prior
to the effective date of this Title shall be required to adhere to the requirements set forth in Section
Five of this Title. Each such owner shall obtain a permit to construct a fence around the private
swimming pool area in order to bring the private swimming pool into compliance with this Title
prior to December 31, 1996.
B. Any owner of an existing fenced private swimming pool constructed and located in the City prior
to the effective date of this Title shall not be required to adhere to the requirements set forth in
Section Five of this Title unless said owner replaces the fence or at least fifty percent (50%) thereof
subsequent to the effective date of this Title, at which time the entire reconstructed fence shall
adhere to the requirements as set forth in Section Five of this Title.
C. Any owner of an existing private swimming pool constructed and located in the City prior to the
effective date of this Title shall not be required to adhere to the requirements set forth in Section
Three of this Title.
SECTION 4-5-10 VALIDITY OF PERMIT
Once the permit is obtained by the property owner to construct a fence as required by Section Five and/or
Section Nine of this Title, the construction shall be completed to the satisfaction of the Zoning Officer no
later than six (6) months after the permit’s date of issuance.
SECTION 4-5-11 PENALTY
A. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this Title shall be fined not less than twentyfive
dollars ($25.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. Each week
upon which such a violation occurs shall constitute a separate violation.
B. In addition, such persons may be enjoined from continuing such violations.
(Ord. 1996-10)
TITLE 4 – SAFETY
Page 30
TITLE 4 SAFETY
CHAPTER 6 NUISANCE NOISES
4-6-1 Musical Instruments Generally
4-6-2 Radios, Phonographs, Amplifiers, etc.
4-6-3 Sound Advertising Devices
4-6-4 Sound Amplifying Equipment, Devices
4-6-5 Steam Whistles
4-6-6 Horns or Signaling Devices on Vehicles
4-6-7 Engine Exhaust
4-6-8 Motor Vehicle Mufflers
4-6-9 Blowers, Power Fans, Electric Motors, or Internal Combustion Engines
4-6-10 Yelling, Shouting, Singing on Streets, etc.
4-6-11 Noise on Streets in Vicinity of Schools, Hospitals, etc.
4-6-12 Noise on Property Adjacent to School
4-6-13 Disturbing a School Gathering or Function
4-6-14 Transportation of Rails, Pillars, Columns of Iron, Steel, etc.
4-6-15 Race Track
4-6-16 Exclusions
4-6-17 Penalties
SECTION 4-6-1 MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS GENERALLY
No person shall use or perform with any hand organ or other musical instrument or device for pay or in
expectation of payment, in any of the streets or public places in the City before 9:00 a.m. or after 9:00 p.m.
of each day.
SECTION 4-6-2 RADIOS, PHONOGRAPHS, AMPLIFIERS, ETC.
No person shall allow or cause to be used or operated any radio receiving unit, musical instrument,
phonograph, loudspeaker, or other machine or device for the production or reproducing of sound in such a
manner as to disturb the peace, quiet, and comfort of the neighboring inhabitants or at any time with louder
volume than necessary for convenient hearing for the person who is in the room, vehicle, or chamber in
which such machine or device is operated and who is a voluntary listener thereto. The operation of any
such set, instrument, phonograph, loud speaker, machine or device between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and
6:00 a.m. in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of fifty (50) feet from the building, structure,
or vehicle in which it is located shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section.
SECTION 4-6-3 SOUND ADVERTISING DEVICES
A. No person shall make or cause, permit or allow to be made any noise of any kind, by means of
radio, musical instrument, phonograph, loud speaker, sound amplifier or other machine or device
for the producing or reproducing of sound, for the purpose of commercial advertising or attracting
the attention of the public to any building or structure.
B. No person shall operate or cause to be operated any motor vehicle or horse drawn vehicle having
mounted thereon or attached thereto any machine or device for the amplification of the human
voice, music, or any other sound for commercial sound advertising purposes in the City with such
sound-amplifying equipment in operation.
TITLE 4 – SAFETY
Page 31
SECTION 4-6-4 SOUND AMPLIFYING EQUIPMENT, DEVICES
A. No person shall operate or cause to be operated any contrivance now known or hereafter invented,
used, or designated for navigation or for flight in the air, having attached thereto or emitted there
from any machine or device for the amplification of music, the human voice or any other noise or
sound, with such machine or device in operation.
B. It shall be unlawful to use any sound amplification devices at such a volume as to cause annoyance
to the residents of the city thereby tending to disturb the peace of said residents between the hours
of 9:00 p.m. to 8:00 a.m.
SECTION 4-6-5 STEAM WHISTLES
A. No person shall allow or cause to be blown within the City, the steam whistle of any stationary
steam plant as signal for commencing or suspending work, or for any other purpose.
B. This section shall not be construed as forbidding the use of steam whistles as alarm signals in case
of fire or collision, or other imminent danger; nor for the necessary signals by the trucks of the fire
department.
SECTION 4-6-6 HORNS OR SIGNALING DEVICES ON VEHICLES
No person shall allow or cause to be blown any horn or signaling device on any automobile, motorcycle,
bus or other vehicle on any street or public place of the city, except as a danger warning; the creation by
means of any such signaling device of any unreasonably loud signaling device of any unreasonably loud or
harsh sound; the sounding of any such device for an unnecessary and unreasonable period of time; the use
of any signaling device except one operated by hand or electricity; the use of any horn, whistle or other
device operated by engine exhaust; the use of any such signaling device when traffic is for any reason held
up.
SECTION 4-6-7 ENGINE EXHAUST
No person shall allow or cause the discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine, stationary
internal combustion engine, motorboat or motor vehicle, except through a muffler or other device which
will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom.
SECTION 4-6-8 MOTOR VEHICLE MUFFLERS
A. For the purposes of this Section, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings
respectively ascribed to them in this subsection:
Decibel: means any unit of measurement of the intensity (loudness) of sound. Sound level meters
which are employed to measure the intensity of sound are calibrated in decibels.
Muffler: means any device used upon a motor vehicle, whose purpose is the deadening of
combustion noises of any engine thereon or the deadening of any other motor noises, including but
not limited to the noise of exhaust gases or any other mechanical device for the deadening of the
noise and intake of gases upon a motor vehicle.
Sound level meter: means an instrument standardized by the American Standards Association for
measurement of intensity of sound; namely Z24.3-1944.
Sound limits: means all sound emanating from any motor vehicle, measured upon the “a” weighing
scale of a second level meter, in excess of the decibels measured at the distances specified shown
TITLE 4 – SAFETY
Page 32
below. The distances shall be measured from the right rear wheel of the propelling unit of the
vehicle in motion as it passes the sound level meter:
B. No person shall operate or cause to be operated any motor vehicle upon a public street or highway
within the City unless such motor vehicle is equipped with a muffler in good working order and in
constant operation to prevent excessive or unusual noise or annoying smoke. For the purposes of
this Section, if sound in excess of the sound limit set forth in this Section shall emanate from
vehicle, such evidence shall constitute and be admitted as prima facie evidence that it was
producing excessive or unusual noises. Evidence that a vehicle was emanating sound of less than
the sound limit shall be relevant evidence, but not given prima facie effect, in determining whether
or not such vehicle was emanating excessive or unusual noises.
SECTION 4-6-9 BLOWERS, POWER FANS, ELECTRIC MOTORS, OR INTERNAL
COMBUSTION ENGINES
No person shall operate or cause to the operation of any noise creating blower, power fan, electric motor,
or internal combustion engine in such a manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of the neighboring
inhabitants. The operation of any such blower, power fan, electric motor, or internal combustion engine
between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. in such a manner as to be more from such blower, power
fan, electric motor, or internal combustion engine shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section.
SECTION 4-6-10 YELLING, SHOUTING, SINGING ON STREETS, ETC.
No person shall yell, shout, hoot, whistle or sing on the public streets, particularly between the hours of
10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. or at any time or place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of
persons in any office, or in any dwelling, hotel, or other type of residence, or of any persons in the vicinity.
SECTION 4-6-11 NOISE ON STREETS IN VICINITY OF SCHOOLS, HOSPITALS, ETC.
No person shall create or cause to be created any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school,
institution of learning, or church while the same are in use, or adjacent to any hospital, which unreasonably
interferes with the workings of such institution, or which disturbs or unduly annoys patients in the hospital;
provided there are conspicuous signs displayed in such streets indicating the same is a school or hospital.
SECTION 4-6-12 NOISE ON PROPERTY ADJACENT TO SCHOOL
No person, while on public or private grounds adjacent to any building in which a school or any class
thereof is in session or in any building owned, occupied or otherwise used by a school, shall willfully make
or assist in the making of any noise or diversion which disturbs or tends to disturb the peace, quiet, or good
order of such school session or class thereof.
Distance in Feet Maximum Permitted Sound Level in dB
50 85
45 86
40 87
35 88
30 89.5
25 91
20 93
15 95.5
TITLE 4 – SAFETY
Page 33
SECTION 4-6-13 DISTURBING A SCHOOL GATHERING OR FUNCTION
No person, while on public or private grounds adjacent to any building or land owned, occupied or
otherwise used by a school, or in any building owned, occupied or otherwise used by a school, in progress,
whether in the daytime or nighttime, shall willfully make or assist in the making of any noise or diversion
which disturbs or tends to disturb the peace, quiet or good order of such gathering or function.
SECTION 4-6-14 TRANSPORTATION OF RAILS, PILLARS, COLUMNS OF IRON, STEEL,
ETC.
All rails, pillars, and columns of iron, steel, or other metal, which are being transported over and along the
streets of the City upon carts, drays, cars, or other vehicles or in any other manner, shall be so loaded to
avoid load noises or disturbing the peace and quiet of such streets.
SECTION 4-6-15 RACE TRACK
No race track shall be permitted to allow vehicles or loud speaker systems to be operated in such a manner
as to disturb the peace, quiet, and comfort of neighboring inhabitants. The operation of any vehicles or
loud speakers between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. in such a manner as to be plainly audible from
the property line shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this Section. See Title 11, Fee Schedule.
SECTION 4-6-16 EXCLUSIONS
A. None of the above provisions shall prohibit operation of the fire department warning siren or civil
defense warning devices.
B. None of the above provisions shall prohibit any emergency situation necessitating removal of fallen
limbs, trees, snow, and maintenance equipment operation.
SECTION 4-6-17 PENALTY
Whoever violates any provision of this Chapter shall be subject to a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars
($500.00). Each day any violation of this Chapter shall continue shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 1994-16)
TITLE 4 – SAFETY
Page 34
TITLE 4 SAFETY
CHAPTER 7 FIREWORKS
4-7-1 Terms and Provisions
SECTION 4-7-1 TERMS AND PROVISIONS
The terms and provisions of Section 2 of the Fireworks Act (425 ILCS 35/2) are hereby adopted as the law
of the City of West Peoria, and henceforth it shall be unlawful for any person, firm, co-partnership, or
corporation to knowingly possess, offer for sale, expose for sale, sell at retail, or use or explode any display
fireworks, flame effects, or consumer fireworks in the City of West Peoria. Any violation continues shall
constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 2010-25)
To the extent allowed by state and federal law, this section shall not be considered violated by the use of a
property by an itinerant merchant for the sale of consumer fireworks, as defined by state law, where the
property so used was annexed to the City of West Peoria within the six months preceding the enactment of
this ordinance or hereafter annexed, if the said annexed property has been used by an itinerant merchant for
the sale of consumer fireworks, as defined by state law, at least once annually for each of the last five (5)
years. (Ord. 2010-25)
For license fee for fireworks vendor, see Title 11, Fee Schedule.
TITLE 4 – SAFETY
Page 35
TITLE 4 SAFETY
CHAPTER 8 TREES
4-8-1 Title
4-8-2 Definitions
4-8-3 Obstruction; Trees to be Pruned
4-8-4 Placing Materials on Public Property
4-8-5 Dead Trees as a Nuisance
4-8-6 Nuisance Trees are Unlawful
4-8-7 Enforcement
4-8-8 Penalties
SECTION 4-8-1 TITLE
This Chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Tree Ordinance of the City of West Peoria”.
SECTION 4-8-2 DEFINITIONS
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to
them in this Section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Certificate of license: means a State department of registration and education certification granted upon
satisfactory completion of an examination on arboriculture.
City Designated Person: means the designated employee of the City assigned to carry out the enforcement
of this Chapter.
Large trees: mean those trees attaining a height of fifty (50) feet or more.
Licensed tree expert: means one duly recognized and licensed by the State Department of Registration
and Education, to perform arboricultural services.
Medium trees: mean those trees attaining a height of thirty (30) feet to fifty (50) feet.
Parkway: means that public area between the sidewalk and curb, or that public area within the dedicated
right-of-way, not used for vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
Property owner: means the person owning such property as shown by the office of the County Recorder
of Deeds.
Public trees: means all shade and ornamental trees now or hereafter growing on any street or any public
land.
Right-of-way: is a general term denoting land, property or interest therein, usually in a strip, acquired for,
or devoted to, transportation purposes.
Small trees: means those trees attaining a height of thirty (30) feet or less.
Street or highway: means the entire width of every public right-of-way when any part thereof is open to
the use of the public, as a matter of right, for purposes of vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
SECTION 4-8-3 OBSTRUCTION; TREES TO BE PRUNED
It shall be the duty of any person owning or occupying real property bordering on any street upon which
property there may be trees, to prune such trees in such manner that they will not obstruct or shade the
TITLE 4 – SAFETY
Page 36
streetlights, obstruct the passage of pedestrians on sidewalks, obstruct vision of traffic signs, traffic signals,
or obstruct view of any street or alley intersection. The minimum clearance of any overhanging portion
thereof shall be seven (7) feet over sidewalks and sixteen (16) feet over all streets.
A. NOTICE TO PRUNE. Should any person or persons owning real property bordering on any street
fail to prune trees as hereinabove provided, the City Staff shall order such person or persons to so
prune such trees within fifteen (15) days after receipt of written notice by certified mail.
B. CERTIFIED MAIL AND POSTING. The notice shall specify that the owners shall remove the tree
at the owner’s cost within fifteen (15) days of receipt of such notice. The notice shall be personally
served or sent by certified mail to the last known address of the property owner, return receipt
requested. If delivery cannot be obtained and the owner not found within thirty (30) days, notice
can be served by posting a notice on the property.
C. FAILURE TO COMPLY; CITY ACTION. When a person to whom an order is directed shall fail
to comply within the specified time, it shall be lawful for the City to prune such trees, and the cost
thereof shall be payable by the owner and collected as a debt owed to the City.
SECTION 4-8-4 PLACING MATERIALS ON PUBLIC PROPERTY
No person shall deposit, place, store, or maintain upon any public place of the City any stone, brick, sand,
concrete, or other materials which may impede the free passage of water, air, and fertilizer to the roots of
any tree growing therein, except by written permit of the City.
(Ord. 2018-11)
SECTION 4-8-5 DEAD TREES AS A NUISANCE
Trees which are dead and which are of sufficient size or are so located that the dead tree could fall on
neighboring property or on the public right of way are hereby declared a nuisance.
SECTION 4-8-6 NUISANCE TREES ARE UNLAWFUL
It shall be unlawful for any owner of property to keep or allow to remain on his/her property any dead tree
which is a nuisance, as defined in Section 5 above.
SECTION 4-8-7 ENFORCEMENT
A. Whenever the Corporate Authorities determine that any property owner is keeping, or allowing to
remain, any dead tree which is a nuisance, the Corporate Authorities shall issue and mail a notice
thereof upon all owners of record or persons having an interest therein as shown by documents
recorded in the office of the County Recorder of Deeds and upon persons in possession of the
premises. The Notice shall be personally served or sent by certified mail, return receipt requested.
If delivery cannot be obtained and the owner not found within thirty (30) days, notice can be served
by posting a notice on the property.
B. The Notice shall specify that the owners shall remove the tree at the owner's cost within fifteen (15)
days of receipt of such notice.
SECTION 4-8-8 PENALTIES
In the event the owner fails to comply within the time period, the City shall have the right to compel removal
and to levy a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00), not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) for
each offense, plus attorney’s fees and costs. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue
shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder. (Ord. 1994-28)
TITLE 4 – SAFETY
Page 37
TITLE 4 SAFETY
CHAPTER 9 CURFEW
4-9-1 General Curfew
SECTION 4-9-1 GENERAL CURFEW
A. It is unlawful for a person less than 17 years of age to be present at or upon any public assembly,
building, business, street, highway or other public place or way at the following times:
1. Between one minute after eleven o’clock (11:01) p.m. Friday and six o’clock (6:00) a.m.
Saturday.
2. Between one minute after eleven o’clock (11:01) p.m. Saturday and six o’clock (6:00) a.m.
Sunday.
3. Between ten o’clock (10:00) p.m. Sunday and six o’clock (6:00) a.m. Monday.
4. Between ten o’clock (10:00) p.m. Monday and six o’clock (6:00) a.m. Tuesday.
5. Between ten o’clock (10:00) p.m. Tuesday and six o’clock (6:00) a.m. Wednesday.
6. Between ten o’clock (10:00) p.m. Wednesday and six o’clock (6:00) a.m. Thursday.
7. Between ten o’clock (10:00) p.m. Thursday and six o’clock (6:00) a.m. Friday.
(Ord. 2007-09)
B. It is a defense to a violation under this Chapter that the child engaged in the prohibited conduct
while:
1. Accompanied by the child’s parent, legal guardian, custodian, sibling, stepbrother, or
stepsister at least eighteen (18) years of age;
2. Accompanied by an adult at least twenty-one (21) years of age approved by the child’s
parent, guardian, or custodian;
3. Participating in, going to, or returning from:
4. Employment which the laws of this state authorize a person less than seventeen (17) years
of age to perform:
5. A school recreational activity;
6. A religious event;
7. An emergency involving the protection of a person or property from an imminent threat of
serious bodily injury or substantial damage;
8. An activity involving the exercise of the child’s rights protected under the First
Amendment to the United States Constitution or Article 1, Sections 3, 4 and 5 of the
Constitution of the State of Illinois, or both;
An activity conducted by a non-profit or governmental entity that provides recreation,
education, training, or other care under supervision of one (1) or more adult. (Ord. 2007-09)
A citation for violation of Subsection A of this Section may be issued by a Police Officer only if
he reasonably believes that a violation has occurred and none of the defenses enumerated in
Subsection B apply. The officer shall not issue a citation without first investigating the possibility
that such a defense exists. (Ord. 2007-09)
C. Penalty: Any person violating the provisions of this Section shall be subject to arrest and, upon
conviction, shall be fined not less than seventy-five dollars ($75.00) nor more than seven hundredfifty
dollars ($750.00), except where said person has been convicted of this offense or received
supervision for this offense at any prior time, the fine for any subsequent offense shall be not less
than one hundred-fifty dollars ($150.00) nor more than seven hundred-fifty dollars ($750.00).
(Ord. 2007-09)
TITLE 4 – SAFETY
Page 38
TITLE 4 SAFETY
CHAPTER 10 OPEN BURNING POLICY
4-10-1 Definitions
4-10-2 General Provisions
4-10-3 Permits Required
4-10-4 Construction Site Burns
4-10-5 Bonfires
4-10-6 Recreational Burns
4-10-7 Prescribed Burns
Appendix A Approved burn containers
Appendix B Air Curtain Destructor (Recommended Operating Instructions)
Appendix C Prescribed burn
SECTION 4-10-1 DEFINITIONS
Air Curtain Destructor: is defined as a portable combustion device that directs a plane of high velocity
forced draft air through a manifold head into a pit with vertical walls in such a manner as to maintain a
curtain of air over the surface of the pit and a recirculating motion of air under the curtain.
Bonfire: is defined as a large outdoor fire utilized for ceremonial purposes, as an expression of public joy
and exultation, or for amusement.
City: means the City of West Peoria.
City Staff: means any employee of the City of West Peoria or the Peoria County Sheriff’s Department or
representatives of any other governmental agency acting under an intergovernmental agreement with the
City of West Peoria.
Commercial Enterprise: is defined as one which is undertaken for a business purpose, rather than hobby,
recreational, educational, or other purposes. Such uses are usually attributed to a for-profit entity, rather
than an individual, university or other educational institutions, or non-profit organizations (such as public
libraries, charities, and other organizations created for the promotion of social welfare).
Construction Site Burn: is defined as a permit required controlled application of fire operation utilized to
remove land clearing debris.
Garbage: is defined as refuse resulting from the handling, processing, preparation, cooking and
consumption of food or food products.
Land Clearing Operation: is defined as the uprooting or clearing of vegetation in connection with
construction of buildings and rights-of-way, residential, or industrial development, or mining activities; or
initial clearing of vegetation to enhance property value; but does not include routine maintenance or
property cleanup activities.
Open burning: is defined as the burning of any material or substance in such a manner that products of
combustion resulting from the burning are emitted directly into the ambient (surrounding outside) air
without passing through an adequate stack, duct or chimney.
Prescribed Burning: is defined as the controlled application of fire, to vegetative fuels, under specified
environmental conditions, and following appropriate precautionary measures, which causes the fire to be
confined to a predetermined area and accomplish planned fire or land management objectives. Also referred
to as prairie grass burn, wildland burn, and ecology burns.
TITLE 4 – SAFETY
Page 39
Recreational Fire: is defined as a small outdoor fire, not to exceed three (3) feet in diameter, for the purpose
of viewing, warming, cooking food for human consumption, or for ceremonial purposes, using only
seasoned dry firewood or commercially available charcoal briquettes.
Rubbish: is defined as items such as paper, plastic, rubber, food products, metal, glass, and combustible
liquids.
Yard Waste: means vegetative matter resulting from landscaping and yard maintenance operations and
includes materials such as tree and shrub trimmings, vegetables, flowers, grass clippings, trees and tree
stumps.
SECTION 4-10-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Open burning that is hazardous due to smoke or odor emissions when atmospheric conditions or local
circumstances make such fires hazardous are prohibited. The City staff is authorized to order the immediate
extinguishment of any open burning which creates or adds to a hazardous situation.
Open burning of any material or substance that emits hazardous emissions or pollutants is strictly
prohibited. This includes, but is not limited to, electrical insulation, treated lumber, plastics, pesticides,
construction and/or demolition materials, asbestos-containing materials, oils, asphalt materials, explosive
materials, chemical wastes, synthetic materials, or rubber.
Open burning of rubbish, garbage, and yard waste is prohibited.
Open burning of any material or substance on sidewalks, public streets, alleys, rights-of-way, or highways
is prohibited.
The use of burn barrels is prohibited. Exception: Burn barrels may be allowed, at the discretion of the City
staff, as a warming station for outdoor workers and strikers.
Only those containers approved by the City staff may be used for the purpose of open burning. (see appendix
A)
Permits or other authorizations to burn will be denied or revoked for any permit holder or person who
violates established rules and regulations. The denial or revocation remains in effect, based on the degree
of the offense, at the discretion of City staff.
Open burning by a commercial enterprise located and/or operating within the City of West Peoria is
prohibited under any circumstance other than those addressed in Sections 4 or 7.
Open burning shall be allowed without prior notification to the City for highway safety flares, cutting and
welding torches, tar pots and similar occupational needs.
Open burning shall be allowed for the instruction and training of firefighting personnel.
Violations of this ordinance are subject to a fine of up to seven hundred-fifty dollars ($750.00) per offense.
This Section, and all provisions within, is effective 1 October, 2007 until amended or repealed by the City
Council of West Peoria.
SECTION 4-10-3 PERMITS REQUIRED
A permit is required for each of the following burn operations:
A. Construction site burn
B. Bonfires
C. Prescribed burns
TITLE 4 – SAFETY
Page 40
Note: Commercially manufactured grills, smokers, and outside fireplaces do not require permits, yet they
are subject to the restrictions outlined in Section 6.
SECTION 4-10-4 CONSTRUCTION SITE BURNS
The burning of land-clearing debris at construction sites only under the following conditions:
All land-clearing debris to be burned must be from the site specified on the burn permit(s) and must not be
transported to the site from another location.
All land-clearing debris that is to be disposed of on-site must be incinerated using an air curtain destructor
(refer to appendix B)
Authorization to conduct a construction site burn using the air curtain destructor must first be obtained from
the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency and an I.E.P.A. permit issued to the contractor or developer
responsible for the project prior to local authorization.
The contractor or developer responsible for the project must present a validated copy of the I.E.P.A. permit,
plus a site map of the area, to the City for review.
The contractor or developer responsible for the project must obtain a burn permit ($100.00 – see Title 11,
Fee Schedule) from the City at least seven (7) days prior to the start of burning operations. An appointment
must be made with a fire inspector to inspect the site for permit approval.
The contractor or developer responsible for the project must ensure the following is adhered to throughout
the duration of the burning operation:
The air curtain destructor meets the manufacturer’s specifications for operation and upkeep to ensure
complete burning of material charged into the pit.
Manufacturers specifications shall be kept on site and be available for inspection by City personnel.
The air curtain destructor operator is fully trained in the correct operation and maintenance of the unit.
The burn pit width, length, and depth are the proper dimensions, in accordance with manufacturers
specifications.
The moisture content and composition of the materials to be burned shall be favorable to good burning to
minimize air pollution. The amount of dirt in the piles shall be minimized to enhance combustion and reduce
emissions.
The location of the burn pit must be at least one thousand (1,000) feet from any occupied structure(s).
A temporary fire apparatus access road, capable of supporting the imposed load of fire apparatus weighing
seventy-five thousand (75,000) lbs., must be constructed and in place, easily accessible to within one
hundred feet (100) of the burn pit, prior to the start of the operation
Prevailing winds at the time of the burn must be away from any area, including public roads within two
hundred-fifty (250) feet of the burning as measured from the edge of the pavement or other roadway surface,
which may be significantly affected by smoke, ash or other air pollutants from the burning.
No land clearing debris or waste will be burned above the level of the air curtain in the pit.
The operator of the air curtain must not allow ash to build up in the pit to a depth higher than one-third (1/3)
of the depth of the pit or to the point where the ash begins to impede combustion, whichever occurs first.
The initiation of the pit burn shall commence no earlier than 7:30 a.m. daily. Burning shall be completed
each day by 4:00 p.m. Operators must stop filling the burn pit with additional land- clearing debris at least
one (1) hour prior to the end of each work day to allow the debris in the pit to burn down. In cases where
TITLE 4 – SAFETY
Page 41
residual fires and/or smoldering objects continue to emit smoke, such areas shall be fully extinguished. The
site must not be abandoned or left unattended until all fires and embers are extinguished.
Access to the burn pit must be restricted to prevent public access at all times to prevent accidents. Barriers
must be placed around the open burn pit to prevent accidental entry, specifically after hours.
SECTION 4-10-5 BONFIRES – BONFIRES ARE NOT APPROVED FOR THE GENERAL PUBLIC
Bonfires are allowed subject to the following conditions:
A. The organization requesting the bonfire must submit a map of the burn site to the City for review.
The site map must show emergency access points to the site (i.e. roads, parking lots, alleys, etc.),
burn sites proximity to buildings/structures, available water source (i.e. fire hydrants), and
approximate number and location of crowd.
B. The organization requesting the bonfire must obtain a burn permit ($150.00 – see Title 11, Fee
Schedule) from the City at least seven (7) days prior to the start of burning operations. An
appointment must be made with a fire inspector to inspect the site the day of the burn.
C. The location of the bonfire shall be no closer than one hundred (100) feet to any structure, tree,
shrub or combustible material, and provisions shall be made to prevent the fire spreading to within
one hundred (100) feet of any structure or combustible material.
D. The organization requesting the bonfire will appoint and identify at least four (4) adults (bonfire
supervisors) to supervise the event throughout its entirety.
E. The fuel for the bonfire shall consist only of clean, dry, non-treated lumber or firewood stacked no
more than ten (10) feet in height with a diameter not to exceed ten (10) feet at the base of the pile.
F. Small amounts of paper and kindling may be used to kindle the fire. The use of flammable or
combustible liquids to start the bonfire is strictly prohibited. Only the dedicated bonfire
supervisor(s) will initiate the fire.
G. No one, except the bonfire supervisor(s) and/or emergency personnel, shall be allowed within
twenty (20) feet of the bonfire throughout the duration of the event. Adequate security measures
must be in place to prevent the audience from encroaching on the pile.
H. The bonfire shall not be lit prior to 12:00 p.m. All bonfires have a maximum time limit of four (4)
hours and shall be properly extinguished at the end of the activities, but in any event, not later than
10:00 p.m.
I. A fully staffed West Peoria Fire Department fire engine must be on-site, located in an easily
accessible location near the bonfire at least thirty (30) minutes prior to the start of the fire. The fire
crews will monitor the bonfire throughout its entirety and will remain afterwards to ensure that it
is extinguished. It is the responsibility of the organization requesting the bonfire to ensure that this
has been arranged.
The bonfire will be suspended or cancelled by the on-site fire crew anytime throughout the event
if wind conditions become strong or if the wind begins to carry brands or embers creating a potential
for fire extension.
J. Bonfires identified as hazardous due to excessive smoke or odor emissions may be extinguished
based on the opinion of the fire officer in charge of the fire crews on-site.
TITLE 4 – SAFETY
Page 42
SECTION 4-10-6 RECREATIONAL FIRES
Recreational fires (campfires or cookouts) for pleasure, religious, ceremonial, cooking, warmth or similar
purposes only under the following conditions:
A. The location of the fire shall be no closer than twenty-five (25) feet from any structure and
provisions shall be made to prevent the fire spreading to within twenty-five (25) feet of any
structure.
B. Recreational fires are strictly prohibited on sidewalks, public streets, alleys, rights-of-way, or
highways.
C. Recreational fires shall be contained in an outdoor fireplace, fire/barbecue pit, campfire ring or
other container approved by City staff, and shall be limited in size to a total fuel area of three (3)
feet or less in diameter and two (2) feet or less in height. The use of devices made of earth, stone,
or metal designed for the purpose of containing a fire shall also be permitted provided the area
containing the fire is no more than three (3) feet wide by three (3) feet long. The pieces of wood
contained in permissible fires shall be nor more than three (3) feet in length.
D. All recreational fires have a maximum time limit of four (4) hours and shall be properly
extinguished at the end of the activities. Regardless of when the fire was initiated it is not allowed
to extend later than 10:00 p.m.
E. The fuel for recreational fires shall consist of seasoned dry firewood or charcoal briquettes.
Construction materials or yard waste are strictly prohibited. Small amounts of paper and kindling
may be used to kindle the fire. The use of flammable or combustible liquids, other than
commercially produced charcoal lighter fluid, to start the fire is strictly prohibited.
F. A responsible adult shall enforce attendance and supervision of children at all times the fire is
kindled. An approved on-site extinguishing agent, such as sand, water container, or garden hose
shall be available for immediate use.
G. The fire shall be immediately extinguished anytime the wind conditions become strong or if the
wind begins to carry brands or embers creating a potential for fire extension. It is the responsibility
of the property owner/tenant to ensure the safety of those enjoying the fire and therefore must
extinguish the fire when the winds are too high.
H. Recreational fires identified as hazardous due to excessive smoke or odor emissions are prohibited.
The City may order the extinguishment of any recreational fire that creates or adds to a hazardous
situation.
Note: Commercially manufactured grills, smokers, and outside fireplaces do not require permits,
however, their use is subject to the time and wind restrictions outlined in this section
SECTION 4-10-7 PRESCRIBED BURNS
Prescribed burns that accomplish planned fire or land management objectives are allowed. They are
permitted only under the following conditions:
A. Authorization to conduct a prescribed burn must first be obtained from the Illinois Environmental
Protection Agency and an I.E.P.A. permit issued to the contractor responsible for the project prior
to local authorization.
B. The contractor responsible for the project must present a validated copy of the I.E.P.A. permit, and
a copy of the prescription for the burn must be submitted for review. The prescription will contain,
as a minimum, the following:
TITLE 4 – SAFETY
Page 43
1. Site Description
2. Map of the area to be burned
3. Personnel and equipment to be used on the prescribed burn
4. Training level of personnel conducting burn
C. Personnel conducting the prescribed burn must be in compliance with:
1. NFPA 1051 - Standard for Wildland Fire Fighter Professional Qualifications
2. NFPA 1143 - Standard for Wildland Fire Management
3. Desired outcome
D. The contractor responsible for the project must obtain a burn permit ($100.00 – see Title 11, Fee
Schedule) from the City at least seven (7) days prior to the start of the fire. Rain date(s) will be
considered at the time of application.
E. Burning shall be conducted only when wind direction and other meteorological conditions are such
that smoke and other pollutants will not cause adverse effects to any public road, or off-site
structure. Refer to appendix C.
F. The initiation of burning shall commence no earlier than one 7:30 a.m. Burning shall be completed
on the same day by 4:00 p.m. In cases where residual fires and / or smoldering objects continue to
emit smoke after this time, such areas shall be extinguished.
G. The responsible agent of the organization conducting the burn must notify the fire dispatcher and
the West Peoria Fire Chief of the time the fire is started and when it is concluded.
H. In any R-2 zoning classification, the owner of any zoning lot the borders of which are not less than
five hundred (500) feet from any single family or multi-family residence and which zoning lot is at
least three (3) acres (130,680 square feet) in size and which is subject to a special use permit issued
by the City of West Peoria, shall be entitled to the issuance of two (2) prescribed burns per twelve
(12) month period, provided that the provisions of this section are complied with.
TITLE 4 – SAFETY
Page 44
APPENDIX A: APPROVED BURN CONTAINERS
A. Outdoor Fireplaces
1. Must be at least twenty-five (25) feet from structures and other combustible surfaces
2. Not allowed on combustible decks
3. Burn only dry, seasoned firewood or charcoal briquettes
4. Specifically designed for this purpose
5. Has spark arrestor or ember screen
6. Examples:
B. Outdoor fire/barbecue pits
1. Must be at least twenty-five (25) feet from structures and other combustible surfaces
2. Burn only dry, seasoned firewood or charcoal briquettes
3. Specifically designed for this purpose
4. Examples:
C. Campfire rings
1. Must be at least twenty-five (25) feet from structures and other combustible surfaces
2. Not allowed on combustible decks
3. Burn only dry, seasoned firewood or charcoal briquettes
4. Specifically designed for this purpose
5. Extinguishing agent on hand (i.e. water hose, sand, fire extinguisher etc.)
6. Examples:
TITLE 4 – SAFETY
Page 45
Note: The use of earth, concrete, or stone for the purpose of containing a campfire or cooking fire is
permitted provided the area is free of combustibles and the diameter of the containment area is not greater
than three (3) feet.
Burn barrels are prohibited with exceptions approved by City staff under Section 2, paragraph 5 of this
Section
TITLE 4 – SAFETY
Page 46
APPENDIX B: AIR CURTAIN DESTRUCTOR
Recommended Operating Instructions
Operating Procedure for Air Curtain destructor
Step 1 - Site Select and Preparation
Select a site, which will likely have a low water table, can be easily excavated, and is not less than 1000
feet from any occupied structure.
Step 2 - Pit Preparation
Excavate the pit using either a front-end loader or backhoe.
Pit Dimensions:
The depth, width, and length of each pit must conform to the specifications prescribed by the Air Curtain
manufacturer. Each pit must be excavated with at least three (3) vertical sides, in soil capable of maintaining
the vertical walls without failure.
Note 1: The length of the pit is dependent upon the length of the air curtain destructor manifold.
Note 2: Caution must be exercised to ensure that walls are not undercut during excavation. If a front-end
loader is used for excavation, the end used for travel must be filled in with dirt beginning at the end of the
manifold and filling up the ramp.
Step 3 - Air Curtain Destructor Set Up
Using a small berm of soil (1 to 1 1/2 feet high), place the manifold (plenum & nozzles), such that the
manifold is properly supported, and the space between the manifold and the ground is sealed. Rotate the
manifold until the air curtain will be directed at an imaginary horizontal line 24 to 36 inches below the top
of the opposite wall. Slide the skid containing the blower and motor into place and connect the manifold.
TITLE 4 – SAFETY
Page 47
A "stop guide" or restraint must be provided at the loading side of the pit in order to keep the loader from
getting to close to the edge of the pit during charging operations. Note: A fence or barrier must be erected
around the pit to protect the public.
Example of Air Curtain Destructor set up for proper operation (refer to mfg. specifications)
Step 4 - Ignition Procedure
Load the pit half full with homogeneous mixture of trees, logs, and large brush. Douse the wood with 1/2
gallon of fuel oil or kerosene. The majority of the fuel oil or kerosene should be put on the wood at the front
center side of the pit. Allow sufficient time for the fire to take hold before introducing any air from the air
curtain destructor. As the fire grows in intensity, gradually bring the blower up to optimum speed (refer to
manufacturer’s recommendation)
CAUTION: Do Not Use Tires or Highly Volatile Solvents Such as Gasoline, Mineral Spirits, Etc., for
Ignition.
Note 1: Only wood waste consisting of trees, logs, large brush, stumps, relatively free of soil and lumber
may be burned.
Note 2: Leaves, sawdust, other densely packed wood wastes, paper (any type), or chemically treated,
coated, or impregnated wood CANNOT be burned.
Step 5 - Loading Procedures
Once the fire reaches full intensity, additional wood waste may be added. The intervals between pit refill
may be determined by observing the burning rate. Generally, if the fire is kept at its maximum intensity, it
will keep one (1) man, operating a front-end loader, constantly busy. Also, the material should be loaded
toward the rear of the pit under the air curtain. The pit should not be overloaded; that is, the material should
not be piled up so high that it would protrude above the air curtain. Also, no material should extend outside
the boundaries of the pit and air curtain.
TITLE 4 – SAFETY
Page 48
Step 6 - Maintenance and Safety Requirements
Ash removal is required in order to maintain efficient and proper combustion. Ashes should not be allowed
to build up higher that 1/3 the pit depth, or below the point where they begin to impede combustion and are
blown out of the pit. If spalling, "cave off", of the pit walls occurs during operations, a new pit must be
constructed and the existing pit filled with soil.
TITLE 4 – SAFETY
Page 49
APPENDIX C – PRESCRIBED BURNS
(Ord. 2007-10)
TITLE 4 – SAFETY
Page 50
TITLE 4 SAFETY
CHAPTER 11 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE & OCCUPANCY CODE
4-11-1 General Provisions
4-11-2 Definitions
4-11-3 Exterior Premises Conditions
4-11-4 Exterior Structure
4-11-5 Interior Structure
4-11-6 Space Requirements
4-11-7 Required Equipment and Facilities
4-11-8 Enforcement
4-11-9 Condemnation – Unfit/Unsafe Structures
4-11-10 Demolition, Repair and Maintenance of Buildings and Structures
4-11-11 Nuisances
4-11-12 Abandoned Structures
4-11-13 Assistance of Legal Counsel
4-11-14 Exclusivity of Remedies
4-11-15 Conflict
4-11-16 Violation-Penalty
SECTION 4-11-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS
A. Title. This Chapter shall be known as the City of West Peoria Property Maintenance and
Occupancy Code.
B. Scope. The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to all existing residential and nonresidential
buildings, structures, dwellings or parts thereof, as herein defined, and shall constitute the minimum
requirements for premises, structures, equipment and facilities for light, ventilation, space, heating,
sanitation, and protection from elements.
The provisions of this Chapter shall constitute minimum standards to all existing residential and
nonresidential buildings, structures, dwellings or parts thereof, as herein defined, so as to eliminate
conditions hazardous to the public health, safety and welfare within the City, as defined herein; and
shall constitute minimum responsibilities of owners, operators and occupants concerning the
occupancy of existing structures and premises.
The provisions of this Chapter shall apply uniformly to the construction, maintenance, use and
occupancy of all buildings, structures and dwellings, and shall apply uniformly to all alteration,
repair, equipment, use, occupancy and maintenance of all existing buildings, structures and
dwellings within the City, irrespective of when or under what code or codes such buildings,
structures or dwellings were originally constructed, rehabilitated or renovated.
C. Declaration of Legislative Purposes. In recognition that the physical condition of a person’s
property has consequences beyond the lot upon which the property is located, this Chapter is
adopted for the following purposes:
1. To promote the public health, safety, morals, comfort and general welfare of the citizens
of the City;
2. To enhance the values of the property throughout the City;
3. To protect and stabilize the general appearance of buildings, structures, dwellings,
landscaping and open areas in the City;
4. To ensure adequate light, air and privacy for property in the City;
TITLE 4 – SAFETY
Page 51
5. To encourage and promote acceptability, attractiveness, cohesiveness and compatibility of
buildings, structures and dwellings so as to maintain and improve the established property
values within the City;
6. To preserve and promote the physical and mental health and social well-being of the
people, to prevent and control incidence of communicable diseases, to reduce
environmental hazards and to ensure safety from fire and accidents;
7. To prevent and control blight;
8. To determine the responsibilities of owners, operators and occupants of buildings,
structures and dwellings within the City;
9. To provide for the administration and enforcement thereof.
SECTION 4-11-2 DEFINITIONS
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.
Accessory building: means a detached building which is secondary or subordinate to a principal building;
and is subordinate in area, extent or purpose to the principal building; and contributes to the comfort,
convenience or necessity of occupants of the principal building; and is temporarily or permanently located
in the same zoning lot as the principal building served.
Apartment: means a dwelling unit having both bathroom and kitchen facilities.
Appropriate authority: means that person within the governmental structure of the corporate unit who is
charged with the administration of the appropriate code.
Approved: means approved by the local, state or federal authority having such administration authority.
Ashes: means all ashes of wood, coal, coke, charcoal and/or residue resulting from the combustion of any
material or substance.
Attic: means any story situated wholly or partly within the roof, and so designed, arranged or built as to be
used for storage or habitation.
Attractive nuisance: means any building, structure or dwelling or part thereof and/or the exterior property
surrounding such building, structure or dwelling or any vacant/abandoned building, structure or dwelling
or property left in an unsightly, dilapidated, deteriorated or neglected condition, such building, structure or
dwelling or premises is an attractive nuisance if it is detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare.
Basement/cellar: means a portion of a building, structure or dwelling having at least one-half (1/2) or more
of its height below the finished lot grade level.
Building: means any structure built for the support, shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels, or
personal property of any kind, such as a house, factory, garage or shed and including temporary housing as
defined herein.
Bulk container or dumpster: means any metal garbage, rubbish and/or refuse container having a capacity
of two (2) cubic yards or greater and that which is equipped with fittings for hydraulic and/or mechanical
emptying, unloading and/ or removal.
Central heating system: means a single system supplying heat to one (1) or more dwelling units or more
than one (1) rooming unit.
Chimney: means a vertical shaft of reinforced concrete or other approved noncombustible, heat resisting
material enclosing one (1) or more flues, for the purpose of removing products of combustion from solid,
liquid or gaseous fuel; must be in conformance with existing City fire codes.
TITLE 4 – SAFETY
Page 52
Code Enforcement Officer: means any employee(s) of the City designated by ordinance for the
enforcement of this Code.
Dangerous buildings: for purposes of this maintenance code, means all buildings or structures which have
any or all of the following defects shall be deemed dangerous buildings:
A. Those whose interior walls or other vertical structural members list, lean or buckle to such an extent
that a plumb line passing through the center of gravity falls outside of the middle third of its base;
B. Those which, exclusive of the foundation, show thirty-three (33) percent or more of damage or
deterioration of the supporting members, or thirty-three (33) percent of damage or deterioration of
the nonsupporting enclosing or outside walls or covering;
C. Those which have improperly distributed loads upon the floors or roofs or in which the same are
overloaded, or which have insufficient strength to be reasonably safe for the purpose used;
D. Those which have been damaged by fire, wind or other causes so as to have become dangerous to
life, safety, morals or the general health and welfare of the occupants or the people of the City;
E. Those which have become or are so dilapidated, decayed, unsafe, unsanitary or which so utterly
fail to provide the amenities essential to decent living that they are unfit for human habitation, or
are likely to cause sickness or disease, so as to work injury to the health, morals, safety or general
welfare of those living therein;
F. Those having light, air and sanitation facilities which are inadequate to protect the health, morals,
safety or general welfare of human beings who live or may live therein;
G. Those having inadequate facilities for egress in case of fire or panic or those having insufficient
stairways, elevators, fire escapes or other means of departure;
H. Those which have parts thereof which are so attached that they may fall and injure members of the
public or property;
I. Those which, because of their condition, are unsafe, unsanitary or dangerous to the health, morals,
safety or general welfare of the people of the City;
Deterioration: means the condition or appearance of a building, structure or dwelling characterized by
holes, breaks, rock crumbling, cracking, rusting, peeling paint or other evidence of physical decay or
neglect, excessive use or lack of maintenance.
Dilapidated: means a building, structure or dwelling or part thereof which is in a state of ruin or shabbiness
resulting from neglect. The term implies a hazard to life or property or no longer adequate for the purpose
or use for which it was originally intended.
Dormitory: means a building or group of rooms in a building used for institutional living and sleeping
purposes by four (4) or more persons.
Dwelling: means any enclosed space wholly or partly used or intended to be used for living and sleeping,
cooking and eating; provided that temporary housing as hereinafter defined shall not be classified as a
dwelling.
A. One (1) family dwelling: means a building containing one (1) dwelling unit.
B. (2) family dwelling: means a building containing two (2) dwelling units.
C. Multifamily apartment: means a building or a portion thereof containing more than two (2)
dwelling units.
D. Boarding house or tourist house: means a building arranged or used for lodging with or without
meals for compensation, by more than five (5) but not more than twenty (20) individuals.
TITLE 4 – SAFETY
Page 53
E. Rooming house: means a building or part thereof, in which sleeping quarters (but not meals or
cooking facilities) are provided by prearrangement for compensation on a weekly or longer basis
for three (3) or more persons.
F. Hotel: means any building containing six (6) or more guest rooms intended or designed to be used,
or which are occupied for sleeping purposes by guests.
G. Motel: means any building containing guest rooms in which the rooms are usually accessible from
an outdoor parking area and the rooms are intended or designed to be used, or which are occupied
for, sleeping purposes by guests.
Dwelling unit: means a room or group of rooms located within a dwelling forming a single habitable unit
with facilities used, or intended to be used, by a single-family for living, sleeping, cooking and eating
purposes.
Egress: means an arrangement of exit facilities to assure a safe means of exit from buildings, structures and
dwellings.
Existing buildings: means a building, structure or dwelling, or part thereof which has been completed and
is ready for occupancy.
Extermination: means the control and elimination of insects, rodents or other vermin or pests, by
eliminating their harborage places; by removing or making inaccessible the materials that may serve as
their food; by poisoning, spraying, fumigating, trapping or by any other recognized and legal pest
elimination methods.
Fair market value: means a price at which both buyers and sellers are willing to do business.
Family: either:
A. Two (2) or more persons, each related to the other by blood, marriage, or adoption, together with
usual domestic servants and not more than one (1) bona fide guest, all living together as a single
housekeeping unit and using common kitchen facilities (that is, a related family); or
B. Five (5) or fewer persons, all of whom are not necessarily related to each of the others by blood,
marriage, or adoption, all living together as a single housekeeping unit and using common kitchen
facilities (that is, an unrelated family).
Flush water closet: means a toilet bowl which is flushed with water which has been supplied under pressure
and equipped with a water sealed trap above the floor level.
Garbage: means any rejected or waste household food, offal, swill land carrion and every accumulation of
animal, fruit or vegetable matter that attends the preparation, use, cooking and dealing in, or storage of
meats, fish, fowl, fruits or vegetables, and any other matter which is subject to decay, putrefaction or the
generation of noxious or offensive gasses or odors, or which during or after decay may serve as breeding
or feeding materials for insects, rodents or other vermin. "Garbage" also includes compostable materials,
manure, miscellaneous waste and yard waste.
Grade: means the established grade of the street or sidewalk. Where no such grade has been established,
the grade shall be the elevation of the sidewalk at the property line or the crown of the street adjacent to the
property line, whichever is higher. However, in cases of unusual topographic conditions as determined by
the building inspector, grade shall be the average elevation of the finished surface of the ground adjoining
the exterior walls of a building at the base of a structure.
Graffiti: means an unattractive or scribbled motto or writing on any building, structure, dwelling, garage,
driveway or walkway on the premises.
TITLE 4 – SAFETY
Page 54
Guest: means a person received and entertained at the house of another for a period no longer than thirty
(30)days.
Habitable room: means a room or enclosed floor space used or intended to be used for living or sleeping
purposes, excluding kitchens, bathrooms, water closet, compartments, laundries, furnace rooms of less than
seventy (70) square feet of floor space, foyers or communicating corridors, stairways, closets, storage
spaces and workshops, hobby and recreation areas.
Heated water: means water heated to a temperature of not less than one hundred twenty (120) degrees
Fahrenheit at the outlet.
Heating device: means all furnaces, unit heaters, domestic incinerators, cooking and heating stoves and
ranges and other similar devices.
Household: means one (1) or more individuals living together in a single-family dwelling unit and sharing
common living, sleeping, cooking and eating facilities. (See also "Family)."
Impervious to water/pests: (as to floors) means a clean, smooth floor, without cracks or holes, and made
of terrazzo, ceramic, wood, asphalt vinyl or rubber tile, smooth concrete, linoleum or other similar material
that is completely sealed so as to be water-resistant and impervious to pests.
Infestation: means the presence within or around a dwelling of any insects, rodents or other pests.
Inoperable motor vehicle: means a motor vehicle from which, for a period of seven (7) days, the engine
wheels or other parts thereof are damaged or otherwise so treated that the vehicle is incapable of being
driven under its own motor power.
Junk vehicle: means any vehicle which is without a current valid license plate and/or City vehicle sticker,
and/or is in a rusted, wrecked, dismantled, partly dismantled, inoperative or abandoned condition for a
period of forty-eight (48) consecutive hours.
Kitchen: means any room used for the storage of foods, preparation of foods and containing the following
equipment; sink and/or device for dishwashing, stove or other device for cooking, refrigerator or other
device for cool storage of food, cabinets and/or shelves for storage of equipment and utensils, and counter
or table for food preparation.
Kitchenette: means a small kitchen or an alcove containing cooking facilities.
Lavatory: means a fixed wash bowl equipped with plumbing. Kitchen sinks do not meet this definition.
Lead based paint: means any paint containing more lead than the level established by U.S. Consumer
Product Safety Commission as being a "safe" level of lead in residential paint and paint products.
Lease: means the transfer of occupancy rights of real property for consideration even if there is no written
agreement entered into.
Maintenance: means conformance of a building, structure or dwelling and its facilities to the code under
which the building was constructed.
Motor vehicle: means as defined by the Illinois Motor Vehicle Code and as amended from time to time,
and any parts thereof.
Multiple dwelling: means any dwelling containing more than one (1) dwelling unit.
Occupant: means any person living in, sleeping in, or having actual possession of, a building, structure or
dwelling, or portion thereof.
Operator/owner: means:
A. Any person having charge, care, management or control of any building, structure, dwelling,
property or part thereof; or
TITLE 4 – SAFETY
Page 55
B. Any person who alone or jointly or severally with others has legal or equitable title to a building,
structure or dwelling, the agent of the person, any person having management or control of the
building, structure or dwelling, including but not limited to a purchaser, mortgagee, receiver or
lessee in possession of any building, structure or dwelling.
Permissible occupancy: means the maximum number of individuals permitted to reside in a dwelling unit,
rooming unit or dormitory.
Person: means any natural person, firm, partnership, trust, cooperative or association. Whenever used with
respect to any penalty, the term "person," as applied to partnerships, firms or associations, means the
partners or members thereof.
Pest: means a destructive or injurious insect or animal, which is harmful to humans.
Plumbing: means and includes all of the following: gas pipes, gas burning equipment, water heating
equipment, water pipes, water pipe wall plates, garbage disposal units, waste pipes, water closets, sinks,
installed dishwashers, lavatories, bathtubs, shower baths, installed clothes washing machines, wells, septic
tanks, catch basins, drains, vents and any other similarly supplied fixtures, and the installation thereof,
together with all connections to water sewer, or gas lines, and as further defined in the plumbing code.
Pre-ordinance building: means every existing building, structure or dwelling, or part thereof which was
completed, or for the construction of which a permit was issued prior to the effective date of this chapter.
Premises: means a lot, plot or parcel of land, including all buildings, structures and dwellings thereon.
Privacy: means the existence of conditions which will permit an individual or individuals to carry out an
activity without interference by either the noise or sight of unwanted individuals.
Properly connected: means connected in accordance with all applicable codes and ordinances of the City
as are in force from time-to-time; provided, however, that the application of this definition shall not require
the alteration or replacement of any connection in good working order and not constituting a hazard to life
or health.
Public nuisance: means:
A. Any act, thing, physical condition, use or occupancy of any premises or its appurtenances which
shall continue for such length of time as to substantially annoy, injure or endanger the comfort,
health, physical senses, repose or safety of the public or persons of ordinary sensibilities.
B. Any act, thing, physical condition, use or occupancy of any premises or its appurtenances which
shall continue for such length of time as to substantially interfere with, obstruct or tend to obstruct
or render dangerous for passage any street, alley, highway, or other public way.
C. Any act, thing, physical condition, use or occupancy or any premises or its appurtenances
considered an attractive nuisance to children, including but not limited to abandoned wells, shafts,
basements, excavations, unsafe fences or structures;
D. Any premises which have unsanitary sewerage or plumbing facilities;
E. Any premises designated as unsafe for human habitation or use;
F. Any premises which are manifestly capable of being a fire hazard, or are manifestly unsafe or
unsecured as to endanger life, limb or property;
G. Any premises from which the plumbing, heating and/or facilities required by the Code have been
removed or from which utilities have been disconnected, destroyed, removed or rendered
ineffective, or the required precautions against trespassers have not been provided;
TITLE 4 – SAFETY
Page 56
H. Any premises which are unsanitary, or which are littered with rubbish or garbage, or which have
an uncontrolled growth of weeds; or
I. Any structure, building or dwelling that is in a state of dilapidation, deterioration or decay, faulty
construction; overcrowded, open, vacant or abandoned, damaged by fire to the extent as not to
provide shelter, in danger of collapse or failure and is dangerous to anyone on or near the premises.
Rat harborage: means any condition or place where rats can live, nest or seek shelter.
Rat proofing: means a form of construction which will prevent the ingress or egress of rats to or from a
given space, building, structure or dwelling, or from gaining access to food, water or harborage. It consists
of the closing and keeping closed of every opening in foundations, basements, cellars, exterior and interior
walls around first floors, roofs, sidewalk openings, and other places that may be reached and entered by
rats by climbing, burrowing or other methods by the use of materials impervious to rat gnawing and other
methods approved by the appropriate authority.
Refuse: means all solids subject to decay or putrefaction (except body wastes) including garbage, rubbish,
ashes and dead animals.
Refuse container: means a water-tight container that is constructed of metal or rigid plastic or other durable
material impervious to rodents, that is capable of being serviced without creating unsanitary conditions or
such other containers that have been approved by the appropriate authority. Openings into the container
such as covers and doors shall be tight-fitting and made of metal or rigid plastic.
Rehabilitation: means:
A. Repairs to, or replacement of, present elements of any existing building, structure or dwelling, such
as windows, stairs, flooring, etc.;
B. Rearrangement of rooms, by the relocation of partitions or walls; or by the installation of new
bathrooms or kitchens; or
C. The general replacement of the interior or portions of the interior of a building; structure or dwelling
which may or may not include changes to structural elements such as floor systems, roof systems,
columns or load bearing interior or exterior walls.
Renovation: means a building, structure or dwelling and its facilities made to conform to present day
minimum standards of sanitation, fire and life safety.
Rodents: means rats, mice, raccoons, possums and other similar animals.
Rooming house: means any dwelling other than a hotel or motel or that part of any dwelling containing
one (1) or more rooming units, and/or one (1) or more dormitory rooms and in which persons either
individually or as families are housed with or without meals being provided.
Rooming unit: means any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit used, or intended to be
used, for living and sleeping, but not for cooking or eating purposes.
Rubbish: means combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except garbage; the term shall include
ashes, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood excelsior, rubber, leather, wrappings, cans, metals, mineral matter,
glass, crockery and dust; any object that is worthless or unsuitable for use.
Safety: means the condition of being reasonably free from danger and hazards which may cause accidents
or disease.
Sale: means the transfer for consideration of the title to real estate and includes the purchase of a
condominium unit or the shares on a cooperative apartment association or a corporation, or a sale of land
contract, contract for deed in trust, or trust deed.
TITLE 4 – SAFETY
Page 57
Servant: means one who performs various duties about the dwelling unit of a personal employer.
Service facilities: means those facilities and fixtures necessary for the supply of such required basic
services as heat, electricity, hot and cold water and sewage disposal.
Short term: means a period of time of a short duration such as a visitor visiting for a week, but not to
exceed thirty (30) days.
Space heater: means a self-contained heating appliance of either the convection type or the radiant type
and intended primarily to heat only a limited space or area such as one (1) room or two (2) adjoining rooms.
Structure: means that which is built or constructed, including without limitation because of enumeration,
buildings or dwellings for any occupancy or use whatsoever, fences, signs, billboards, fire
escapes/stairways, chute escapes railings, water tanks, towers, open grade steps, sidewalks or stairways,
tents or anything erected and framed of component parts which is fastened, anchored or rests on a permanent
foundation or on the ground.
Supplied: means paid for, furnished by, provided by, or under the control of the owner, operator or agent.
Temporary housing: means any tent, trailer, mobile home or any other structure used for human habitation
which is designed to be transportable and which is not attached to the ground, to another structure, or to
any utility system on the same premises for more than thirty (30) days.
Tenant: means a person, persons, co-partnership, firm or corporation occupying or using a building,
structure, dwelling or premises or any part or parts thereof owned by another.
Toxic substance: means any chemical product applied on the surface of, or incorporated into, any structural
or decorative material which constitutes a potential hazard to human health at acute or chronic exposure
levels, as defined by the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency or the United States Environmental
Protection Agency, which is modified as new substances are developed.
Trash: means the same definition as "Rubbish" defined herein.
Unsanitary conditions: means a condition constituting a danger or hazard to the health of a person or
persons occupying or frequenting a building, structure, dwelling or premises, or to the general public.
Variance: means a difference between that which is required or specified and that which is a grant of relief
from what is required or specified by the appropriate authorities.
Ventilation: means the process of supplying and removing air by natural or mechanical means to or from
any space.
Yard: means an open space, on the same zoning lot with a building, structure or dwelling unoccupied and
unobstructed from its lowest level to the sky, except as may otherwise be permitted in the City zoning
ordinance. A yard extends along a lot line and to a depth or width specified in the yard requirements of the
zoning ordinance.
SECTION 4-11-3 EXTERIOR PREMISES CONDITIONS
The owner of the premises shall be responsible for maintaining such premises in compliance with the
requirements of this Section. No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let to another for occupancy use
any such premises which do not comply with the following requirements:
A. Vacant Structures and Land. All vacant buildings, structures, dwellings and premises and/or vacant
land, shall be maintained in a clean, safe, secure and sanitary condition as provided herein so as not
to cause blight or adversely affect the public health, safety and welfare.
B. Litter/Sanitation. All vacant land, exterior property areas and premises shall be maintained in a
clean, safe and sanitary condition free from any accumulation of rubbish, litter, garbage, building
TITLE 4 – SAFETY
Page 58
materials, abandoned and/or inoperative vehicles, tall weeds, grasses, brush or tree trimming and
other similar materials.
C. Refuse Containers. All garbage/rubbish shall be stored in containers. The owner of any building
with more than three (3) dwelling units shall provide bulk refuse containers with close fitting covers
of an adequate capacity to meet the needs of the occupants of such building and shall arrange for
ample pick-up to control any overflow of refuse.
D. Grading and Drainage. All premises shall be graded and maintained so as to prevent the
accumulation of stagnant water thereon, or within any building, structure or dwelling located
thereon. This shall not apply to City approved detention ponds, retention ponds or drainage swales.
E. Downspout/Gutter/Sump Pump Discharge. All gutters and downspouts shall be securely and firmly
fastened to the building, structure or dwelling and shall be free of debris. Gutter, downspout and
sump pump discharge shall be retained upon the premises and directed away from adjacent
properties.
F. Insect/Rodent Control. An owner of a building, structure, dwelling or property shall be responsible
for the extermination of insects, rats, vermin, rodents or other pests in all exterior areas of the
premises of a single-family dwelling. Whenever infestation exists in the shared or public parts of
the premises of other than a single-family dwelling, extermination shall be the responsibility of the
owner. Every owner/operator shall maintain the premises in a "pest proof" fashion by preventing
the presence of insects, rodents and other vermin. This maintenance shall include construction
which will prevent the ingress or egress of such animals or insects to or from the premises, or from
gaining access to food, water or harborage. Such maintenance shall consist of the closing of
openings in the foundation, rooms, walls, sidewalk gratings and other places that may be reached
by such animals or insects by climbing, flying, or burrowing, and by the use of materials impervious
to rat gnawing.
G. Sidewalks/Driveways/Public Areas. All sidewalks, steps, driveways, parking spaces and similar
paved areas for public use shall be kept in a proper state of repair and free of all mud and other
debris. If any sidewalk or driveway or portion thereof by virtue of its state of repair shall constitute
a danger to public health and safety, the sidewalk or driveway or portion thereof shall be replaced
or repaired.
H. Landscaping.
1. No premises shall contain an uncontrolled growth of weeds and/or grasses. All premises
shall be frequently mowed. It is unlawful for any owner/operator of any premises, lot or
tract of land within the City to:
a) Permit weeds, grass or undergrowth to grow over a height of nine (9) inches or
more from the ground;
b) Permit dead trees to remain on the premises, lot or tract of land;
c) Permit the growth upon any premises, lot or tract of land of any noxious weeds,
such as jimson, burdock, ragweed, chokeweed, cockleburs and barberry bushes.
2. Every owner/operator shall:
a) Maintain any plant growth in a pruned and fertilized fashion;
b) Remove and discard fallen limbs, stumps, roots, obnoxious growth and branches
within five (5) business days;
c) Remove and discard dead and dying trees or other unnatural growth which have
rotted or are in a deteriorating condition within five (5) business days;
d) Trim all trees, hedges, shrubs and other plantings so as to avoid interference with,
or obstruction to, persons or vehicles passing on public ways, easements or
adjoining private property.
TITLE 4 – SAFETY
Page 59
I. Exhaust Vents. A person shall not construct, maintain or operate pipes, ducts, conductors, fans or
blowers discharging gases, steam vapor, hot air, grease, smoke odors or other gaseous or particulate
wastes so as to discharge directly upon abutting or adjacent public and private property or that of
another tenant.
J. Accessory Structures, Fences and Sheds.
1. All accessory structures, including detached garages, fences, sheds and walls, shall be
maintained in a structurally sound condition and kept in compliance with the Code. All
garages must have doors installed and maintained in good working order.
2. All exterior surface materials, including wood, vinyl, composition or metal siding, shall be
maintained in a weatherproof condition, properly surface coated and kept free of peeling
paint and graffiti. Such structures shall be kept in good repair so as not to become a
harborage for rats, rodents or insects.
3. It is unlawful for any owner or operator to place a temporary or snow fence on the property,
except for short periods of time attendant to construction on the side for which a City
building permit has been issued. Every owner/operator shall maintain all fences in good
repair and keep them free from rips or missing members. All fences shall be constructed of
sturdy, permanent material and be supported by rigid permanent supports, as per City code
specifications. The owner/operator shall protect all metal or wood fence materials, except
decay-resistant woods, against decay by using paint or other preservative materials.
K. Graffiti. The owner of the premises shall be responsible for the removal of any and all graffiti
placed upon any building, structure, dwelling, garage, driveway, fence or walkway on such
premises within forty-eight (48) hours of being notified.
L. Litter. Throwing or depositing garbage or refuse of any kind, including, but not limited to, cans,
bottles, paper and plastic in any street, alley, park or public way within the City is unlawful.
SECTION 4-11-4 EXTERIOR STRUCTURE
The operator, owner or occupant of the premises shall be responsible for maintaining the exterior of the
building, structure or dwelling on such premises in accordance with the requirements of this Section. No
person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let to another for occupancy use any such premises which do not
comply with the requirements of this section. The exterior of a building, structure or dwelling shall be
maintained in a structurally sound and sanitary condition so as not to pose a threat to the health and safety
of the occupants and so as to protect the occupants from the outer environment.
A. Structural Members. All supporting structural members of all buildings, structures and dwellings
shall be kept in a structurally sound condition, free of deterioration and capable of safely bearing
the loads that normal use may cause to be placed thereon.
B. Exterior Surfaces (Foundations, Walls, Roof).
1. Every foundation, exterior wall, roof and all other exterior surfaces shall be maintained in
a workmanlike state of maintenance and repair and shall be kept in such condition as to
exclude rats, birds, insects and rodents.
2. All exterior surfaces shall be maintained free of broken glass, loose shingles, crumbling
stone or brick, peeling paint, holes, breaks, loose or rotting boards or timbers, and any other
conditions which might admit rain or dampness to the interior portions of the walls/ceiling
and/or reflect deterioration or inadequate maintenance of the building, structure or
dwelling.
C. Foundation Walls. All foundation walls shall be maintained so as to carry the safe design and
operating loads of the building, structure or dwelling; said walls shall be maintained plumb and
free from open cracks and breaks so as not to be detrimental to the public safety and welfare.
TITLE 4 – SAFETY
Page 60
D. Exterior Walls. Every exterior wall shall be free of holes, breaks, loose or rotting boards or timbers,
paint and any other conditions which might admit rain or dampness to the interior portions of the
walls or to the occupied spaces of the building, structure or dwelling. All exterior surface materials,
including wood, vinyl, composition or metal siding, shall be maintained in a weather-proof
condition and shall be properly surface coated/painted when required to prevent deterioration.
E. Roofs, Soffits, Facia, Cornice, Eaves, Gutters and Downspouts. The roof, soffits, facia, cornice and
eaves shall be structurally sound, tight and not have defects which admit rain; roof drainage shall
be adequate to prevent rain water from causing dampness in the walls, ceilings or interior portions
of the building, structure or dwelling. Tarps or other plastic covering do not serve as an adequate
alternative and will only be permitted as a temporary covering for up to seven (7) business days.
Gutters and downspouts shall be installed and maintained as specified in the City codes. All gutters
and downspouts shall be securely and firmly fastened to the building, structure or dwelling and
shall be free of debris or leaves. The discharge of gutters and downspouts shall be retained upon
the premises and directed away from adjacent properties in a manner that does not create a public
nuisance.
F. Decorative Features. All cornices, entablatures, belt courses, corbels, terracotta trim, wall facings
and similar decorative features shall be maintained in good repair with proper anchorage and in a
safe condition.
G. Signs, Marquees, Fire Escapes, Awnings and Overhead Extensions. All canopies, marquees, signs,
awnings, stairways, fire escapes, standpipes, exhaust ducts and similar overhead extensions shall
be maintained in good repair and be properly anchored so as to be kept in a safe and sound
condition. They shall be protected from the elements and against decay and rust by the periodic
application of weather-coating material such as paint or other protective treatments.
H. Chimneys. All chimneys, cooling towers, smoke stacks and similar appurtenances shall be
maintained in a structurally safe, sound condition and in good repair and shall not have any loose
or missing mortar or materials. All exposed surfaces of metal or wood shall be protected from the
elements and against decay or rust by periodic application of weather-coating material such as paint
or similar surface treatments.
I. Stairs, Porches and Balconies. Every exterior stair, steps, porch, balcony and all appurtenances
attached thereto shall be so constructed as to be safe to use and capable of supporting the loads to
which it is subjected and shall be kept in sound condition and good repair. Exterior steps or stairs
shall have uniform risers and uniform treads. Exterior stairs and every porch, which are more than
two risers high, shall have handrails so located and of such design as to be safe to use and capable
of supporting the loads to which it is subjected. Every handrail or railing shall be firmly fastened
and must be maintained in good condition. Properly balustrade railings no less than thirty (30)
inches in height and spaced no more than five (5) inches apart, vertically or horizontal, and capable
of bearing normally imposed loads as required, shall be placed on the open portions of stairs,
balconies, landings and stairwells.
J. Weather tight Windows/Doors. Every window sash shall be fully supplied with glass window panes
or an approved substitute which contain no open cracks or holes. Every window and door shall be
fitted reasonably in its frame and be weather tight and rodent and insect proof. Weather stripping
shall be used to exclude wind or rain from entering the building, dwelling or structure. Every door
hinge, door latch, door and window shall be maintained in good working condition.
K. Window, Skylight and Door Frames. Every window, skylight, door and frame shall be constructed
and maintained in such relation to the adjacent wall construction so as to exclude rain as completely
as possible and substantially exclude wind from entering the building, dwelling or structure. Every
window, skylight and door shall be fitted reasonably in its frame and be weather tight. Windows,
TITLE 4 – SAFETY
Page 61
skylights, doors and frames shall not be boarded up except temporarily in the event of a fire or
other emergency and then only for a period not to exceed sixty (60) days.
L. Glazing. Every required window sash shall be fully supplied with glazing materials which are
without open cracks or holes.
M. Openable Windows. Every window, other than a fixed window, shall be capable of being easily
opened and shall be held in position by window hardware.
N. Door Hardware. Every exterior door, door hinge and door latch shall be maintained in good
condition. Door locks in dwelling units shall be in good repair and be capable of rightly securing
the door. No person shall let to another for occupancy any dwelling or dwelling unit unless all
exterior doors of the dwelling are equipped with functioning locking devices. Locks which can be
secured from the exterior of the dwelling or dwelling unit which cannot be unlocked from the
interior are expressly prohibited.
O. Insect Screens--Storm Doors/Windows. Every door and window or other outside opening used for
ventilation purposes shall be supplied with approved sixteen (16) mesh screening and storm
door/storm windows; every swinging screen door or storm door shall have a self-closing device in
good working condition. Windows located at or near ground level shall be supplied with adequate
screens to prevent entry of rats or rodents into the building, structure or dwelling. Screens shall not
be required in any dwelling units or rooms above the fifth floor.
P. Basement Hatchways. Every basement or cellar hatch-way shall be so constructed and maintained
as to prevent the entrance of rodents, rain, rats, insects and surface water drainage into the building,
structure or dwelling.
Q. Guards for Basement Windows. Every basement or cellar window which is openable shall be
supplied with rodent-proof shields or storm windows or other material affording protection against
the entry of rats, rodents, or insects.
R. Matching Exterior Repairs. Whenever repair, replacement or maintenance of exterior walls or roofs
is required, such repair, replacement or maintenance shall be undertaken so as to match, conform
and be consistent with the existing exterior.
S. Exterior Accessories. Mailboxes, television antennas, doorbells, coachlights, entrance lights, etc.,
shall be securely and firmly fastened to the dwelling and maintained in good repair and working
condition.
T. Sump Pump Discharge. Sump pump discharge shall be directed away from adjacent properties and
retained on the premises. Tying of sump pump discharge directly into the sewer system is
prohibited.
U. Exterior Maintenance. The exterior finish of all buildings, structures and dwellings shall be
maintained; chipped and peeling paint shall be removed and replaced with new materials, damaged
and deteriorated walls shall be removed, replaced or resurfaced, failing mortar shall be
reconditioned and tuck-pointed. Damaged or deteriorated roof; doors and windows shall be repaired
and/or replaced to a structurally sound condition. Fences, porches, stairways, balconies and
entrances shall be maintained in good condition and repair and protected by weather resistant
materials.
V. Lead-Based Paint. Lead-based paint with a lead content of more than one-half (1/2) of one (1)
percent shall not be applied to any interior or exterior surface of a building, structure, dwelling,
dwelling unit or child care facility, including fences and outbuildings at these locations. Existing
interior and exterior painted surfaces of buildings, structures, dwelling units and child care facilities
that contain an excess of one-half of one percent lead shall be removed or covered with paneling
or other suitable covering approved by the code enforcement officer.
TITLE 4 – SAFETY
Page 62
SECTION 4-11-5 INTERIOR STRUCTURE
The operator, owner or occupant of the premises shall be responsible for maintaining the interior of the
building, structure or dwelling of such premises in accordance with the requirements of this section. No
person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let to another for occupancy use any such premises which do not
comply with the requirements of this Section. The owner of a building, structure or dwelling shall maintain
the interior and its equipment, in a structurally sound and sanitary condition so as not to pose a threat to the
health, welfare and safety of the occupants and shall protect the occupants from the environment.
A. Structural Members. The supporting structural members of every building, structure or dwelling
shall be maintained in a structurally sound condition, not showing any evidence of deterioration
which would render them incapable of carrying the imposed loads which they were intended to
carry.
B. Interior Surface. All floors, walls, ceilings, windows, doors and other interior surfaces shall be
maintained in good, clean, sanitary, working condition and shall be substantially rodent proof; free
of holes, free of large cracks in wallboard, paneling or other material.
C. Safe Condition. Every interior floor, interior wall, ceiling, inside stair, every enclosed porch and
every appurtenance thereto shall be safe to use and capable of supporting the loads that normal use
may cause to be placed thereon and shall be kept in sound condition and good repair. Every inside
stair or step shall have uniform risers, uniform treads, and handrails for two (2) or more steps.
D. Lead-Based Paint. Lead-based paint with a lead content of more than one-half (1/2) of one (1)
percent shall not be applied to any interior or exterior surface of a building, structure, dwelling,
dwelling unit or child care facility, including fences and outbuildings at these locations. Existing
interior and exterior painted surfaces of buildings, structures, dwelling units and child care facilities
that contain an excess of one-half of one percent lead shall be removed or covered with paneling
or other suitable covering approved by the Code Enforcement Officer.
E. Bathroom, Kitchen and Other Floors. Every water closet compartment, bathroom and kitchen floor
surface shall be constructed and maintained so as to be substantially impervious to water; to prevent
leaking into adjacent rooms and so as to permit such floor to be easily kept in a clean and sanitary
condition. All other floors shall be constructed and maintained in a structurally sound condition
and capable of supporting anticipated loads.
F. Plumbing Fixtures. Every plumbing fixture and all water and waste pipes shall be properly installed
and maintained in good sanitary working condition, free from defects, leaks and obstruction.
G. Facilities Equipment--Utilities. Every supplied facility, piece of equipment or utility which is
required under this Code shall be maintained in satisfactory working condition so that it will
function safely and effectively.
H. Free From Dampness. Cellars, basements and crawl spaces, in every building, structure or dwelling
shall be maintained reasonably free from damp conditions likely to lead to decay, mold or
deterioration of the structure.
I. Sanitation. The interior of every building, structure or dwelling shall be maintained in a clean and
sanitary condition free from any accumulation of rubbish, refuse or garbage. Rubbish, garbage and
other refuse shall be properly kept inside temporary storage facilities as required by this Code.
Garbage or refuse shall not be allowed to accumulate or be stored in public hallways or stairways.
J. Rat proofing. Every building, structure, dwelling, multiple dwelling or accessory structure and the
premises on which it is located, shall be maintained in a rat-free and rat-proof condition. All
openings in the exterior walls, foundations, basements, ground or first floors and roofs which have
a one-half (1/2) inch diameter or more opening shall be rat proofed in an approved manner if they
TITLE 4 – SAFETY
Page 63
are within forty-eight (48) inches of the existing exterior ground level, or if they may be reached
by rats from the ground by climbing unguarded pipes, wires, cornices, stairs, roofs and other items
such as trees or vines or by burrowing. All sewers, pipes, drains or conduits and openings around
such pipes and conduits shall be constructed to prevent the ingress and egress of rats to or from a
building, structure, dwelling, multiple dwelling or accessory structure.
K. Exit Facilities. All interior stairs and railings and other exit facilities of every building, structure
dwelling shall be maintained in sound condition and good repair by replacing treads and risers that
evidence excessive wear or are broken, warped or loose. Every inside stair shall be so constructed
and maintained as to be safe to use and be capable of supporting the anticipated loads.
L. Stairs, Porches and Railings. Adequate interior stairs, porches, railings and/or other exit facilities
shall be provided in every structure and shall be maintained in a structurally sound and safe
condition.
M. Handrails. Every interior stairwell and every interior flight of stairs, which is more than two (2)
risers high, shall have handrails and every open portion of a stair, porch, landing and balcony which
is more than thirty (30) inches above the floor or grade below shall have guardrails. Every handrail,
railing and guardrail shall be firmly fastened and capable of bearing normally imposed loads and
shall be maintained in good condition. Properly balustrade railings, spaced no more than five (5)
inches apart, capable of bearing normally imposed loads as required, shall be placed on the open
portions of stairs, balconies, landings and stairwells.
N. Storage of Drugs/Poisons. Each dwelling unit shall have facilities for the safe storage of drugs and
household poisons.
O. Fire/Smoke Detectors. All buildings of residential or mixed occupancy shall be equipped with
approved smoke detectors in the manner prescribed as follows: smoke detectors shall be installed
outside of each separate sleeping area in the immediate vicinity of the bedrooms and on each
additional story of the family living unit including basements but excluding crawl spaces and
unfinished attics. The approved smoke detector shall be installed on the ceiling and at least six (6)
inches from any wall and thirty-six (36) inches from any cold air return or warm air vent. The
approved smoke detector may be installed on a wall, located from six (6) inches to twelve (12)
inches from the ceiling and thirty-six (36) inches from any cold air return or warm air supply vent,
and within fifteen (15) feet of all rooms used for sleeping purposes, with not less than one (1)
detector per living level. All multiple dwellings and buildings of mixed occupancy having any
residential units shall contain not less than one (1) approved smoke detector at the uppermost
ceiling of all interior stairwells. All approved smoke detectors herein required shall be placed and
installed per the National Fire Protection Association Life Safety Code and maintained in working
condition.
P. Carbon Monoxide Detectors. All buildings of residential or mixed occupancy shall be equipped
with approved carbon monoxide detectors in accordance with State of Illinois law.
SECTION 4-11-6 SPACE REQUIREMENTS
No person shall occupy, or let to be occupied, any dwelling or dwelling unit, for the purpose of living
therein, which does not comply with the following requirements; the owner shall be responsible for
maintaining such building, structure or dwelling in compliance with these requirements:
A. Dwelling Units. The maximum occupancy of any dwelling unit shall not exceed the lesser value of
the following two (2) requirements:
1. For the first occupancy of a dwelling unit there shall be at least two hundred (200) square
feet of floor area and there shall be at least one hundred fifty (150) square feet of floor area
TITLE 4 – SAFETY
Page 64
for every additional occupancy thereof; the floor area to be calculated on the basis of total
habitable room area.
2. No more than one (1) family or two (2) occupants shall occupy a dwelling unit. For
purposes of this property maintenance code, “family” shall be defined as one or more
persons related by blood, marriage or adoption; or five (5) or fewer persons, all of whom
are not necessarily related to each of the others by blood, marriage or adoption, all living
together as a single housekeeping unit and using common kitchen facilities (that is, an
unrelated family).
B. Sleeping Area. Every room occupied for sleeping purposes by one (1) occupant shall contain at
least seventy (70) square feet of floor area and every room occupied for sleeping purposes by more
than one (1) person shall contain at least fifty (50) square feet of floor area for each additional
occupant thereof.
C. Access.
1. No dwelling or dwelling unit containing two (2) or more sleeping rooms shall have room
arrangements such that access to a bathroom or water closet compartment intended for use
by occupants of more than one (1) sleeping room can be had only by going through another
sleeping room; nor shall room arrangements be such that access to a sleeping room can be
had only by going through another sleeping room. A bathroom or water closet compartment
shall not be used as the only passageway to any habitable room, hall, basement or cellar or
to the exterior of the dwelling unit.
2. Every dwelling unit shall be arranged in such a manner that each room is accessible from
every other room, rooms or other areas not exclusively a part of such dwelling unit except
through a doorway equipped with a door and a lock.
D. Overcrowding. If any dwelling unit is overcrowded, the Code Enforcement Officer may order the
number of persons sleeping or occupying the room to be so reduced that it shall not exceed the
maximum occupancy permitted in Subsection A of this Section.
E. Ceiling Height.
1. At least one-half (1/2) of the floor area of every habitable room shall have a clear ceiling
height of at least seven and one-half (7 ½)feet; the floor area of that part of any room which
is less than five (5) feet shall not be considered as part of the floor area in computing the
total floor area of the room for the purpose of determining the maximum permissible
occupancy thereof.
2. All public corridors and hallways shall have a ceiling height of not less than seven and onehalf
(7 ½) feet. Hallways within dwelling units shall have a ceiling clearance of not less
than seven (7) feet.
3. Bathroom/toilet compartments and utility nonhabitable basement rooms shall have a
ceiling clearance of not less than seven (7) feet.
F. Closet Space. Every dwelling unit shall have at least four (4) square feet of floor-to-ceiling height
closet space for the personal effects of each permissible occupant; if it is lacking in whole or in
part, an amount of space equal in square footage to the deficiency shall be subtracted from the area
of habitable room space used in determining permissible occupancy.
SECTION 4-11-7 REQUIRED EQUIPMENT AND FACILITIES
No person shall occupy or let to be occupied any dwelling or dwelling unit, for the purpose of living therein,
which does not comply with the following requirements:
A. Bathroom. Within every dwelling unit there shall be a nonhabitable room which affords privacy to
a person within the room and which is equipped with a flush water closet in good working
TITLE 4 – SAFETY
Page 65
condition. The flush water closet shall be equipped with easily cleanable surfaces, be properly
connected to a water system that at all times provides an adequate amount of running water under
pressure to cause the water closet to be operated properly and shall be properly connected to a
sewer system or septic system.
1. Such room shall be equipped with a solid door that can be locked for privacy.
2. The floors, walls and fixtures in the room shall be grouted, caulked or sealed to prevent the
escape of moisture and entry of insects into adjoining sections of the dwelling or dwelling
unit.
B. Lavatory/Water Closet. Within every dwelling unit there shall be a lavatory sink. The lavatory sink
may be in the same room as the flush water closet, or, if located in another room, the lavatory sink
shall be located in close proximity to the door leading directly into the room and properly connected
to a water supply system which meets appropriate City codes and provides at all times an adequate
amount of heated and unheated running water under pressure, and which is properly connected to
a sewer system or septic system. Water inlets for lavatory sinks shall be located above the overflow
rim of these facilities. Such room shall be equipped with a solid door that can be locked for privacy.
C. Direct Access to Lavatory and Water Closet. No dwelling or dwelling unit containing two (2) or
more sleeping rooms shall have room arrangements so that access to a bathroom or water closet
compartment, intended for use by occupants of more than one (1) sleeping room, can be had only
by going through another sleeping room; nor shall room arrangements be such that access to a
sleeping room can be had only by going through another sleeping room or a bathroom or water
closet compartment. Such room shall be equipped with a solid door that can be locked for privacy.
D. Bathtub and Shower. Within every dwelling unit there shall be a room which affords privacy to a
person within the room and that which is equipped with a bathtub or shower in good working
condition. The bathtub or shower may be in the same room as the flush water closet or in another
room and shall be properly connected to a water supply system and provides at all times an adequate
amount of heated water at a temperature of one hundred twenty (120) degrees Fahrenheit and
unheated water under pressure, and which is connected to a sewer system or septic system. Water
inlets for bathtubs shall be located above the overflow rim of these facilities. Such room shall be
equipped with a solid door that can be locked for privacy.
E. Kitchen/Food Preparation Room. Every dwelling unit shall have a room or portion of a room in
which food may be prepared and/or cooked, which shall be equipped with the following:
1. Kitchen Sink. A kitchen sink in good working condition and properly connected to a water
supply system and which provides at all times an adequate amount of heated and unheated
running water under pressure, and which is connected to a sewer system or septic system.
2. Cabinets/Shelves. Cabinet and/or shelves for the storage of eating, drinking and cooking
equipment and utensils, and for food that does not under ordinary summer conditions
require refrigeration for safe keeping; and a counter or table shall be of sound construction
and furnished with surfaces that are easily cleanable and that will not import any toxic or
harmful effect to food.
3. Refrigeration and Cooking Equipment. A stove, or similar device for cooking food, and a
refrigerator or similar device, for the safe storage of food at temperatures less than fortyfive
(45) degrees Fahrenheit, but more than thirty-two (32) degrees Fahrenheit, under
ordinary maximum summer conditions, which are properly installed with all necessary
connections for safe, sanitary and efficient operation; provided that such stove, refrigerator
and/or similar devices need not be installed when a dwelling unit is not occupied and when
the occupant is expected to provide same upon occupancy, and also provided that sufficient
space and adequate connections for the safe and efficient installation and operation of the
stove, refrigerator and/or similar devices are provided. Every piece of such equipment shall
be so constructed and installed so that it will function safely and effectively and shall be
TITLE 4 – SAFETY
Page 66
maintained in sound working condition. Portable cooking equipment employing flame, and
cooking equipment using gasoline or kerosene as fuel for cooking are prohibited; provided,
however, that this subsection shall not apply to fondue dishes, chafing dishes or other
similar portable cooking equipment.
F. Electrical Outlets. Every kitchen shall be equipped with not less than three (3) duplex outlets.
Toilet Rooms. No person shall occupy or let to be occupied any dwelling or dwelling unit, for the
purpose of living therein, which does not comply with the following requirements. The owner of
the dwelling or dwelling unit shall maintain such dwelling or dwelling unit in compliance with the
following requirements:
1. Privacy. Toilet rooms and bathrooms shall be designed and arranged for privacy. Such
rooms shall be equipped with solid doors that can be locked for privacy and such doors and
locks shall be maintained in good working condition.
2. Direct Access. Toilet rooms shall not be used as a passageway to a hall or other space, or
to the exterior. A toilet room or bathroom in a dwelling unit shall be accessible from any
sleeping room without passing through another sleeping room.
G. Floors. Bathrooms and toilet rooms shall be provided with floors of moisture resistant material.
Such floors shall be structurally sound, in good repair, safe to use and capable of supporting the
loads of normal use. All floors shall be rodent proof; free of holes, wide cracks and loose,
protruding, warped or rotting floor boards which might possibly constitute an accident hazard. Such
floor shall be easily kept clean and sanitary. Plumbing Fixtures. No person shall occupy, or let to
be occupied, any dwelling or dwelling unit, for the purpose living therein, which does not comply
with the following requirements. The owner of the dwelling or dwelling unit shall maintain such
dwelling or dwelling unit in compliance with the following requirements:
1. Connections. Water supply lines, plumbing fixtures, vents and drains shall be properly
installed, connected and maintained in good working order and shall be kept free from
obstructions, leaks and defects, and be capable of performing the function for which they
were originally designed.
2. Maintained Clean and Sanitary. All plumbing facilities shall be maintained in a clean and
sanitary condition by the occupant of the dwelling or dwelling unit so as not to breed insects
and rats or produce dangerous or offensive gases, odors or mold.
3. Access for Cleaning. Plumbing fixtures shall be so installed so as to permit easy access for
cleaning both the fixture and the area about it.
H. Water Systems. No person shall occupy, or let to another for occupancy, or use any building,
structure, dwelling or portion thereof; or premises, which does not comply with the requirements
of this Section.
1. Connections. Every sink lavatory, bathtub, shower, drinking fountain, water closet or other
facility shall be properly connected to either a public water system or an approved private
water system. All sinks, lavatories, bathtubs and showers shall be supplied with hot and
cold running water.
2. Contamination. The water supply shall be maintained free from contamination and all
water inlets for plumbing fixtures shall be located above the overflow rim of the fixture.
3. Supply. The water supply system shall be installed and maintained to provide, at all times,
a supply of water to plumbing fixtures, devices and appurtenances, in sufficient volume
and at pressures adequate to enable them to function satisfactorily.
4. Water Heating Facilities. Where hot water is provided, water heating facilities shall be
installed in an approved manner, properly maintained in a safe working condition and
properly connected with hot water lines to the fixture required to be supplied with the hot
water. Water heating facilities shall be capable of heating water to such a temperature as
to permit an adequate amount of water to be drawn at every required kitchen sink, lavatory,
TITLE 4 – SAFETY
Page 67
bathtub, shower or laundry facility, at a temperature of not less than one hundred twenty
(120) degrees Fahrenheit.
5. Venting. No owner or occupant shall install, operate, or use a heating device, including hot
water heating units, which employs the combustion of carbonaceous fuel, which is not
vented to the outside of the building, structure or dwelling, in an approved manner and
which is not supplied with sufficient air to continuously support the combustion of the fuel.
All heating devices shall be constructed, installed and operated in such a manner so as to
minimize accidental burns.
I. Sewage Systems. Every sink, lavatory, bathtub, shower, drinking fountain, water closet or other
such facility, in a building, structure or dwelling, shall be connected to a public sewer system or
septic system. The owner shall provide and maintain such sewer system in compliance with the
requirements of this Section. No person shall occupy or let to another for occupancy or use any
building, structure, dwelling or portion thereof which does not comply with the following
requirements:
1. Maintenance. Every plumbing stack, waste and water line shall be so installed and
maintained as to function properly and shall be kept free from obstruction, leaks, and
defects to prevent structural deterioration or health hazards.
2. Storm Drainage. An approved system of storm water disposal shall be provided and
maintained by the owner of the building, structure or dwelling, for the safe and efficient
drainage of roofs and paved areas; yards, courts and other open areas on the premises.
J. Heating Facilities. No person shall occupy as owner, occupant or let to another for occupancy any
dwelling or dwelling unit, for the purpose of living therein, which does not comply with the
following requirements.
1. Heating Equipment. Every dwelling unit, or rooming unit shall have heating facilities
which are properly installed, are maintained in safe and good working condition, and are
capable of safely and adequately heating all habitable rooms, bathrooms, toilet rooms and
water closet compartments as provided in this Section. Heating plants designed or intended
to serve one or more dwelling units shall not be located in a habitable room.
2. Cooking and Heating Equipment. All cooking and heating equipment, components and
accessories in every heating, cooking and water-heating device shall be maintained free
from leaks and obstructions and kept functioning properly so as to be free from fire, health
and accident hazards. Portable equipment employing flame is prohibited except for
approved residential-type food trays of salvers which are heated by a candle or alcohol
lamp.
3. Installation. All mechanical equipment shall be properly installed and safely maintained in
good working condition and be capable of performing the function for which it was
designed and intended.
4. Venting. No owner or occupant shall install, operate, or use a heating device, including hot
water heating units, which employs the combustion of carbonaceous fuel, which is not
vented to the outside of the dwelling or dwelling unit in an approved manner, and which is
not supplied with sufficient air to continuously support the combustion of the fuel. All
heating devices shall be constructed, installed and operated in such a manner so as to
minimize accidental burns.
5. Maintenance. All fuel burning equipment shall be connected to an approved chimney, flue
or vent; such flue, chimney or vent shall be structurally sound and functional.
6. Clearance. All required clearances to combustible materials shall be maintained.
7. Safety Control. All safety controls for fuel burning equipment shall be maintained in
effective operation.
8. Combustion Air. A supply of air for complete combustion of the fuel and for ventilation of
the space shall be provided for the fuel burning equipment.
TITLE 4 – SAFETY
Page 68
9. Fireplace. Fireplaces and other construction and devices intended for use similar to a
fireplace shall be stable and structurally safe and connected to approved chimneys.
10. Climate Control. When facilities for interior climate control (heating, cooling and/or
humidity) are integral functions of buildings, structures or dwellings containing dwelling
units, such facilities shall be maintained and operated in a continuous manner in accordance
with the designed capacity of the installed equipment. During instances when the integral
equipment is inoperative because of power or mechanical failure, alternative provisions for
fresh air, ventilation of each dwelling shall be provided.
K. Electrical Facilities. No person shall occupy as owner, occupant or let to another for occupancy,
any dwelling or dwelling unit for the purpose of living therein, which does not comply with the
following requirements:
1. Outlets. Every habitable room shall contain at least two (2) separate wall type electric
convenience outlets or one (1) such convenience outlet and one (1) supplied electric light
fixture, and every water closet compartment, bathroom, furnace room or laundry room shall
contain at least one (1) wall or ceiling type electric light fixture. Every kitchen shall have
an additional grounded duplex electric convenience outlet in addition, to the requirements
for a habitable room and this extra outlet shall be a minimum of six (6) feet from any other
required outlet for the purpose of refrigeration.
2. Installation. All electrical equipment, wiring, appliances, and electrical outlets and fixtures
shall be properly installed and maintained in good and safe working condition and shall be
connected to the source of electric power in a safe manner.
3. Temporary Wiring. Temporary wiring or extension cords shall not be used as permanent
wiring.
4. Defective System. Where it is found, in the opinion of the Code Enforcement Officer, that
the electrical system in a building, structure or dwelling constitutes a hazard to the
occupants by reason of inadequate service, improper fusing, insufficient outlets, improper
wiring or installation, deterioration or damage, or for similar reasons, the Code
Enforcement Officer shall require the defects to be corrected to eliminate the hazard within
five (5) business days.
5. Maintenance. All outlets, fixtures and connecting electrical lines required by this Section
shall be maintained, by the owner of the dwelling or dwelling unit, in a good, safe and
workable condition.
L. Ingress/Egress. No person shall occupy as owner, occupant or let to another for occupancy, any
dwelling or dwelling unit for the purpose of living therein, which does not comply with the
following requirements:
1. Safe Ingress/Egress. A safe, continuous and unobstructed means of ingress/egress shall be
provided from the interior of a building, structure or dwelling to the exterior at a street, or
to a yard, court, or passageway leading to a public open area at grade, and not limited to
an elevator.
2. Direct Exit. Every dwelling unit shall have access directly to the outside or to a public
corridor.
3. Fire Escapes. All fire escapes shall be maintained working condition and be structurally
sound.
4. Exit Routes. Exits from dwelling units shall not lead through other such units, or through
water closet compartments or bathrooms.
5. Exit Signs. All exit signs shall be maintained and in a visible condition.
6. Dwelling Unit Security. No dwelling unit shall be accessible from any hallway, room or
other area not exclusively a part of such dwelling unit except through a doorway equipped
with a door and a lock.
TITLE 4 – SAFETY
Page 69
M. Accumulations and Storage. No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let to another for
occupancy, any dwelling or dwelling unit, for the purpose of living therein, which does not comply
with the following requirements:
1. Accumulations. Waste, refuse or other materials shall not be allowed to accumulate in
stairways, passageways, doors, windows, fire escapes or other means of ingress/egress.
2. Flammable Matter. Highly flammable or explosive matter, such as paints, volatile oils and
cleaning fluids, or combustible refuse, such as waste paper, boxes and rags, shall not be
accumulated or stored on residential premises except in reasonable quantities consistent
with normal usage.
3. Residential Unit. A dwelling unit shall not be located within a building or structure
containing an establishment handling, dispensing or storing flammable liquids with a flash
point of one hundred ten (110) degrees Fahrenheit or lower, except as provided for in the
City Code.
SECTION 4-11-8 ENFORCEMENT
A. Enforcement Authority. The following persons shall be responsible for the enforcement of the
property maintenance standards set forth in this chapter:
1. Supervisor of the Code Enforcement Officer or the Code Enforcement Officer.
B. Collection and Settlement.
1. City Attorney. The City Attorney may take any steps necessary to prosecute violators of
property maintenance codes in court, or to collect money owed relating to the property
maintenance code. The City Attorney is authorized to negotiate settlements of any such
enforcement or collection action.
C. Official Record. An official record shall be kept of the Zoning and Code Enforcement Department
business and activities with regard to this chapter and its provisions.
D. Inspections.
1. The Code Enforcement Department and/or the Code Enforcement Officer may make
regular inspections to determine the condition of the buildings, structures, dwellings and
premises located within the City for the purposes of safeguarding the health and safety of
all occupants and of the general public. The Code supervisor or the Code Enforcement
Officer may make such inspections whenever he or she shall deem such an inspection
necessary; provided, however, that such inspections of the interior of the premises must be
made at reasonable times and upon reasonable notice to, and with the consent of the owner
or operator and the occupant, except when an existing emergency requires immediate
action. Inspections shall also be made by the Code supervisor and/or the Code Enforcement
Officer, subject to the following conditions:
a) If an inspection is requested in writing by the owner or occupant;
b) If a building permit has been applied for by the owner or occupant; or
c) If an individual files a court complaint against the owner or occupant and that
individual acts as a complaining witness in court, and the court directs the
supervisor of the Code Enforcement Officer or the Code Enforcement Officer to
inspect the building, structure or dwelling.
E. Credentials. The Code Enforcement Department and/or the Code Enforcement Officer, shall, upon
request, disclose proper credentials of his or her respective office for the purpose of inspecting any
and all buildings, structures, dwellings and premises in the performance of his or her duties under
this Code.
TITLE 4 – SAFETY
Page 70
F. Inspection Upon Warrant--Right of Entry. Whenever the Code Enforcement Officer, after
presentation of proper credentials and request for entry to inspect is refused access to any building,
structure or dwelling, by any owner, occupant or other person in charge subject to the provisions
of this Code, the Code Enforcement Officer is authorized to petition any judge, through the City
Attorney, for the issuance of a warrant authorizing the inspection of such building, structure or
dwelling for the purpose of making such inspections as are necessary for the enforcement of the
provisions of this Code and/or all other City codes.
G. Owner’s Right of Entry. Every occupant of a building, structure or dwelling shall give the owner
thereof, or his or her agent or employee access to any part of such building, structure or dwelling,
for the purpose of making such repairs or alterations as are necessary to effect compliance with the
provisions of this Chapter or with any lawful rule or regulation adopted or any lawful order issued
pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter. Entry pursuant to this subsection shall be made only at
reasonable times and after reasonable notice to the occupant, unless an existing emergency requires
immediate action.
H. Right of Refusal to Access--Owner Occupied Single-Family Residence. The owner of a singlefamily
residence in which he or she is the occupant, has a right of refusal to the City’s Code
Enforcement/Zoning Department without prior showing of a petition for right of entry, warrant or
for cause.
SECTION 4-11-9 CONDEMNATION – UNFIT/UNSAFE STRUCTURES
A. Structure Unfit for Human Habitation. When a building, structure or dwelling, or part thereof is
found by the Code Enforcement Officer to be unsafe, unlawful or because of the degree in which
it lacks maintenance it is in disrepair, unsanitary, vermin or rat infested, contains filth and
contamination, or lacks ventilation, illumination, sanitary facilities, heating facilities or other
essential equipment required by this Code, or because of its location constitutes a hazard to its
occupants or to the public, it may be condemned pursuant to the provisions of this Code and may
be placarded and vacated. Any such condemned building, structure or dwelling shall not be reoccupied
without the approval of the Code Enforcement Officer. Unsafe equipment shall be
placarded and placed out of service and repaired or replaced within five (5) business days.
B. Unsafe Structure. Any building, structure or dwelling shall be designated as unfit for human
habitation when any aforesaid and following defects or conditions are found and when in the
judgment of the Code Enforcement Officer such defects create a hazard to the health, safety or
welfare of the occupants or of the public.
C. Unsafe Equipment. Unsafe equipment includes any boiler, heating equipment, elevator, moving
stairway, electrical wiring or device, flammable liquid container or other equipment on the premises
or within the building, structure or dwelling, which is in such disrepair or condition that it is found
to be a hazard to life, health, property or safety of the public or occupants of the premises and/or
building, structure or dwelling. Unsafe equipment may contribute to the finding that the building,
structure or dwelling is unsafe or unfit for human habitation or use until repaired.
D. Closing of Vacant Structure. If a building, structure or dwelling, or part thereof is vacant and
designated unfit for human habitation, occupancy of use; and is not in danger of structural collapse,
the Code Enforcement Officer may post a placard of condemnation on the premises and order the
building, structure or dwelling closed up so as to not be an attractive nuisance to children. Upon
failure of the owner to close up the building, structure or dwelling within the time specified in the
order, the Code Supervisor or Code Enforcement Officer shall cause the building, structure or
dwelling to be closed through any available public agency, or by contract or arrangement by private
TITLE 4 – SAFETY
Page 71
persons, and the cost thereof shall be charged against the real estate upon which the building,
structure or dwelling is located and a lien shall be placed upon such real estate.
E. Vacation of Premises--Closing of Occupied Structures.
1. If a building, structure or dwelling, or part thereof is unfit for human habitation, and
occupied, the Code Enforcement Officer shall post the building, structure or dwelling, as
unfit for habitation and use and shall order the building, structure or dwelling vacated
within a reasonable period of time; such period of time shall not be less than one (1), nor
more than three (3) days.
2. No building, structure or dwelling which has been designated as unfit for human habitation,
posted as such and vacated, shall be used again for human habitation until written approval
is secured from the Code Enforcement Officer and the notice is removed.
F. Unfit Designation Rescinded. The Code Enforcement Officer shall rescind the designation of unfit
for human habitation, and the notice shall be removed when the defect or condition upon which
such designation and posting was based has been corrected or eliminated and such building,
structure or dwelling is deemed by the Code Enforcement Officer to be safe, sanitary and fit for
human habitation.
G. Removal of Notice of Unfit Structure. No person shall deface or remove the notice from any
building, structure or dwelling which has been designated as unfit for human habitation and has
been posted as such, other than the Code Enforcement Officer.
H. Unfit Structure--One (1) Year Vacant. Any building, structure or dwelling having been designated
as unfit for human habitation and/or having been left vacant or abandoned for a period of one (1)
year or longer, shall be returned to full code compliance as per this Chapter, the City Zoning
Ordinance and other applicable City codes or ordinances before human habitation can resume.
I. Hearing--Unfit Structure. Any person affected by any decision of the Code Enforcement Officer,
or by any designation or posting of a building, structure or dwelling as unfit for human habitation,
may be granted a hearing on the matter before the Code Supervisor, Code Enforcement Officer,
and/or City Council under the procedures set forth herein.
SECTION 4-11-10 DEMOLITION, REPAIR AND MAINTENANCE OF BUILDINGS AND
STRUCTURES
A. Application for a Permit.
1. A permit is required for the partial or the complete demolition of any structure within the
City of West Peoria.
2. Demolition Permit fee for residential and commercial properties is $100.00. Demolition
Permit fee for garage or accessory structure is $25.00 (See West Peoria Permit Fee
Schedule, Title 11)
3. A site plan of the property showing the dimensions of the building(s) to be demolished
must be included with the application.
4. Applications are available at www.cityofwestpeoria.com or at City Hall.
5. The Code Enforcement Officers will review the application and issue a permit within five
(5) days of the review (Ord. 2009-6)
B. Bonds.
1. All demolitions must be done by a licensed, insured and bonded demolition contractor or
by the property owner.
2. If done by a contractor, a fifteen thousand dollar ($15,000) performance bond must be on
file at City Hall.
TITLE 4 – SAFETY
Page 72
3. If done by the property owner, a cash bond of fifty cents ($.50) per square foot of the first
floor building area is required. The cash bond will be returned following completion of
the final inspection.
C. Disconnect All Utilities.
1. All sewer, water, electrical and gas lines must be disconnected, capped and secured before
beginning demolition work. Begin by calling JULIE – 811 or www.illinois1call.com.
They will mark existing utilities.
2. You will need to notify the West Peoria Code Enforcement Officer to arrange for an
inspection of utility disconnection.
D. Demolition.
1. All foundations and footings must be removed to a minimum of two (2) feet below finish
grade.
2. All subterranean walls, floors, and footings must be removed. All depressions, cavities,
cisterns or wells must be filled with approved granular material, such as sand, to within six
(6) inches of final grade. Final grading must be done so that no depression or cavity exists
and storm water cannot stand on the demolition site. Six (6) inches of earth is required
over any depression, cavity, and cistern or well filled with fill material. All debris must be
removed from site. Debris cannot be used for fill.
3. The finished grade shall have six inches (6”) of top soil and be sodded or sowed with grass
seed and straw.
4. Burning any material or debris is strictly prohibited within City limits.
5. All asbestos, lead, and other toxic or hazardous materials shall be removed and disposed
of in compliance with all State and Federal regulations.
E. Inspection:
Upon completion of demolition, please call the Code Enforcement Officer for the required onsite
inspection to insure compliance. Inspections can be arranged by calling (309) 674-1993 Monday
through Friday, 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. No inspections will be done on holidays or weekends. These
inspections are part of the permit fee and are no additional charge.
SECTION 4-11-11 NUISANCES
A. Public Nuisance. When a building, structure or dwelling or part thereof, and/or exterior property
surrounding such building, structure or dwelling or any vacant/abandoned building, structure or
dwelling or property is determined by the Supervisor of Code Enforcement Officer or the Code
Enforcement Officer to be unsafe or unfit for human occupancy including, but not limited to one
(1) or more of the following conditions; such building, structure, dwelling or premises, whether
occupied, vacant or abandoned, shall be declared a public nuisance dangerous to the public health
and safety:
1. Any act, thing, physical condition, use or occupancy of any premises or its appurtenances
which shall continue for such length of time as to substantially annoy, injure or endanger
the comfort, health, physical senses, repose or safety of the public or persons of ordinary
sensibilities.
2. Any act, thing, physical condition, use or occupancy of any premises or its appurtenances
which shall continue for such length of time as to substantially interfere with, obstruct or
tend to obstruct or render dangerous for passage any street, alley, highway, or other public
way.
3. Any act, thing, physical condition, use or occupancy of any premises or its appurtenances
considered an attractive nuisance to children, including but not limited to abandoned cars,
wells, shafts, basements, excavations and unsafe fences or structures;
TITLE 4 – SAFETY
Page 73
4. Any premises which have unsanitary sewerage or plumbing facilities;
5. Any premises designated as unsafe for human habitation or use;
6. Any premises which are manifestly capable of being a fire hazard, or are manifestly unsafe
or unsecured as to endanger life, limb or property;
7. Any premises from which the plumbing, heating and/or facilities required by this Chapter
have been removed, or from which utilities have been disconnected, destroyed, removed
or rendered ineffective, or the required precautions against trespassers have not been
provided;
8. Any premises which are unsanitary, or which are littered with rubbish or garbage, or which
have an uncontrolled growth of weeds and grasses;
9. Any premises which are unsanitary due to rat, rodent or insect infestation; or
10. Any structure, building or dwelling that is in a state of dilapidation, deterioration or decay;
faulty construction, overcrowded, open, vacant or abandoned; damaged by fire to the extent
as not to provide shelter; in danger of collapse or failure and is dangerous to anyone on or
near the premises.
B. Attractive Nuisance. When a building, structure or dwelling, or part thereof and/or the exterior
property surrounding such building, structure or dwelling or any vacant/abandoned building,
structure or dwelling or property, is found by the supervisor of Code Enforcement Officer or the
Code Enforcement Officer to be in an unsightly, dilapidated, deteriorated or neglected condition,
such building, structure, dwelling or premises shall be declared an attractive nuisance detrimental
to the public health, safety and welfare.
C. Nuisances Declared. It is declared to be unlawful and a nuisance for any owner, operator, occupant
or lien holder(s) of record of any building, structure, dwelling or property within the limits of the
City to violate any of the following provisions of this subsection:
1. General Condition of Premises. The owner, occupant or operator of any building, structure,
dwelling or property within the City shall maintain the exterior portions thereof in a safe,
sanitary condition, clear and free from any accumulation of rubbish, garbage, building
materials, litter, junk, abandoned or inoperative vehicles or parts thereof, or similar
materials.
2. Litter. It is unlawful to leave, throw, scatter or accumulate wastepaper, foodstuff
containers, advertising matter, refuse, sweepings or materials of like substance upon any
premises.
3. Downspout/Gutter/Sump Pump Discharge Flow. All gutters and downspouts shall be
securely and firmly fastened to the building, structure or dwelling and shall be free of leaves
and debris. Gutter, downspout and sump pump discharge shall be retained upon the
premises and directed away from adjacent properties or to storm sewers.
4. Graffiti. The owner/operator of the premises shall be responsible for the removal, within
forty-eight (48) hours of being notified of any and all graffiti, as defined herein, placed
upon any building, structure, dwelling, garage, driveway or walkway on the premises.
5. Vacant Properties--Structures. All vacant properties and vacant buildings, structures and
dwellings shall be maintained in a clean, litter free, safe and sanitary condition.
6. Debris Accumulation. The interior or exterior areas of buildings, structures, dwellings and
dwelling units, including basements, attics, other storage areas, and the surrounding
premises and accessory buildings associated therewith, shall be maintained free of any
debris, object, material or condition which does or may create a hazard to the health or
safety of persons, and that which is conducive to rat/rodent or insect infestation, presents a
fire hazard or constitutes a deteriorating influence on the neighborhood.
7. Trash.
a) It is unlawful for any owner/operator to permit accumulations of filth, garbage,
animal waste, trash, broken glass, refuse or debris to exist on the premises.
TITLE 4 – SAFETY
Page 74
b) Every owner/operator shall package garbage for pick-up in such a manner as to
ensure that no windblown debris is created. The packaging shall also be done in
conformity with the City’s garbage and yard waste regulations.
8. Water Accumulation. It is unlawful for any owner/operator to:
a) Permit the existence of depressions, excavations or any other conditions on the
premises wherein water may accumulate. This shall not include City approved
detention ponds, retention ponds or drainage swales.
b) Permit stagnant water susceptible to promulgation of mosquitoes or other noxious
insects therein to exist on the premises.
9. Smoke/Pollutants. It is unlawful for any owner/operator to allow the escape of soot,
cinders, noxious acids, fumes, gases, flay ash or industrial dust within the City limits in
such quantities as to endanger the health of persons with ordinary sensibilities or to threaten
or cause substantial injury to property but excluding smoke emanating from residential
fireplaces.
10. Odors/Noise. It is unlawful for any owner/operator to use any property, substance or thing
within the City or within one (1) mile thereof, to emit or cause any foul, offensive, noisome,
nauseous, noxious or disagreeable odors, effluvia or stenches extremely repulsive to the
physical senses of ordinary persons which annoy, discomfort, injure or inconvenience the
health of any appreciable number of persons within the City.
D. Aggravated Public Nuisances. The repeated commission of criminal offenses and violations of the
City’s Municipal Code substantially annoys and injures the health, comfort, repose and safety of
the public.
The failure of owners or managers of certain real property to control the activity occurring on their
property causes the repeated and substantial expenditures of public funds in order to enforce State,
Federal and City laws upon or near their property.
Among the property management practices that contribute to the existence of activities which
disturb neighborhoods are the failure of owners of real property to require tenants to obey laws as
a condition of leases, the failure to enforce existing provisions of leases, the failure of the owners
to respond to or take affirmative steps to address complaints by adjoining property owners, and the
overall tolerance by owners of criminal activity on property by tenants or their guests, all of which
substantially annoys and injures the health, comfort, repose and safety of the public.
The decline in or depression of surrounding property values and the expenditure of public funds
results in part from the facts that certain property owners fail to adequately manage and control
their property.
1. Definition. An Aggravated Public Nuisance is a dwelling, where the owners or occupants
of the dwelling conduct or commit the following activities within the dwelling unit, on the
premises of the dwelling unit, or within one hundred (100) feet of the property line of the
premises of the dwelling of which the owner or occupant has control within a three hundred
sixty-five (365) day period.
a) Two (2) or more forcible felonies (as defined by the Illinois Criminal Code).
b) Two (2) or more State or Federal criminal offenses related to the illegal sale,
possession or manufacture of controlled substances, cannabis or drug
paraphernalia.
c) Five (5) or more of any combination of the following (as defined in the Illinois
Criminal Code):
(i) Disorderly Conduct, Battery, Assault, Aggravated Assault, Criminal
Damage to Property, Domestic Battery, Mob Action, Unlawful Use of
Weapon.
TITLE 4 – SAFETY
Page 75
2. Violation. No owner of real property shall recklessly, knowingly, or negligently allow or
permit an aggravated public nuisance or allow or permit an aggravated public nuisance to
exist upon real property of part thereof, including dwelling units, owned by that person.
3. Penalties. In addition to prosecution of the offense or pursuing any other remedies available
under this Code, the City Attorney, upon receipt of reliable information that any real
property within the City is being maintained as an aggravated public nuisance, may
prosecute an action for equitable relief in the name of the City, to abate the nuisance and
to enjoin any person who shall own, rent, or occupy the real property or dwelling in
question from using or permitting its use as set forth herein.
a) The Court shall, upon a finding of guilt in an action filed in the name of the City,
fine the defendant a sum of no less than fifty dollars ($50.00) and no more than
seven hundred and fifty dollars ($750.00) per day that the nuisance existed.
b) Upon finding of guilt, the Court may, in addition to other remedies permitted by
this Code, impose other terms, including but not limited to:
(i) The completion of improvements upon the property which have the impact
of mitigating crime, including but not limited to the erection of fences,
installation of security devices upon the entrances or increased lighting;
(ii) Require a written lease for occupants which includes provisions requiring
eviction for criminal activity;
(iii) Any other condition reasonably related to the objective of abating the
aggravated public nuisance.
SECTION 4-11-12 ABANDONED STRUCTURES
A. General. Whenever a building, structure or dwelling has been unoccupied for a period of one
hundred twenty (120) days, the Code Enforcement Officer shall serve written notice upon the owner
or operator, lessee, or mortgagee that the building, structure or dwelling may be designated as
abandoned within thirty (30) days after service of a notice.
B. Method of Service. Notice shall be given by personal service or by mailing a copy thereof to the
owner or operator, lessee or mortgagee of the suspected abandoned building, structure or dwelling,
by certified mail, return receipt requested, at his or her last known address. In the event that notice
by mail is ineffective, a copy of the notice required by this section shall be posted in a conspicuous
place on or about the suspected abandoned building, structure or dwelling.
C. Required Contents. Such notice shall inform the owner or operator, lessee or mortgagee of the
suspected abandoned building, structure or dwelling that, unless the dwelling unit is reoccupied
within thirty (30) days after service of the notice required by this Section, the building, structure or
dwelling shall be designated as abandoned, be posted as such, and be subject to reinspection and
the issuance of an occupancy permit in the manner provided herein.
D. Effect of Notice. If a suspected abandoned building structure, or dwelling is not reoccupied within
thirty (30) days after service of the notice required by Subsection C of this section, the building,
structure or dwelling shall be designated as abandoned.
E. Designation of Abandoned. Whenever any building, structure or dwelling is subject to designation
as abandoned, the Code Enforcement Officer shall carry out such designation in compliance with
the following procedures:
1. Notice and Placarding. The Code Enforcement Officer shall serve notice of the design of
the building, structure or dwelling as abandoned upon the last owner, operator, lessee or
mortgagee. Service shall be by certified mail, return receipt requested, and by posting a
placard at each entrance of the affected building, structure or dwelling. Where the identity
TITLE 4 – SAFETY
Page 76
or whereabouts of the owner, operator, lessee or mortgagee cannot be ascertained, notice
shall be mailed to the person or persons to whom the last tax bill was mailed.
2. Contents. The notices and placards required in Subsection (E)(1) of this Section, shall state
that the affected building, structure or dwelling is by such placard declared to be abandoned
within the meaning of this Chapter, and shall further state that the inspection of the
abandoned building, structure or dwelling by the Code Enforcement Officer shall be
required prior to occupancy by an owner, operator or lessee and that it is unlawful to reoccupy
an abandoned building, structure or dwelling.
3. Placard Removal. It is unlawful to remove or deface the placard required by Subsection
(E)(1) of this Section, from any building, structure or dwelling which has been designated
as abandoned, except as provided in Subsection F of this section.
F. Effect of Designation--Abandoned Building, Structure or Dwelling.
1. Any building, structure or dwelling designated as abandoned shall be subject to inspection
by the Code Enforcement Officer, prior to occupancy of the building, structure or dwelling.
2. No building, structure or dwelling which has been designated as abandoned in accordance
with Subsection E of this Section, shall again be used for any purpose until and unless
written approval is secured from, and the placard so designating the building, structure or
dwelling as abandoned is removed by the Code Enforcement Officer who shall remove
such placard only after the building, structure or dwelling has been inspected.
3. The Code Enforcement Officer shall not issue an occupancy permit for the abandoned
building, structure or dwelling until it has been inspected and is found to comply in all
respects with the requirements of this Chapter.
G. Fee for Inspection of Abandoned Building, Structure or Dwelling. The fee for inspection of an
abandoned building, structure or dwelling shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) per inspection, paid to the
City of West Peoria.
H. Rehabitable Buildings. The Code Enforcement Officer may declare a building, structure or
dwelling rehabitable based upon a written inspection report, which includes the following:
1. The building, structure or dwelling under consideration does not conform to the present
requirements of the City codes but can be made to conform to the requirements of these
codes through rehabilitation.
2. The primary structural elements are basically sound and will require a minimum amount
of repair or replacement to meet the requirements of the City Code.
3. The building, structure or dwelling can be made to meet the requirements of the City Code
without continuing an existing hazardous condition.
a) Any repair, alteration or replacement of structural elements or equipment in a
building, structure or dwelling which may be required by the provisions of this
Chapter, shall be done in accordance with the applicable sections of the
maintenance code and all other applicable City codes and ordinances.
SECTION 4-11-13 ASSISTANCE OF LEGAL COUNSEL
The Code Enforcement Officer and any other affected City official may secure the assistance of the City
Attorney in the interpretation or enforcement of this Chapter.
SECTION 4-11-14 EXCLUSIVITY OF REMEDIES
The imposition of any penalty pursuant to this Chapter shall not preclude the City from instituting an
appropriate action or proceeding in a court of proper jurisdiction to prevent an unlawful repair or
maintenance, to restrain, correct or abate a violation, to prevent the occupancy of a building; to require
compliance with the provisions of this chapter or other applicable laws, ordinances, rules or regulations or
TITLE 4 – SAFETY
Page 77
the orders and determinations of the Code Enforcement Officer. To that end, the remedies provided by this
Chapter and similar ordinances or statutes shall be cumulative.
SECTION 4-11-15 CONFLICT
A. If the provisions of this Code impose a higher standard than as set forth in other ordinances of the
City, then the standard set forth here shall prevail. If the provisions of this Code impose a lower
standard than other ordinances of the City then the higher standard contained in such other
ordinance shall prevail. If any section, division, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this
Chapter is declared invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the remaining portion of this Chapter,
which shall remain in full force and effect; and to this end the provisions of this Chapter are declared
to be severable.
B. Whenever words are used in this Chapter, they shall be construed to include the plurals of such
words and/or if they are followed by the words "or any part thereof." The word "shall" shall be
applied retroactively as well as prospectively.
SECTION 4-11-16 VIOLATION-PENALTY
Any person found guilty of violating, disobeying or opposing the enforcement of any of the provisions of
this Chapter, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than seven
hundred and fifty dollars ($750.00) per violation. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall
constitute a separate offense.
TITLE 4 – SAFETY
Page 78
TITLE 4 SAFETY
CHAPTER 12 DISCHARGE OF WEAPONS
4-12-1 Discharging, etc., Prohibited; Exception
4-12-2 Exception to Provisions of Section 4-12-1
4-12-3 Confiscation
SECTION 4-12-1 DISCHARGING, ETC., PROHIBITED; EXCEPTION
A. No person shall fire or discharge any gun, pistol or other firearm within the City, except on premises
used by a duly licensed shooting gallery, gun club or rifle club.
B. No person shall be permitted to fire or discharge upon any public way within the City any air gun,
spring gun or other similar device which is calculated or intended to propel or project a bullet,
arrow or similar projectile; provided, however, that nothing in this Article shall prevent the use of
such weapons in shooting galleries or in any private grounds or residence, where the projectile fired
or discharged from any such gun or device will not traverse any space used as a public way.
(Ord. 2016-09)
SECTION 4-12-2 EXCEPTION TO PROVISIONS OF SECTION 4-12-1
A. The provisions of this Section shall not apply to sheriffs, coroners, constables, members of the
police department, military or other peace officers engaged in the discharge of their official duties;
or to any person summoned by any such officers to assist in making arrests or preserving the peace,
while such person so summoned is engaged in assisting such officer. (Ord. 2016-09)
SECTION 4-12-3 CONFISCATION
Weapons used in violation of this article shall be forfeited to and confiscated by the City at the expense of
the owner.
(Ord. 2016-09)
TITLE 4 – SAFETY
Page 79
TITLE 4 SAFETY
CHAPTER 13 CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES
4-13-1 Definitions
4-13-2 Possession
4-13-3 Sale
4-13-4 Drug Paraphernalia
4-13-5 Medical Use Cardholder
SECTION 4-13-1 DEFINITIONS
A. Adequate supply: means
1. 2.5 ounces of usable cannabis during a period of fourteen (14) days and that is derived
solely from an intrastate source.
2. Subject to the rules of the Department of Public Health, a patient may apply for a waiver
where a physician provides a substantial medical basis in a signed, written statement
asserting that, based on the patient’s medical history, in the physician’s professional
judgment, 2.5 ounces is an insufficient adequate supply for a fourteen (14) day period to
properly alleviate the patient’s debilitating medical condition or symptoms associated with
the debilitating medical condition.
3. This Subsection may not be construed to authorize the possession of more than 2.5 ounces
at any time without authority from the Department of Public Health.
B. Cannabis: includes marijuana, hashish and other substances which are identified as including any
parts of the plant Cannabis Sativa, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof, the resin extracted
from any part of such plant; and any compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or
preparation of such plant, its seeds, or resin, including tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) and all other
cannabinol derivatives, including its naturally occurring or synthetically produced ingredients,
whether produced directly or indirectly by extraction, or independently by means of chemical
synthesis or by a combination of extraction and chemical synthesis; but shall not include the mature
stalks of such plant, fiber produced from such stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of such plant,
any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of such mature stalks
(except the resin extracted therefrom), fiber, oil or cake, or the sterilized seed of such plant which
in incapable of germination.
C. Cardholder: means a qualifying patient or a designated caregiver who has been issued and
possesses a valid registry identification card by the Department of Public Health.
D. Casual delivery: means the delivery of not more than ten (10) grams of any substance containing
cannabis without consideration.
E. Controlled Substance: means (i) a drug, substance, immediate precursor, or synthetic drug in the
Schedules of Article II of this Act or (ii) a drug or other substance, or immediate precursor,
designated as a controlled substance by the Department through administrative rule. The term does
not include distilled spirits, wine, malt beverages, or tobacco, as those terms are defined or used in
the Liquor Control Act of 1934 and the Tobacco Products Tax Act of 1995.
F. Deliver or Delivery: means the actual, constructive or attempted transfer of possession of cannabis,
with or without consideration, whether or not there is an agency relationship.
G. Drug paraphernalia: means all the equipment, products and materials of any kind, other than
methamphetamine manufacturing materials as defined in Section 10 of the Methamphetamine
TITLE 4 – SAFETY
Page 80
Control and Community Protection Act, which are intended to be used unlawfully in planting,
propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting,
producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing,
concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing into the human body cannabis
or a controlled substance in violation of the Cannabis Control Act, the Illinois Controlled Substance
Act, or the Methamphetamine Control and Community Protection Act or a synthetic drug product
or misbranded drug in violation of the Illinois Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act. It includes, but is not
limited to:
1. Kits intended to be used unlawfully in manufacturing, compounding, converting,
producing, processing or preparing cannabis or a controlled substance;
2. Isomerization devices intended to be used unlawfully in increasing the potency of any
species of plant which is cannabis or a controlled substance;
3. Testing equipment intended to be used unlawfully in a private home for identifying or in
analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of cannabis or controlled substances;
4. Diluents and adulterants intended to be used unlawfully for cutting cannabis or a controlled
substance by private persons;
5. Objects intended to be used unlawfully in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing
cannabis, cocaine, hashish, hashish oil, or a synthetic drug product or misbranded drug in
violation of the Illinois food, drug and cosmetic act into the human body including, where
applicable, the following items:
a) Water pipes;
b) Carburetion tubes and devices;
c) Smoking and carburetion masks;
d) Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials;
e) Carburetor pipes;
f) Electric pipes;
g) Air-driven pipes;
h) Chillums;
i) Bongs;
j) Ice pipes or chillers;
6. Any item whose purpose, as announced or described by the seller, is for use in violation of
this Act.
H. Medical use: means the acquisition; administration; delivery; possession; transfer; transportation;
or use of cannabis to treat or alleviate a registered qualifying patient's debilitating medical condition
or symptoms associated with the patient's debilitating medical condition.
I. Person: means any individual, corporation, mail-order pharmacy, government or governmental
subdivision or agency, business trust, estate, trust, partnership or association, or any other entity.
J. Subsequent offense: means an offense under this Act, the offender of which, prior to his conviction
of the offense, has at any time been convicted under this Act or under any laws of the United States
or of any state relating to cannabis, or any controlled substance as defined in the Illinois Controlled
Substances Act.
SECTION 4-13-2 POSSESSION
It is unlawful for any person knowingly to possess cannabis. Any person who violated this section with
respect to:
A. Not more than ten (10) grams of any substance containing cannabis is guilty of a civil law violation
punishable by a minimum fine of one hundred dollars ($100) and a maximum fine of two hundred
dollars ($200).
TITLE 4 – SAFETY
Page 81
B. More than ten (10) grams but not more than thirty (30) grams of any substance containing cannabis
is guilty of a Class B misdemeanor;
C. More than thirty (30) grams but not more than one hundred (100) grams of any substance containing
cannabis is guilty or a Class A misdemeanor; provided, that if any offence under this subsection (c)
is a subsequent offense, the offender shall be guilty of a Class 4 felony;
D. More than one hundred (100) grams but not more than five hundred (500) grams of any substance
containing cannabis is guilty of a Class 4 felony; provided, that if any offense under this subsection
(d) is a subsequent offense, the offender shall be guilty of a Class 3 felony;
E. More than five hundred (500) grams but not more than two thousand (2,000) grams of any
substance containing cannabis is guilty of a Class 3 Felony;
F. More than two thousand (2,000) grams but not more than five thousand (5,000) grams of any
substance containing cannabis is guilty of a Class 2 felony;
G. More than five thousand (5,000) grams of any substance containing cannabis is guilty of a Class 1
felony.
SECTION 4-13-3 SALE
It is unlawful for any person knowingly to manufacture, deliver, or possess with intent to deliver, or
manufacture, cannabis. Any person who violates this section with respect to:
A. Not more than 2.5 grams of any substance containing cannabis is guilty of a Class B misdemeanor;
B. More than 2.5 grams but not more than ten (10) grams of any substance containing cannabis is
guilty of a Class A misdemeanor;
C. More than ten (10) grams but not more than thirty (30) grams of any substance containing cannabis
is guilty of a Class 4 felony;
D. More than thirty (30) grams but not more than five hundred (500) grams of any substance
containing cannabis is guilty of a Class 3 felony for which a fine not to exceed fifty thousand dollars
($50,000) may be imposed;
E. More than five hundred (500) grams but not more than two thousand (2,000) grams of any
substance containing cannabis is guilty of a Class 2 felony for which a fine not to exceed one
hundred thousand ($100,000) may be imposed;
F. More than two thousand (2,000) grams but not more than five thousand (5,000) grams of any
substance containing cannabis is guilty of a Class 1 felony for which a fine not to exceed one
hundred fifty thousand ($150,000) may be imposed;
G. More than five thousand (5,000) grams of any substance containing cannabis is guilty of a Class X
felony for which a fine not to exceed two hundred thousand ($200,000) may be imposed.
SECTION 4-13-4 DRUG PARAPHERNALIA
A. A person who knowingly possesses an item of drug paraphernalia with the intent to use it in
ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing cannabis or a controlled substance into the human
body, or in preparing cannabis or a controlled substance for that use, is guilty of a Class A
misdemeanor for which the court shall impose a minimum fine of seven hundred fifty dollars ($750)
in addition to any other penalty prescribed for a Class A misdemeanor.
TITLE 4 – SAFETY
Page 82
B. In determining intent under Subsection A, the trier of fact may take into consideration the proximity
of the cannabis or controlled substances to drug paraphernalia or the presence of cannabis or a
controlled substance on the drug paraphernalia.
C. If any person violates Subsection A of Section 2 of this Section, the penalty for possession of any
drug paraphernalia seized during the violation for that offense shall be a civil law violation
punishable by a minimum fine of one hundred dollars ($100) and a maximum fine of two hundred
dollars ($200).
Section 4-13-5 This Section shall allow a cardholder to possess an adequate supply of cannabis
for medical use only pursuant to 410 ILCS 130, Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Pilot
Program Act. (Ord. 2017-22)
TITLE 4 – SAFETY
Page 83
TITLE 4 SAFETY
CHAPTER 14 VACANT AND FORECLOSED PROPERTY REGISTRATION
4-14-1 Purpose and intent
4-14-2 Definitions
4-14-3 Registry
4-14-4 Registration of property subject to foreclosure
4-14-5 Registration of vacant property
4-14-6 Registration fee
4-14-7 Changes in registration information
4-14-8 Transfer of registerable property
4-14-9 Notice of determination of registerable property
4-14-10 Maintenance of registerable property
4-14-11 Inspection; enforcement
4-14-12 Records and reports
4-14-13 Violations; penalties
4-14-14 Appeals
SECTION 4-14-1 PURPOSE AND INTENT
The purpose of this Chapter is to enable the City to develop a comprehensive list of properties located in
the City that are vacant or foreclosed in order to reduce the amount of properties within the City that are
not adequately maintained and contribute to blight and nuisance conditions within the City. Additionally,
the City wants to ensure that all such properties within the City comply with all rules and regulations
adopted by the City pertaining to nuisances in order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the residents
of the City of West Peoria.
SECTION 4-14-2 DEFINITIONS
For the purposes of this Chapter:
Enforcement officer means any building inspector, code enforcement officer, law enforcement officer, fire
inspector, or other person authorized by the City to enforce the City Code or the laws and regulations of the
State of Illinois.
Evidence of vacancy means any condition that on its own, or combined with other conditions, would lead
a reasonable person to believe that the property is vacant or unoccupied by persons legally in possession
thereof. Such conditions include, but are not limited to, overgrown or dead vegetation; past due utility
notices or bills; disconnected utilities; accumulation of trash junk or debris; abandoned vehicles or parts
thereof; the absence of furnishings or personal items consistent with habitation or occupancy; the presence
of an unsanitary, stagnant swimming pool; the accumulation of newspapers, circulars, flyers or mail;
statements by neighbors, passers-by, delivery agents or government agents that the property is vacant or
unoccupied; or the presence of boards over doors, windows or other openings.
Foreclosure or foreclosure action means the legal process by which a mortgagee terminates a property
owner's interest in the real property pledged as security for a debt. This definition includes, but is not limited
to, public notice of default, a deed-in-lieu of foreclosure, sale to the mortgagee, certificate of title, and all
other processes, activities and actions, by whatever name, associated with the described process. The
process is not concluded until the property obtained by the mortgagee, or their designee, by certificate of
title, or any other means, is sold to a non- related bona fide purchaser in an arm's length transaction to
satisfy the debt or lien.
TITLE 4 – SAFETY
Page 84
Mortgagee means a mortgage creditor, including, but not limited to, trustees; mortgage service companies;
lenders in a mortgage agreement; any agent, servant, or employee of the creditor; any successor in interest;
or any assignee of the creditor's rights, interests or obligations under a mortgage agreement.
Owner means an individual(s), legal entity, partnership, limited liability company, corporation, or
governmental or private agency in whom legal title to the property is vested or purchased under a recorded
land contract.
Property manager means an individual (including the owner, if applicable), or property maintenance
company or other similar entity responsible for the maintenance of registerable properties.
Property or real property means any residential or commercial land, building, leasehold improvements
and anything affixed to the land, or portion thereof identified by a property parcel identification number,
located within the corporate limits of the City.
Registerable property means:
A. Any real property that is vacant or subject to any cancellation of utilities to the property for a period
of ninety (90) consecutive days or more; or
B. Any real property located within the City, whether vacant or occupied, that is encumbered by a
mortgage that is subject to a foreclosure action by the mortgagee, is subject to a judgment of
foreclosure by the mortgagee, is subject to an application for a tax deed or a pending tax assessor's
lien sale, or has been the subject of a foreclosure sale where the title was transferred to the
beneficiary of a mortgage involved in the foreclosure and any property transferred under a deed in
lieu of foreclosure.
Registry shall mean a database of real property records maintained by the City regarding the mortgagees
and owners of real property governed by this Chapter, which may include a searchable web-based,
electronic database maintained by the City or a contract administrator on behalf of the City.
Semi-Annual Registration shall mean six (6) months from the date of the first action that requires
registration, as determined by the City or its designee, and every subsequent six (6) months. The date of the
initial registration may be different than the date of the first action that required registration.
Utilities shall mean any utility that is essential for a building or structure to be habitable, including, but not
limited to, electrical, gas, water, and sewer.
Vacant means any property in the City that is improved by a building or structure that is not occupied by
persons legally entitled to possession thereof and that exhibits evidence of vacancy as that term is defined
herein. Vacant property does not mean property that is temporarily unoccupied while the persons legally
entitled to possession thereof are away on vacation, personal matters or business, or is not intended by such
persons to be left vacant for a period of more than ninety (90) days.
SECTION 4-14-3 REGISTRY
The City, or its designee, shall establish and create a registry identifying each registerable property within
the City and containing all of the information required by this Chapter.
SECTION 4-14-4 REGISTRATION OF PROPERTY SUBJECT TO FORECLOSURE
A. A mortgagee that initiated a foreclosure action against a property within the corporate limits of the
City of West Peoria prior to the effective date of this Chapter, or its agent, shall register each
property as provided in this Chapter within ten (10) days.
B. After the effective date of this Chapter, a mortgagee or its agent shall, within ten (10) days of the
date of its initiation of a foreclosure action against a property within the corporate limits of the City
TITLE 4 – SAFETY
Page 85
of West Peoria, register the property as provided in this Chapter. Registration shall include the
following:
1. Mortgagee's name, address, phone number, and e-mail address. If the mortgagee is a legal
entity, partnership, limited liability company, corporation, the name, address, phone
number, and e-mail address of each officer, director, individual, or entity having more than
a 5% interest in such entity;
2. When applicable, the name, address, phone number, and email
address of the mortgagee's
agent, property manager, other person responsible for the maintenance of the registerable
property and whom is designated to receive any and all notices with respect to the property;
3. Address and property tax index number of the registerable property;
4. Type of property (commercial, single-family, duplex, multiunit,
apartment complex, etc.);
5. Whether the property is vacant or occupied;
6. Plan and timeline to abate existing nuisances or code violations (if applicable); and
7. Other information as the City may require from time to time.
C. Any property that has previously registered in accordance with this Section, and which later
becomes vacant, shall not be required to re-register pursuant to Section 4-14-5; provided, however,
that such registration information shall be updated in accordance with this Chapter to reflect the
change in occupancy status.
D. A designation as a registerable property under this Section shall remain until such time as the
property is sold to a bona fide purchaser in an arm's length transaction or the foreclosure action has
been dismissed.
SECTION 4-14-5 REGISTRATION OF VACANT PROPERTY
A. The owner of a property that was vacant within the corporate limits of the City of West Peoria prior
to the effective date of this Chapter, or his agent, shall register each property as provided in this
Chapter within ten (10) days.
B. After the effective date of this Chapter, an owner or his agent shall, within ten (10) days after a
property becomes vacant, register the property as provided in this Chapter. Registration shall
include the following:
1. Owner's name, address, phone number, and e-mail address. If the owner is a legal entity,
partnership, limited liability company, corporation, the name, address, phone number, and
e-mail address of each officer, director, individual, or entity having more than a 5% interest
in such entity;
2. When applicable, the name, address, phone number, and email
address of the owner's
agent, property manager, other person responsible for the maintenance of the registerable
property and whom is designated to receive any and all notices with respect to the property;
3. Address and property tax index number of the registerable property;
4. Type of property (commercial, single-family, duplex, multiunit,
apartment complex, etc.);
5. When the property became vacant;
6. Plan and timeline to abate existing nuisances or code violations (if applicable); and
7. Other information as the City may require from time to time.
TITLE 4 – SAFETY
Page 86
C. Any property that has previously registered in accordance with this Section, and which later
becomes subject to foreclosure, shall not be required to re-register pursuant to Section 4-14-4;
provided, however, that such registration information shall be updated in accordance with this
Chapter to reflect the change in status of the property.
D. A designation as a registerable property under this Section shall remain until such time as the
property is occupied for a period of thirty (30) consecutive days or sold to a bona fide purchaser in
an arm's length transaction with the intent to permanently occupy the property.
SECTION 4-14-6 REGISTRATION FEE
A. At the time of initial registration each mortgagee or owner, whichever is applicable, shall pay a
non-refundable Semi-Annual Registration fee of $300.00 for each registerable property.
Subsequent Semi- Annual Registration fees in the amount of $300.00 are due within ten (10) days
of the expiration of the previous registration.
B. If a registerable property is not registered, or the registration fee is not paid within thirty (30) days
of when the initial registration or renewal is required pursuant to this Chapter, a late fee equivalent
to ten percent (10%) of the Semi-Annual Registration fee shall be charged for every thirty (30) day
period or portion thereof in which the property is not registered, and shall be due and payable with
the Semi-Annual Registration.
SECTION 4-14-7 CHANGES IN REGISTRATION INFORMATION
Any and all changes in the registration information as required by this Chapter shall be provided in writing
to the City within fifteen (15) days of the change in information. No additional fee shall be assessed for
submitting the change in registration information.
SECTION 4-14-8 TRANSFER OF REGISTERABLE PROPERTY
A. If a registerable property or property that has been registered pursuant to this Chapter is sold or
transferred, including, but not limited to, a transfer to a mortgagee under a foreclosure sale, deed
in lieu of foreclosure, or any other legal means, the new owner shall be subject to all the terms of
this Chapter. Within fifteen (15) days of the sale of the sale or transfer, the new owner shall register
the property or update the existing registration. The previous owner shall not be released form the
responsibility of paying all unpaid fees, fines, and penalties that accrued during that owner’s
interest in the registerable property.
B. If a registerable property or property that is encumbered by a mortgage has been registered by the
mortgagee pursuant to this Chapter, and such mortgage is sold, assigned, or otherwise transferred,
the new mortgagee shall be subject to all the terms of this Chapter. Within fifteen (15) days of the
sale, assignment, or transfer, the new mortgagee shall register the property or update the existing
registration. The previous mortgagee shall not be released from the responsibility of paying all
unpaid fees, fines, and penalties that accrued during that mortgagee’s interest in the registerable
property.
SECTION 4-14-9 NOTICE OF DETERMINATION OF REGISTERABLE PROPERTY
After the effective date of this Chapter, the City or its designee shall continually evaluate all properties
within City and make a determination for each as to whether the property is a registerable property. For
each property determination to be a registerable property, the City or its designee shall send a written notice
of its determination by certified mail to the mortgagee or owner, whichever is applicable, to the address
listed in the mortgage, or in the case of the owner to the address where the last property tax bill was sent,
TITLE 4 – SAFETY
Page 87
according to the official records of Tazewell County, Illinois. If the mortgagee or owner cannot be found
after diligent inquiry, service may be made by posting a notice in or on the registerable property or by
publication in a newspaper of general circulation in Tazewell County for a period of three (3) consecutive
days. The notice shall contain the following:
A. A statement to register the property in accordance with this Chapter within fifteen (15) calendar
days of the date of the notice;
B. A statement of the obligations as a mortgagee or owner of registerable property;
C. The registry link or a copy of the registration form to be completed by the owner;
D. The penalties for failure to register the property; and
E. A notice of the right to appeal the determination.
SECTION 4-14-10 MAINTENANCE OF REGISTERABLE PROPERTY
A. Each registerable property or property that has been registered pursuant to this Chapter shall be
maintained in accordance with all applicable provisions of the City Code and free of any nuisance,
including, but not limited to, nuisance greenery, garbage, rubbish, refuse, graffiti, stagnant water,
foul odors, and dilapidated or unsafe buildings or structures.
B. Each registerable property or property that has been registered pursuant to this Chapter shall be
maintained in a secure manner so as to be inaccessible by unauthorized persons, including, but not
limited to, boarding up, closing off, locking windows and entrances, or enclosing the exterior of
the property with an appropriate fence or wall.
SECTION 4-14-11 INSPECTION; ENFORCEMENT
A. Enforcement officers are authorized and empowered to inspect or cause the inspection of each
registerable property within the City at any reasonable hour to determine compliance with this
Chapter and any other applicable provision of the City Code.
B. Compliance with this Chapter does not relieve the mortgagee or owner of a registerable property
from any other obligations set forth in the City Code, which may apply to the property. Failure of
the mortgagee or owner to properly maintain a registerable property in accordance with all
applicable provisions of the City Code may result in a violation of the City Code and issuance of a
citation in accordance therewith. Registration under this Chapter shall not preclude the City from
taking any other action against the property pursuant to other applicable provisions of the City Code
or the Illinois Municipal Code or other applicable laws, including, but not limited to, the right of
the City to secure, demolish, or take remedial action with respect to the property or buildings or
structures located thereon when it is in the best interest of the public safety and welfare. The City
may also pursue other legal or equitable remedies including, but not limited to, injunctive relief,
application to a court of competent jurisdiction for a receiver, demolition or condemnation,
contracting for the repair or purchase of the premises, or foreclosure of any lien the City may have
on the property.
SECTION 4-14-12 RECORDS AND REPORTS
A. The City shall be responsible for maintaining all vacant and foreclosed property registration
information and provide an annual report to the Director of Buildings and Inspections of the number
of vacant and foreclosed properties in the City, and the number of properties added to or deleted
from the previous registration report.
TITLE 4 – SAFETY
Page 88
B. The Department of Buildings and Inspections shall keep records of all complaints, inspections,
reports, and actions taken with respect to each registerable property.
SECTION 4-14-13 VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES
A. Every mortgagee or owner, whichever is applicable, who fails to register or renew the registration
of a registerable property within the applicable time period prescribed in this Chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not less than one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00), nor
more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) per unregistered property. A separate offense shall
be deemed committed for each day upon which said violation shall continue or exist.
B. Every mortgagee, owner, or agent thereof, whichever is applicable, who submits false information
on the applicable registration form shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not less
than one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00), nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00).
C. Except as otherwise provided herein, any person who violates any provision of this Chapter shall,
upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not less than one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00),
nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense. A separate offense shall be
deemed committed for each day upon which said violation(s) shall continue or exist.
D. The fines provided in this Section shall not be construed to abridge or in any manner interfere with
the right and power of the City to enforce any other action provided in this Chapter or other
applicable provision of the City Code, or to seek injunctive relief or other appropriate legal remedy
provided by law for a violation of this Chapter or other applicable provision of the City Code.
SECTION 4-14-14 APPEALS
A mortgagee, owner, or agent thereof, whichever is applicable, may appeal the determination of an
enforcement officer that a property has been determined to be a registerable property or is in violation of
this Chapter to the Board of Appeals pursuant to the provisions of Title 2, Chapter 11.
(Ord. 2019-21)
TITLE 5 – BUSINESS
TITLE 5: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1 - LIQUOR
CHAPTER 2 - CANNABIS
CHAPTER 3 - ADULT BUSINESSES
CHAPTER 4 - MASSAGE BUSINESSES
CHAPTER 5 - PAWNBROKERS
CHAPTER 6 - ITINERANT MERCHANTS
CHAPTER 7 - CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE
CHAPTER 8 - GARAGE SALES
CHAPTER 9 - AUTO RACING
TITLE 5 – BUSINESS
Page 1
TITLE 5 BUSINESS REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1 LIQUOR
5-1-1 Definitions
5-1-2 Adoption and applicability of state law
5-1-3 Liquor Control Commissioner
5-1-4 Possession, purchase, dispensing, or consumption of liquor by person of non-age proof,
misrepresentation of age
5-1-5 Carrying alcoholic liquor in unsealed or opened container from premises
5-1-6 Required and conditions for license
5-1-7 License required for each place owned by licensee; license not transferable
5-1-8 Application form(s)
5-1-9 Classes of licenses generally
5-1-10 Supplemental licenses generally
5-1-11 Restrictions on supplemental licenses
5-1-12 Temporary licenses
5-1-13 Fees
5-1-14 General restrictions upon issuance
5-1-15 Retail sales near churches, schools, hospitals, etc.
5-1-16 Zoning requirements
5-1-17 Food and drink license
5-1-18 Display
5-1-19 Revocation suspension
5-1-20 Hours of sale generally
5-1-21 Hours of sale on New Year’s Eve
5-1-22 Sanitation generally
5-1-23 Warning to minors
5-1-24 Display of obscenity
5-1-25 Reporting of incidents to the sheriff; telephone on premises
5-1-26 Illegal activities on premises
5-1-27 Employment of minors
5-1-28 Sales to persons of non-age, intoxicated persons, etc.
5-1-29 Presence of persons of non-age upon licensed premises
5-1-30 Solicitation of patrons by employees
5-1-31 Curb service
5-1-32 Peddling
5-1-33 Manager
5-1-34 Change in stockholders
5-1-35 Happy hours prohibited; up front drinks, unlimited number of drinks
5-1-36 Gambling Permitted
SECTION 5-1-1 DEFINITIONS
Unless the context otherwise requires, the following terms, as used in this chapter, shall be construed
according to the definitions given below:
Alcoholic liquors: Any spirits, wine, beer, ale, or other liquor containing more than one-half (1/2) of one
(1) percent alcohol by volume which is capable of being consumed as a beverage by a human being.
(State law reference: Alcoholic liquor defined, 235 ILCS 5/1-305.)
TITLE 5 – BUSINESS
Page 2
Beer: A beverage obtained by the alcoholic fermentation of an infusion or concoction of barley, other
grain, malt, and hops in water, and includes, among other things, ale, stout, lager beer, porter and the like.
(State law reference: 235 ILCS 5/1-3.04.)
Clubs: Any corporation, organized under the laws of this state, not for pecuniary profit, solely for the
promotion of some common object other than the sale or consumption of alcoholic liquors kept, used and
maintained by its members through the payment of annual dues, and owning, hiring, or leasing a building
or space in a building of such extent and character as may be suitable and adequate for the reasonable and
comfortable use and accommodation of its members and their guests and provided with suitable and
adequate kitchen and dining room space and equipment; and maintaining a sufficient number of servants
and employees for cooking, preparing and serving food and meals for its members and their guests;
provided, that such club files with the local Liquor Control Commissioner at the time of its application for
a license under this Chapter, two (2) copies of a list of names and residences of its members, and similarly
files within ten (10) days of the election of any additional member, his name and address; and, provided
further, that its affairs and management are conducted by a board of directors, executive committee or
similar body chosen by the members in the annual meeting and that no member or any officer, agent, or
employee of the club is paid, or directly or indirectly receives, in the form of salary or other compensation
any profits from distribution or sale of alcoholic liquor to the club or to the members of the club or its
guests introduced by members beyond the amount of such salary as may be fixed and voted at any annual
meeting by the members or by its board of directors or other governing body out of the general revenue of
the club. (State law reference: 235 ILCS 5/1-3.24.)
Dwelling or apartments used for home or residence purposes: Any building designed and used for, and
occupied by one (1) or more persons, as a permanent living and sleeping quarters; provided, however, that
the term “dwellings” or “apartments shall not include any hotel or building occupied as a more or less
temporary living and sleeping quarters for individuals, who are lodged with or without meals, and in which
there are more than fifteen (15) sleeping rooms, usually occupied singly, and no provisions made for
cooking in any individual room or apartment.
Hotels: Every building or other structure kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public to
be a place where food is actually served and consumed and sleeping accommodations are offered for
adequate pay to travelers and guests, whether transient, permanent, or residential, in which fifteen (15) or
more rooms are used for sleeping accommodations of such guests, and having one (1) or more public dining
rooms where meals are served to such guests, such sleeping accommodations and dining rooms being
contained in the same building, or buildings in connection therewith, and such building or buildings, or
structure or structures being provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment and
capacity. (State law reference: 235 ILCS 5/1-3.25.)
Minor: Any person who has not attained the age of twenty-one (21) years.
Obscene: Any of the following as a minimum:
Exposure of genitalia, pubic hair, buttocks, natal cleft, perineum, anal region, or pubic hair region;
Exposure of any device or costume giving the appearance or simulation of areas in Paragraph 1
above;
Exposure of any portion, or simulation of such exposure, of the mature female breasts;
Engaging in a male or female strip tease, lingerie fashion show, any wrestling in any substance
other than air, or female wet T-shirt contest;
Engaging in any act or form of entertainment which, in whole or part, would be considered obscene
as such term is defined by State law;
Performing, or simulating the performance of, acts of sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy,
bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation, or normally considered similar acts;
TITLE 5 – BUSINESS
Page 3
The actual or simulated touching, caressing, or fondling of the breasts, buttocks, pubic area, anus,
or genitals.
Original package: Any bottle, flask, jug, can, cask, barrel, keg, hogshead, or other receptacle or container
used, corked, or capped and labeled by the manufacturer of alcoholic liquor to contain or convey any
alcoholic liquor.
Pre-mixed packages: An alcoholic liquor mixed with flavoring and bottled by the manufacturer in single
serving bottles having less than 7.5 percent alcohol by volume.
Premises: The area within a building for which a license to sell alcoholic liquor is issued and which is
actually used in connection with the storage, preparation and sale of alcoholic liquor, but specifically
excluding any outside areas such as patios, open porches, roof tops, balconies, stoops, sidewalks, yards,
driveways, parking lots and similar outside areas; except as otherwise provided in the case of a Subclass
(2) supplemental license.
Restaurant: Any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised, and held out to the public primarily as a
place where meals are served, and where meals are actually and regularly served, without sleeping
accommodations, such space being provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining equipment and
capacity and having employed therein a sufficient number and kind of employees to prepare, cook, and
serve suitable food for its guests and where the sale or consumption of alcoholic liquors is only incidental
to the serving of meals. The fact that seventy (70) percent or more of the gross revenue in any license year
from the operation of the licensed premises is derived from the sale of meals prepared and served for human
consumption on the licensed premises and all nonalcoholic beverages served incidental thereto, shall be
prima facie evidence that such business is a restaurant within the meaning of this Chapter. Such gross
revenue shall not include food and beverages served by vending machines, nor meals and beverages
prepared and sold for carryout or catering functions to be consumed off of the licensed premises.
(State law reference: 235 ILCS 5/1-3.23.)
Retail sales: The sale for use or consumption and not for resale. (State law reference: 235 ILCS 5/1-3.18.)
Retailer: Any person who sells or offers for sale alcoholic liquors, beer, or wine beverages for use or
consumption and not for resale in any form.
Sale: Any transfer, exchange, or barter in any manner, or by any means whatsoever, including all sales
made by any person, whether principal, proprietor, agent, servant, or employee.
(State law reference: 235 ILCS 5/1-3.21.)
To sell: “To sell” includes to keep or expose for sale and to keep with intent to sell.
(State law reference: 235 ILCS 5/1-3.22.)
Wine: Any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of the natural contents of fruits or vegetables,
containing sugar, including such beverages when fortified by the addition of alcohol.
(State law reference: 235 ILCS 5/1-3.03.)
SECTION 5-1-2 ADOPTION AND APPLICABILITY OF STATE LAW
All provisions of “AN ACT relating to alcoholic liquors” Laws 1933-34, Second sp. Sess., approved Jan.
31, 1934, eff. July 1, 1934 (Ill. Rev. Stat. 235 ILCS 5/1-1 et seq.), as amended or shall be amended are
hereby incorporated and made a part of this Chapter insofar as the provisions of such state law pertain to
the City. In the event of a conflict between state law and any provision of this Chapter, the state law shall
govern.
SECTION 5-1-3 LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSIONER
The Mayor shall, in accordance with State statutes, serve as the Liquor Control Commissioner of the City
of West Peoria and shall be charged with the administration of the Liquor Control Act. Chapter 235, ILCS
5/1-1, et. seq., of the Illinois Revised Statutes, this Chapter, and of all Ordinances and Resolutions relating
TITLE 5 – BUSINESS
Page 4
to alcoholic liquor as may be enacted by the City of West Peoria. The Mayor shall have the authority to
appoint a person or persons to assist him in exercise of the powers and performance of the duties of Liquor
Control Commissioner.
A. The Corporate Authorities may establish a salary for the Liquor Control Commissioner.
B. The Liquor Control Commissioner shall have the following powers, duties and functions with
respect to local liquor licenses.
1. To grant or suspend for not more than thirty (30) days or to revoke for cause all local
licenses issued to persons or entities within West Peoria.
2. To enter or authorize any law enforcement officer to enter upon the premises licensed
hereunder pursuant to state statute.
3. To examine under oath any applicant for a local license or renewal thereof, any licensee
upon whom notice of revocation or suspension has been served, and to examine or cause
to be examined the books and records of any applicant and to hear testimony and take proof
of information and to issue subpoenas which shall be effective upon issuance.
4. To receive local license fees and pay the same to the City Treasurer.
5. In lieu of suspension or revocation, to levy fines not to exceed one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) for each violation, each day on which a violation continues constituting a
separate violation. Not more than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) in fines may be
imposed against any license during the period of his license. The proceeds shall be paid
into the general corporate fund.
The Liquor Control Commissioner may, in accordance with law, revoke or suspend any license
issued by him if he determines that the licensee has violated State law, municipal ordinance or
applicable rule and regulation of the Liquor Control Commission, which is not inconsistent with
law. No liquor license shall be revoked or suspended except after a public hearing before the Liquor
Control Commissioner as provided by state statute. Notice of hearing shall be posted at the City
Hall. (State law references: 235 ILCS 5/4-2,3,4, and 5 and 5/7-5.)
The Liquor Control Commissioner shall provide a quarterly written report on his/her activities to
the Corporate Authorities.
SECTION 5-1-4 POSSESSION, PURCHASE, DISPENSING, OR CONSUMPTION OF LIQUOR BY
PERSON OF NON-AGE; PROOF, MISREPRESENTATION OF AGE
Any person to whom the sale, gift, or delivery of any alcoholic liquor is prohibited because of age
shall not purchase or accept a gift of such alcoholic liquor or have such alcoholic liquor in his
possession; except as provided in this Chapter. The possession and dispensing or consumption by
a person of non-age of alcoholic liquor in the performance of a religious ceremony or service, or
the consumption by person of non-age under the direct supervision and approval of the parents or
parent or legal guardian of such person of non-age in the privacy of a home, is not prohibited in
this Section.
If a licensee or his agent or employees believes, or has reason to believe, that sale or delivery of
any alcoholic liquor is prohibited because of the non-age of the prospective recipient, he shall,
before making such sale or delivery, demand presentation of some form of positive identification,
containing proof of age, issued by a public official in the performance of his official duties.
For the purpose of preventing the violation of this Section, any licensee, or his agent or employee,
may refuse to sell or serve alcoholic beverages to any person who is unable to produce adequate
positive identification of identity and of the fact that he is the age of twenty-one (21) years or older.
Proof that the licensee, or his employee or agent, demanded, was shown and reasonably relied upon
such positive identification in any transaction forbidden by this Section is competent evidence and
TITLE 5 – BUSINESS
Page 5
may be considered in any prosecution or hearing therefore in any proceedings for the suspension
or revocation of any license based thereon.
No person shall transfer, alter, or deface such identification card, use the identification card of
another; carry or use a false or forged identification card; or obtain any identification card by means
of false information. No person shall purchase, accept delivery, or have possession of alcoholic
liquor in violation of this Section. (State law reference: 235 ILCS 5/6-16 and 5/6-20.)
SECTION 5-1-5 CARRYING ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR IN UNSEALED OR OPENED CONTAINER
FROM PREMISES
It shall be unlawful for any person to carry any alcoholic liquors in an unsealed or opened container
from the licensed premises where such alcoholic liquor was purchased.
No licensee or person as proprietor, agent, servant, or employee of such licensee shall knowingly
permit any patron to violate this Section, nor continue to sell alcoholic liquors to such person,
knowing that such person intends to carry the alcoholic liquor from the premises in an open or
unsealed container.
SECTION 5-1-6 REQUIRED AND CONDITIONS FOR LICENSE
Licenses shall be granted for the sale of alcoholic liquors in all its forms as defined in the statutes of this
State, subject to the conditions hereinafter set forth. No person, either by himself or his agent, or any person
acting as an agent, barkeeper, clerk, or servant of another shall sell or offer for sale at retail in the City of
West Peoria alcoholic liquor without first having obtained a license to do so as hereinafter provided, and it
shall likewise be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale any intoxicating liquors, either alcoholic,
malt, or vinaceous, in violation of the terms and condition of such license.
SECTION 5-1-7 LICENSE REQUIRED FOR EACH PLACE OWNED BY LICENSEE; LICENSE
NOT TRANSFERABLE
A separate license shall be required for each individual place of business operated by a licensee, and such
license shall not be transferable from one licensee to another licensee, except in conformance with the laws
of this State, then existing, with reference to the transfer of State licenses.
SECTION 5-1-8 APPLICATION FORMS
All applicants for a license for the sale of alcoholic liquors at retail in the City shall make their application
on forms provided by the local Liquor Control Commissioner. The City Clerk shall prepare a sufficient
quantity of the forms and shall provide the same to the applicant at no additional charge. Each applicant
shall answer all questions on the application form which the Commissioner, in his discretion, believes
necessary in order for the Commissioner to reach a determination.
Each application shall be accompanied by the appropriate application fee in the amounts as set forth in
Section 5-1-13 of this Code. See also Title 11, Fee Schedule. The application for an initial annual license
shall be accompanied by the application fee as provided in Section 5-1-13 (1) of this section; and the
applicant upon notification by the Commissioner, or the City Clerk, that such application has been approved
shall remit the appropriate license fee as set forth in 5-1-13 (2).
No liquor license shall be issued or renewed until all license fees as required by this Section have been paid
by the applicant and the requisite food and beverage licenses/permits have been issued by the health
department.
11/11/03
TITLE 5 – BUSINESS
Page 6
SECTION 5-1-9 CLASSES OF LICENSES GENERALLY
Licenses to sell alcoholic liquors at retail are hereby divided into nine (9) classes as follows:
Class “A” licenses shall authorize the sale of alcoholic liquors on the premises of any tavern for
consumption on the premises, as well as package sales as an incidental use.
Class “B” licenses shall authorize the retail sale of alcoholic liquors on the premises in any restaurant for
consumption on the premises. (If the restaurant has a bar, Class G shall also be required.).
Class “B-1” licenses shall authorize the retail sale of alcoholic liquors on the premises in any
establishment that would otherwise qualify as a restaurant under Section 5-1-1 but fails to meet the
seventy (70) percent food sales threshold and has at least twenty-five (25) percent of its gross
revenue in any license year from the operation of the licensed premises derived from the sale of
meals prepared and served for human consumption on the licensed premises and all nonalcoholic
beverages served incidental thereto. (If the establishment has a bar, Class G is also required.)
(Ord. 2006-07)
Class “C” shall authorize the retail sale of alcoholic liquors in packages; and not for consumption on the
premises where sold.
Class “D” licenses shall authorize the retail sales of alcoholic liquors on the premises of a tavern for
consumption on the premises.
Class “E” licenses shall authorize the retail sale on the premises of alcoholic liquors in any club or
nationally organized veterans' association, for consumption on the premises.
Class “F” licenses shall authorize the retail sale of beer and wine only on the premises of any tavern or
restaurant for consumption on the premises.
Class “G” licenses shall authorize the retail sale of alcoholic liquors on the premise when such bar is
connected to a restaurant as well as package sales as an incidental use.
Class “H” licenses shall authorize sale of beer and wine in packages not for consumption on premises.
Class “I” Temporary license shall authorize for sale of beer, wine, and pre-mixed beverages for
consumption on the premises at special events.
Class "J" licenses shall authorize the retail sales of alcoholic liquors on the premises of any assembly hall,
stadium or privately owned public golf course for consumption on the premises when such retail sale is
made by the same person who operates the assembly hall, stadium or privately owned public golf course.
(Ord. 2010-14)
SECTION 5-1-10 SUPPLEMENTAL LICENSES GENERALLY
Upon application to the local Liquor Control Commissioner by a license holder, the following
supplemental licenses may be issued by the Commissioner. The granting of a supplemental license
in no way abrogates the responsibility of obtaining any other license required by this Chapter.
Additional written conditions may be imposed by the Commissioner upon a supplemental license
if the Commissioner reasonably believes such conditions are necessary to protect the health, safety,
and welfare of the general public. Such conditions and additional conditions shall be deemed to
exist with the agreement of the licensee and shall be a condition and part of the supplemental
license.
It shall be unlawful for any licensee to operate as provided in the hereinafter enumerated five (5)
subclasses of licenses without holding a current valid subclass license for such operation.”
(Ord. 2015-25)
TITLE 5 – BUSINESS
Page 7
The term of subclass licenses shall be one (1) license year; unless otherwise provided in this
Chapter; however, any subclass license shall be subject to review, suspension, or termination at any
time on the basis of changed conditions.
Before the issuance, denial, renewal, continuation, or termination by the Commissioner of any
subclass (1), (2), (3), (4), or (5) license, any licensee or person owning property or residing within
a three hundred (300) foot radius of the proposed site may request the Commissioner hold a hearing
open to the public on the question of such subclass license. (Ord. 2015-25) The Commissioner
shall make an official record and shall consider and make findings on the following issues:
1. The zoning classification of the licensed premises;
2. The character of the surrounding area;
3. The traffic and parking situation, including any off-street parking requirements of the
licensed business, within a three hundred (300) foot radius;
4. Any statements of interested person, either oral or written;
5. The impact of such proposed or existing subclass license on the character of and the traffic
and parking situation in the immediate neighborhood;
6. Any past operating history of the licensee and the proposed site. 11/11/03
7. No subclass license shall be issued or continued if there is a finding that it would alter
adversely or has altered adversely the essential character of the neighborhood or would
cause, or has caused, undue traffic or parking problems in the neighborhood.
SECTION 5-1-11 RESTRICTIONS ON SUPPLEMENTAL LICENSES
A subclass (1) license shall authorize the performance of live entertainment on the premises licensed
pursuant to this section. Obscene entertainment shall be specifically prohibited.
A subclass (2) license shall authorize the retail sale of alcoholic liquor in an outdoor beer garden or café
adjacent to a licensed premises.
A subclass (3) license shall authorize a licensed establishment holding a Class “C” license as described in
Section 5-1-8 of this Code to hold no more than twelve (12) wine tasting events during a license year subject
to the following restrictions:
The licensee or his agents shall dispense such wine at no charge to the consumer.
The licensee shall not charge a “cover charge”, “door charge”; solicit donations; or condition the
dispensing of wine upon the purchase of any item offered for retail sale by the licensee;
For purposes of this Section, the term “event” shall mean any twenty-four (24) hour period;
A licensee may apply for this supplemental license on either a daily or an annual basis. The daily
license shall be issued for only one (1) specific date and a separate supplemental license shall be
required for each event;
An annual subclass (3) license may be applied for at any time during the license year by the
licensee. Once an annual license is issued, the licensee shall notify the County Sheriff’s
Department of any date for a wine tasting event at least fourteen (14) days prior to the event.
Subclass (4) a supplemental license authorizing the retail sale of alcoholic beverages in assembly halls,
stadiums or privately owned public golf courses in temporary locations such as ballrooms, party rooms,
meeting rooms, movable concession stands or from traveling vendors, which are not licensed as permanent
locations through the obtaining of a Class "J" license. This supplemental license will allow the use of up to
ten (10) temporary locations for which the fee shall be forty-five dollars ($45.00) per temporary location.
(Ord. 2010-14)
Subclass (5) a supplemental license authorizing the retail sale of alcoholic beverages as part of a
entertainment package as permitted in Section 5-1-35 subject to the following restrictions:
TITLE 5 – BUSINESS
Page 8
The dates of operation are restricted to dates during which there is an event at a separate stadium.
The establishment is restricted to serving alcoholic liquor to two (2) hours before the event and one
(1) hour after the event.
The sale of alcoholic liquor is restricted to beer and wine.
Tickets are required for admission to the establishment.
Sales of admission tickets are prohibited on the day of an event and sales of admission tickets are
permitted for single day events only. (Ord. 2015-25)
SECTION 5-1-12 TEMPORARY LICENSES
Under the provisions as set forth herein, the local Liquor Control Commissioner may, in his discretion,
upon proper application being made, grant and issue a Class I license for a temporary sale of beer, wine,
and pre-mixed beverages to any person for a specific event, not for use as a regularly established business,
for use on privately owned premises, for a certain designated period of time not to exceed seven (7) days.
The granting and issuance of a temporary license shall in no way relieve the licensee from any requirements
imposed by State law including any requirement that a State liquor license be obtained. 3/29/07
SECTION 5-1-13 FEES
Each application for a Class A, B, C, D, E, F, or H license from any applicant who at the time of
application is not holding a then valid City liquor license shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable
payment of three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00). This application fee shall be in addition to all
other fees set forth in this Section and such application fee shall not be apportioned even though
less than twelve (12) months remain in the license year, nor shall it be refunded in the event the
application is denied. (Ord. 1994-12)
The annual license fee for each license shall be as follows: (Ord. 2002-04)
In the event the initial application is for a period of less than the full license year; the annual fee as
set forth in subsection (b) shall be reduced in proportion to the full calendar months which have
elapsed in the license period prior to the issuance of the license.
License Type Fee
Classes “A, “C”, “D” and “E” $850.00
Classes “B”,”B-1”, “F”, and “H” $740.00
Class “G” $110.00
Class “J” $850 (Ord. 2010-15)
Subclass (1) No fee
Subclass (2) $121.00 per annum
Subclass (3) $22.00 per day; or $220.00 per License year. Anyone holding
Ten (10) wine-tasting events in one (1) year shall be deemed to
have paid for an annual license
Subclass (4) $45.00 per temporary location up to 10 locations (Ord. 2010-15)
Class I -Temporary
One (1) day $25.00
Two (2) days $33.00
Three (3) days $42.00
Four (4) days $55.00
More than four (4) days $83.00
TITLE 5 – BUSINESS
Page 9
The fee paid for a liquor license may be reduced on a pro rata basis for each calendar month for
which the license shall not be used if the licensee relinquishes the license to the City Clerk and no
longer does business at the location of the liquor license establishment. The refund on the prorated
license fee shall be determined on the first day of each month. If a license holder relinquishes his
liquor license subsequent to the first day of a month, that entire month shall not be included in
determining the amount of the reimbursement.
No refunds will be given in the event the business ownership or control is transferred during the
license year. However, new applicants applying partway through the license year will be charged
only a prorated fee. (Ord. 2002-05)
Number of available liquor licenses
License Class Number of available liquor licenses
A 10 (Ord. 2018-20)
B 3 (Ord. 2003-10)
B-1 2 (Ord. 2006-08)
C 7 (Ord. 2015-10)
D 1 (Ord. 2002-06)
F 1 (Ord. 2012-11)
G 3 (Ord. 2003-10)
H 1 (Ord. 2015-10)
J 1 (Ord. 2010-15)
(Ord. 2002-06)
SECTION 5-1-14 GENERAL RESTRICTIONS UPON ISSUANCE
No license authorized by this Chapter shall be issued to:
A person under the age of twenty-one (21) years; or under any legal disability;
A person not an actual resident of the City;
A person who is not of good moral character and reputation in the community in which he resides;
A person who is not a citizen of the United States;
A person who has been convicted of a felony under any federal or state law, if the local Liquor
Control Commissioner determines after investigation that such person has not been sufficiently
rehabilitated to warrant the public trust;
A person who has been convicted of being a keeper or is keeping a house of ill fame;
A person who has been convicted of pandering or any other crime or misdemeanor opposed to
decency and morality;
A person whose license issued under this Section or whose license issued by the Illinois Liquor
Control Commission has been revoked for cause;
A person who, at the time of application for renewal of any license issued under this Chapter, would
not be eligible for such license upon a first application;
A co-partnership, unless all the members of the co-partnership shall be qualified to obtain a license;
A corporation, unless it is incorporated in Illinois; or unless it is a foreign corporation which is
qualified under the Illinois Business Corporation Act to transact business in Illinois;
A corporation, if any officer, manager, or director thereof, or any stockholder or stockholders
owning in the aggregate more than five (5) percent of the stock of such corporation, would not be
TITLE 5 – BUSINESS
Page 10
eligible to receive a license hereunder for any reason other than citizenship and residence within
the county.
A person whose place of business is conducted by a manager or agent, unless such manager or
agent possesses the same qualifications other than residency required of the licensee;
A person who has been convicted of a violation of any federal or state law concerning the
manufacture, possession, or sale of alcoholic liquor, or shall have forfeited his bond to appear in
court to answer charges for any such violation;
A person who does not own the premises for which a license is sought, or does not have a lease
thereon for the full period for which the license is to be issued;
Any law enforcing public official, member of the City Council, and no such official shall be
interested in any way, either directly or indirectly, in the manufacture, sale, or distribution of
alcoholic liquors;
A person who is not a beneficial owner of the business to be operated by the licensee;
A person who has been convicted of a gambling offense as proscribed by any of subsections (a) (3)
through (a) (10) of Section ZZZ of, or as prescribed by Section 28-3 of the “Criminal Code of
1961” of the State of Illinois, approved July 28, 1961, as heretofore or hereafter amended, or as
proscribed by a statute replaced by any of the aforesaid statutory provisions;
A person to whom a federal gaming device stamp or a federal wagering stamp has been issued by
the federal government for the current tax period;
A co-partnership to which a federal gaming device stamp or federal wagering stamp has been issued
by the federal government for the current tax period, or if any of the partners have been issued a
federal gaming device stamp or federal wagering stamp by the federal government for the current
tax period;
A corporation, if any officer, manager, or director thereof, or any stockholder owning in the
aggregate more than twenty (20) percent of the stock of such corporation has been issued a federal
gaming device stamp or federal wagering stamp for the current tax period;
Any premises for which a federal gaming device or a federal wagering stamp has been issued by
the federal government for the current tax period;
A person who has not submitted to photographing and fingerprinting by the Sheriff’s Department,
or by another law enforcing agency with the approval of the Sheriff;
Any person not eligible for a state retail liquor dealer’s license.
(State law reference: 235 ILCS 5/6-2,3,4)
SECTION 5-1-15 RETAIL SALES NEAR CHURCHES, SCHOOLS, HOSPITALS, ETC.
No license shall be issued for the sale at retail of any alcoholic liquor or beer or wine beverages
within one hundred (100) feet of any church, school, other than an institute of higher learning,
hospital, home for the aged or indigent persons, nursing homes, or homes for veterans, spouses, or
children in any military or naval station; provided that this prohibition does not apply to hotels
offering restaurant services, regularly organized clubs, or to restaurants, food shops, or other places
where the sale of alcoholic liquors is not the principal business carried on, if such place of business
so exempted shall have been established for such purposes prior to the taking effect of this Code;
nor to the renewal of a license for the sale at retail of alcoholic liquor on premises within one
hundred (100) feet of any church or school where such church or school has been established within
such one hundred (100) feet since the issuance of the original license.
In the case of a church or school, the distance of one hundred (100) feet shall be measured to the
nearest part of any building used for worship services or educational programs and not to property
TITLE 5 – BUSINESS
Page 11
boundaries. In all other instances the distance of one hundred (100) feet shall be measured to the
nearest part of the property boundaries.
Nothing in this Section shall prohibit the issuance of a license to a church or private school to sell
at retail alcoholic liquor if such sales are limited to periods when groups are assembled on the
premises solely for the promotion of some common object other than the sale or consumption of
alcoholic liquors.
No license shall be issued to any person for the sale at retail of any alcoholic liquor at any store or
other place of business where the majority of customers are minors of school age, or where the
principal business consists of school supplies, food, lunches, or drinks for such minors.
The prohibitions contained in this Section do not pertain to temporary licenses under Section 5-1-
12. (State law reference: 235 ILCS 5/6-11.)
SECTION 5-1-16 ZONING REQUIREMENTS
No license shall be issued or renewed for the sale at retail of any alcoholic liquor or beer or wine
unless the use of the premises for the retail sale of distribution of alcoholic liquors or beer or wine
is a “permitted use” as defined in Chapter 24, entitled “Zoning,” of the Code of Peoria County or
under any adopted City zoning ordinance.
No license shall be issued or renewed for the sale at retail of any alcoholic liquor or beer or wine
beverages in a building situated in a zoning district with a “UU” use group as now provided or
hereinafter amended in the Zoning Ordinance of the County or under any like category under any
adopted City zoning ordinance.
SECTION 5-1-17 FOOD AND DRINK LICENSE
No licenses shall be issued or renewed without the license holder/applicant first obtaining a food or drink
license as provided by ordinance. The failure to obtain a license or the loss of such license through
revocation, suspension, lapse or otherwise shall require the local Liquor Control Commissioner to revoke,
suspend, or refuse to grant the liquor license.
SECTION 5-1-18 DISPLAY
Every licensee shall cause his license to be framed and hung in plain view in a conspicuous place on the
licensed premises.
SECTION 5-1-19 REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION
The local Liquor Control Commissioner may, after proper hearing, fine (as provided in Paragraph
2 of this Section), revoke, or suspend for not more than thirty (30) days any license issued by him
under the terms of this Section, for any of the following reasons:
1. Violation of any of the provisions of this Section or any violation of any provision of the
laws of the State relating to the sale of alcoholic liquors.
2. The willful making of any false statements as to a material fact in an application for a
license or the renewal thereof; however, no such license shall be revoked or suspended
except after a public hearing by the Commissioner with a three (3) day written notice to
the licensee affording said licensee an opportunity to appear and defend.
3. If the Commissioner has reason to believe that any continued operation of a particular
licensed premises will immediately threaten the welfare of the community, he may, upon
the issuance of a written order stating the reason for such conclusion, and without notice
or hearing, order the licensed premises closed for not more than seven (7) days, giving the
licensee any opportunity to be heard during that period, except that if such licensee shall
TITLE 5 – BUSINESS
Page 12
also be engaged in the conduct of another business or businesses on the licensed premises
such order shall not be applicable to such other business or businesses.
In lieu of suspension or revocation, the local Liquor Control Commissioner may instead levy a fine
on the licensee for such violations. The fine imposed shall not exceed one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) for each violation; each day on which a violation continues shall constitute a separate
violation. Not more than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) in fines under this Section may be
imposed against any licensee during the period of his license. Proceeds from such fines shall be
paid into the general corporate fund.
The Commissioner, upon probable cause that a violation of this Chapter or any violation of any
provision of the laws of this State relating to the sale of alcoholic liquors has occurred, shall cause
a written notice to appear to be issued to the licensee. Such notice to appear shall inform the
licensee of nature of the charges and set a time and place for hearing not less than three (3) days
from the date of the notice.
Such hearing shall be public and a verbatim transcript shall be made. The licensee may be
represented by legal counsel licensed to practice law in the State. All witnesses shall testify under
oath administered by the Commissioner or other person authorized to administer such oath in
Illinois. Such hearing need not be conducted according to the strict rules of evidence and procedure
followed in a court of law; however, such hearings shall be conducted in a fair and impartial manner
to all concerned. On motion of the licensee, the three (3) day written notice of hearing may be
waived in whole or in part. Any licensee may, at his option, waive his right to a public hearing on
the suspension or revocation of his license. In such an event, the Commissioner may order any
suspension, revocation, or make any other order which would be appropriate upon a finding of a
violation at the conclusion of a public hearing. The licensee shall indicate such waiver in writing
to the Commissioner at any time prior to the commencement of the actual public hearing.
The Commissioner shall within five (5) days after such hearing, if he determines after such hearing
that the license should be revoked, or suspended, state the reason or reasons for such determination
in a written order of revocation or suspension and shall serve a copy of such order within the said
five (5) days upon said licensee.
Any five residents of the City shall have the right to file a complaint with the local Commission
stating that any retailer licensee, subject to the jurisdiction of the local Commission, has been or is
violating the provisions of this Act or the rules or regulations issued pursuant hereto. Such
complaint shall be in writing in the form prescribed by the local Commission and shall be signed
and sworn to by the parties complaining. The complaint shall state the particular provision, rule,
or regulation believed to have been violated and the facts in detail upon which belief is based. If
the local Commission is satisfied that the complaint substantially charges a violation and that from
the facts alleged there is reasonable cause for such belief, it shall set the matter for hearing and shall
serve notice upon the licensee of the time and place of such hearing and of the particular charge in
the complaint. (State law reference: 235 ILCS 5/7-5.)
SECTION 5-1-20 HOURS OF SALE GENERALLY
No person or licensee shall sell or offer for sale at retail, any alcoholic liquors or furnish or give
away, or allow or permit the same to be consumed on the licensed premises, or any other premises,
under the control, directly or indirectly, of the licensee between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00
a.m. on all days.
No person other than the licensee of a licensed premises or any of the licensee’s employees while
actually in the performance of their duties shall be permitted to enter or remain upon the premises,
nor shall any person consume any alcoholic liquor on such premises, nor shall any alcoholic liquor
be exposed upon such premises in any open individual serving container (including but not limited
TITLE 5 – BUSINESS
Page 13
to glasses or beer bottles) beyond thirty (30) minutes after the prescribed closing time for such
licensed premises.
It shall be unlawful to keep open for business or to permit the public to patronize any premises
where alcoholic liquors are sold at retail during the hours within which the sale of such liquor is
prohibited; provided however, in the case of restaurants, clubs, hotels, grocery stores, package
stores and drug stores, such establishments may be kept open during such hours, but no alcoholic
liquor may be sold during such hours, except as provided by this Section.
(State law reference: 235 ILCS 5/4-1.)
SECTION 5-1-21 HOURS OF SALE ON NEW YEAR’S EVE
The closing hours provided for in this Chapter are hereby extended for a period of two (2) hours
on New Year’s Eve provided that the licensed establishment not permit any additional patrons on
its premises after the normal closing hours provided for in this Chapter, and further provided that
the licensed establishment not advertise or indicate in any manner that it is still open for business
after the normal closing hours provided for in this Section.
If a disturbance occurs on the licensed premises during the hours referred to in the preceding
paragraph, which appears to endanger the lives, property, or person of the patrons of a licensed
premises, the sheriff or the local Liquor Control Commissioner, or his delegates, may order the
licensed establishment to close its business until the next business day and may order all the patrons
to leave the licensed premises immediately.
SECTION 5-1-22 SANITATION GENERALLY
All premises used for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor or for the storage of such liquor for retail sale shall
be kept in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be kept in full compliance with the provisions of all
ordinances of the City and health ordinances of the County regulating the condition of premises.
SECTION 5-1-23 WARNING TO MINORS
The City Clerk shall have printed and shall provide each licensee with a printed card which shall read
substantially as follows:
“warning to minors – You are subject to a fine of up to One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00) and criminal
prosecution, under the laws of the State of Illinois and the Ordinances of the City of West Peoria if you
purchase alcoholic liquors for yourself or misrepresent your age for the purpose of purchasing or obtaining
alcoholic liquor for yourself.”
Every licensee shall display the printed card provided by the City Clerk in a prominent place in any location
which he uses for the sale or serving of alcoholic liquor.
SECTION 5-1-24 DISPLAY OF OBSCENITY
No licensee shall permit, show, sell, exhibit, or display obscene or salacious matter, literature, motion
pictures, cards, or papers on the licensed premises or permit any obscene exposure, behavior, or
entertainment to occur on the premises.
SECTION 5-1-25 REPORTING OF INCIDENTS TO THE SHERIFF, TELEPHONE ON
PREMISES
Each licensee and each of his agents and employees shall promptly report to the County Sheriff’s
Department any outbreak of any fights, riots, disturbances of the peace occurring on or about the
licensed premises and, in addition, shall promptly report to the Sheriff’s Department any incident
TITLE 5 – BUSINESS
Page 14
occurring on or about the licensed premises which in the licensee’s knowledge or opinion
constitutes the commission of a crime as prohibited by the laws of the State or the United States,
including any violation of this Section, and shall truthfully and fully answer all questions and
investigations of any identified Sheriff’s Commissioned Deputy who makes inquiry of any persons
in or about the licensed premises, and cooperate fully in such investigation including the giving of
any oral or written statements at such reasonable times and in such reasonable locations to any
Sheriff’s Commissioned Deputy engaged in said investigation.
Each licensee shall maintain on each licensed premises not less than one (1) telephone in operating
order, which telephone must be within the easy access of the bartender or other responsible person
in charge of the premises, for the purpose of reporting to the Sheriff’s Department incidents as
described immediately above.
SECTION 5-1-26 ILLEGAL ACTIVITIES ON PREMISES
No licensee or any officer, associate, member, representative, agent, or employee of such licensee shall
engage in any activity or conduct or suffer or permit any other person to engage in any activity or conduct
in or about the licensed premises which is prohibited by any ordinance of the City of West Peoria or law of
the State or the United States.
SECTION 5-1-27 EMPLOYMENT OF MINORS
No licensee under this Chapter shall employ or permit any person under the age of twenty-one (21)
to sell or serve alcoholic beverages or malt or vinaceous beverages; provided, however, any
establishment holding a restaurant-liquor license may employ persons nineteen (19) years of age
or older to sell or serve alcoholic beverages to patrons who are actually dining in the establishment
when it is only incidental to their primary job function of serving food; but under no circumstances
shall such person be employed or act as a bartender or cocktail waitress.
No licensee under this Chapter shall employ or permit any person under the age of eighteen (18) to
act in person as a live entertainer on a licensed premises whether or not such person is compensated;
provided, however, nothing in this Section shall prohibit performances of persons under the age of
eighteen (18) which are broadcast through radio, television, motion pictures, sound recordings or
video tape.
SECTION 5-1-28 SALES TO PERSONS OF NON-AGE, INTOXICATED PERSONS, ETC.
No licensee or any officer, associate, member, representative, agent, or employee of such licensee shall sell,
give, or deliver alcoholic liquor to any person under the age of twenty-one (21), or to any intoxicated person
or to any person known by him to be a habitual drunkard, spendthrift, insane, mentally ill, mentally deficient
or in need of mental treatment. No person after purchasing or otherwise obtaining alcoholic liquor shall
sell, give, or deliver such alcoholic liquor to another person under the age of twenty-one (21) years except
in performance of a religious ceremony or service; or as provided in this Chapter.
(State law reference: 235 ILCS 5/6-16.)
SECTION 5-1-29 PRESENCE OF PERSONS OF NON-AGE UPON LICENSED PREMISES
Any person to whom the sale, gift, or delivery of any alcoholic liquor is prohibited because of age shall not
enter or remain upon any premises licensed for the sale of alcoholic liquor except in the company of his
parent or legal guardian; provided, however, that this Section shall not apply to restaurants, grocery stores,
universities, or to that portion of bowling alleys or auditoriums other than those rooms or portions used
exclusively or primarily for the sale and consumption of alcoholic liquors, or to minors present in the course
of their employment. In an establishment holding a B-1 liquor license, no person under the age of twentyone
(21) may be on the licensed premises at all after 10 p.m., unless with parent or guardian.
TITLE 5 – BUSINESS
Page 15
(Ord. 2006-07) (State law reference: 235 ILCS 5/6-16.)
SECTION 5-1-30 SOLICITATION OF PATRONS BY EMPLOYEES
No licensee under this Section shall permit any employee or entertainer in the premises to solicit any patron
thereof to purchase alcoholic or non-alcoholic beverages for such employee or entertainer or any other
person on or in such licensed premises, or to solicit any patron to give or donate money or any other thing
of value for any purpose; provided, however, that nothing herein contained shall prohibit any bartender,
waiter, waitress who shall be regularly employed therein from accepting and serving an order of a patron
in the regular course of his employment.
SECTION 5-1-31 CURB SERVICE
No curb service for the sale of alcoholic liquors shall be carried on in connection with premises for which
a license has been granted for the sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption upon the premises, either upon
the public street or private property contiguous to such premises so licensed.
SECTION 5-1-32 PEDDLING
It shall be unlawful for any person to peddle alcoholic liquor in the area of the City of West Peoria.
SECTION 5-1-33 MANAGER
No licensee shall employ any person to manage his licensed liquor establishment unless such person, firm,
or corporation possesses the same qualifications required of a licensee other than residency by this Chapter.
No licensee shall permit any person to act as a manager of his liquor establishment unless proper notification
has been determined by the local Liquor Control Commissioner.
SECTION 5-1-34 CHANGE IN STOCKHOLDERS
Any corporate licensee shall notify the local Liquor Control Commissioner in writing not less than twentyone
(21) days prior to a transfer of its stock which would vest in the aggregate more than five (5) percent
of the stock outstanding in said corporation, in any shareholder. Such corporate licensee shall suffer
revocation of its license unless such stock transferee possesses the same qualifications required of a licensee
except residency.
SECTION 5-1-35 HAPPY HOURS PROHIBITED
All retail licensees shall maintain a schedule of the prices charged for all drinks of alcoholic liquor
to be served and consumed on the licensed premises or in any room or part thereof. Whenever a
hotel or multi-use establishment which holds a valid retailer’s license operates on its premises more
than one (1) establishment at which drinks of alcoholic liquor are sold at retail, the hotel or multiuse
establishment shall maintain at such establishment a separate schedule of the prices charged for
such drinks at that establishment.
No retail licensee or employee or agent of such licensee shall:
1. Sell more than one (1) drink of alcoholic liquor for the price of one (1) drink of alcoholic
liquor;
2. Sell, offer to sell, or serve to any person an unlimited number of drinks of alcoholic liquor
during any set period of time for a fixed price, except at private functions not open to the
general public, except as provided in Paragraph 3;
3. (blank)
TITLE 5 – BUSINESS
Page 16
4. Increase the volume of alcoholic liquor contained in a drink, or the size of a drink of
alcoholic liquor, without increasing proportionately the price regularly charged for the
drink on that day;
5. Encourage or permit, on the licensed premises, any game or contest which involves
drinking alcoholic liquor or the awarding of drinks of alcoholic liquor as prizes for such
game or contest on the licensed premises; or
6. Advertise or promote in any way, whether on or off the licensed premises, any of the
practices prohibited under paragraphs a through e.
Permitted Happy Hours and Meal Packages, Party Packages, and Entertainment Packages
1. Definitions:
Dedicated event space: means a room or rooms or other clearly delineated space within a
retail licensee’s premises that is reserved for the exclusive use of party package invitees
during the entirety of a party package. Furniture, stanchions and ropes, or other room
dividers may be used to clearly delineate a dedicated event space.
Meal package: means a food and beverage package, which may or may not include
entertainment, where the service of alcoholic liquor is an accompaniment to the food,
including, but not limited to, a meal, tour, tasting or any combination thereof for a fixed
price by a retail licensee or any other licensee operating within a sports facility, restaurant,
winery, brewery, or distillery.
Party package: means a private party, function, or event for a specific social or business
occasion, either arranged by invitation or reservation for a defined number of individuals,
that is not open to the general public and where attendees are served both food and alcohol
for a fixed price in a dedicated event space.
2. A retail licensee may:
3. Offer free food or entertainment.
4. Include drinks of alcoholic liquor as part of a meal package;
5. Sell or offer for sale a party package only if the retail licensee:
6. Offers food in a dedicated event space;
7. Limits the party package to no more than three (3) hours;
8. Distributes wristbands, lanyards, shirts or any other wearable items to identify party
package attendees so the attendees may be granted access to the dedicated event space; and
9. Excludes individuals not participating in the party package from the dedicated event space.
10. Include drinks of alcoholic liquor as part of a hotel package;
11. Negotiate drinks of alcoholic liquor as part of a contract between a hotel or multi-use
establishment and another group for the holding of any function, meeting, convention, or
trade show;
12. Provide room service to persons renting rooms at a hotel;
13. Sell pitchers (or the equivalent, including but not limited to buckets) carafes, or bottles of
alcoholic liquor which are customarily sold in such manner and delivered to two (2) or
more persons at one time; or
14. Advertise events permitted hereunder;
15. Include drinks of alcoholic liquor as part of an entertainment package where the licensee
is separately licensed by the City of West Peoria and the West Peoria ordinance that:
16. Restricts dates of operation to dates during which there is an event at an adjacent stadium;
17. Restricts house of serving alcoholic liquor to two (2) hours before the event and one (1)
hour after the event;
18. Restricts alcoholic liquor sales to beer and wine;
19. Requires tickets for admission to the establishment; and
20. Prohibits sale of admission tickets on the day of an event and permits the sale of admission
tickets for single day events only; and
21. Discount any drink of alcoholic liquor during a specified time period only if:
TITLE 5 – BUSINESS
Page 17
22. The price of the drink of alcoholic liquor is not changed during the time that it is
discounted;
23. the period of time during which any drink of alcoholic liquor is discounted does not exceed
four (4) hours per day and fifteen (15) hours per week; however, this period of time is not
required to be consecutive and may be divided by the licensee in any manner;
24. the drink of alcoholic liquor is not discounted between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and the
licensed premises’ closing hour; and
25. notice of the discount of drink of alcoholic liquor during a specified time is posted on the
licensed premises or on the licensee’s publicly available website at least seven (7) days
prior to the specified time. (Ord. 2015-25)
SECTION 5-1-36 GAMBLING PERMITTED
Any licensed liquor facility that is licensed by the City of West Peoria that has also received a video gaming
license from the State of Illinois, pursuant to 230 ILCS 40/1 et seq., shall be hereby expressly authorized
to allow said video gaming as is allowed by the State license under said Act to be engaged in on the licensed
premises within the City of West Peoria. (Ord. 2018-03)
TITLE 5 – BUSINESS
Page 17-1
TITLE 5 BUSINESS REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 2 CANNABIS
5-2-1 Municipal Cannabis Retailers’ Occupation Tax
5-2-2 Prohibited Cannabis Business Establishments
5-2-3 Definitions
5-2-4 Requirements and Conditions for License
5-2-5 License Required for Each Place Owned by Licensee; License not Transferable
5-2-6 Application forms; Application and Renewal Fees
5-2-7 Number of Dispensing Organization Licenses
5-2-8 Zoning Requirements
5-2-9 Display
5-2-10 Revocation or Suspension
5-2-11 Hours of Sale Generally
5-2-12 On-Site Consumption
5-2-13 Sanitation Generally
SECTION 5-2-1 MUNICIPAL CANNABIS RETAILERS’ OCCUPATION TAX
A. Tax imposed; Rate
A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of selling cannabis, other
than cannabis purchased under the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Pilot Program
Act, at retail in the City at the rate of 3% of the gross receipts from these sales made in the
course of that business.
The imposition of this tax is in accordance with the provisions of Section 8-11-22, of the
Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-22).
B. Collection of Tax by Retailers
The tax imposed by this Ordinance shall be remitted by such retailer to the Illinois
Department of Revenue (Department). Any tax required to be collected pursuant to or as
authorized by this Ordinance and any such tax collected by such retailer and required to be
remitted to the Department shall constitute a debt owed by the retailer to the State.
Retailers may reimburse themselves for their seller’s tax liability hereunder by separately
stating that tax as an additional charge, which charge may be stated in combination, in a
single amount, with any State tax that sellers are required to collect.
The taxes hereby imposed, and all civil penalties that may be assessed as an incident
thereto, shall be collected and enforced by the Department. The Department shall have full
power to administer and enforce the provisions of this article.
C. Severability
If any provision of this Ordinance, or the application of any provision of this Ordinance, is held
unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, such occurrence shall not affect other provisions of this
Ordinance, or their application, that can be given effect without the unconstitutional or invalid
provision or its application. Each unconstitutional or invalid provision, or application of such
provision, is severable, unless otherwise provided by this Ordinance.
D. Effective Date
This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage and approval and
publication as required by law, provided, however, that the tax provided for herein shall take
effect for all sales on or after the first business day of January, 2020. Copies of this Ordinance
shall be certified and sent by the Clerk to the Illinois Department of Revenue prior to September
30, 2019. (Ord.2019-30)
TITLE 5 – BUSINESS
Page 17-2
SECTION 5-2-2 PROHIBITED CANNABIS BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENTS.
Definitions
The following words and phrases shall, for the purposes of this Chapter, have the meanings
respectively ascribed to them by this section, as follows:
Adult-use cannabis business establishment: A cultivation center, craft grower, processing
organization, infuser organization, dispensing organization, or transporting organization.
Adult-use cannabis craft grower: A facility operated by an organization or business that is
licensed by the Illinois Department of Agriculture to cultivate, dry, cure, and package cannabis and
perform other necessary activities to make cannabis available for sale at a dispensing organization
or use at a processing organization, per the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act (410 ILCS 705/1-1
et seq.), as it may be amended from time-to-time, and regulations promulgated hereunder.
Adult-use cannabis cultivation center: A facility operated by an organization or business that is
licensed by the Illinois Department of Agriculture to cultivate, process, transport, and perform
necessary activities to provide cannabis and cannabis-infused products to licensed cannabis
business establishments, per the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act (410 ILCS 705/1-1 et seq.), as
it may be amended from time-to-time, and regulations promulgated thereunder.
Adult-use cannabis dispensing organization: A facility operated by an organization or business
that is licensed by the Illinois Department of Financial and Professional Regulation to acquire
cannabis from licensed cannabis business establishments for the purpose of selling or dispensing
cannabis, cannabis-infused products, cannabis seeds, paraphernalia or related supplies to
purchasers or to qualified registered medical cannabis patients and caregivers, per the Cannabis
Regulation and Tax Act (410 ILCS 705/1-1 et seq.), as it may be amended from time-to-time, and
regulations promulgated thereunder.
Adult-use cannabis infuser organization or infuser: A facility operated by an organization or
business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of Agriculture to directly incorporate cannabis
or cannabis concentrate into a product formulation to produce a cannabis-infused product, per the
Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act (410 ILCS 705/1-1 et seq.), as it may be amended from time-totime,
and regulations promulgated thereunder.
Adult-use cannabis processing organization or processor: A facility operated by an organization
or business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of Agriculture to either extract constituent
chemicals or compounds to produce cannabis concentrate or incorporate cannabis or cannabis
concentrate into a product formulation to produce a cannabis product, per the Cannabis Regulation
and Tax Act (410 ILCS 705/1-1 et seq.), as it may be amended from time-to-time, and regulations
promulgated thereunder.
Adult-use cannabis transporting organization or transporter: An organization or business that
is licensed by the Illinois Department of Agriculture to transport cannabis on behalf of a cannabis
business establishment or a community college licensed under the Community College Cannabis
Vocational Training Pilot Program, per the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act (410 ILCS 705/1-1
et seq.), as it may be amended from time-to-time, and regulations promulgated thereunder.
Person: Any person, firm, corporation, association, club, society or other organization, including
any owner, manager, proprietor, employee, volunteer or agent.
Cannabis Business Establishments Prohibited
The following Adult-Use Cannabis Business Establishments are prohibited in the City of West
Peoria. No person shall locate, operate, own, suffer, or allow to be operated or aide, abet or assist
in the operation within the City of West Peoria of any of the following:
Adult-Use Cannabis Craft Grower
TITLE 5 – BUSINESS
Page 17-3
Adult-Use Cannabis Cultivation Center
Public Nuisance Declared
Operation of any prohibited Cannabis Business Establishment within the City in violation of the
provisions of this Chapter is hereby declared a public nuisance and shall be abated pursuant to all
available remedies.
Violations
Violations of this Chapter may be enforced in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter.
E. Severability
If any provision of this Ordinance, or the application of any provision of this Ordinance, is held
unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, such occurrence shall not affect other provisions of this
Ordinance, or their application, that can be given effect without the unconstitutional or invalid
provision or its application. Each unconstitutional or invalid provision, or application of such
provision, is severable, unless otherwise provided by this Ordinance.
F. Effective Date. This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage and
approval and publication as required by law. (Ord. 2019-41)
SECTION 5-2-3 DEFINITIONS
All words and phrases used in this Chapter and not otherwise defined herein, which are defined in the
Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, 410 ILCS 705/1-1 et seq., as amended, shall have the meaning accorded
to such words and phrases in said Act. In the event the meanings ascribed to these terms in the Act shall
be changed by subsequent legislation, the words and phrases used in this Chapter shall follow the meanings
as changed in the Act. Unless the context otherwise requires, the following terms as used in this Chapter
shall be construed according to the definitions set forth below:
Cannabis: means marijuana, hashish, and other substances that are identified as including any parts of the
plant Cannabis sativa, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof, the resin extracted from any part of the
plant; and any compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant, its seeds, or
resin, including tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) and all other naturally produced cannabinol derivatives.
“Cannabis” does not include the mature stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake made
from the seeds of the plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of
the mature stalks (except the resin extracted therefrom), fiber, oil, or cake, or the sterilized seed of the plant
which is incapable of germination, nor does it include industrial hemp as defined in the Industrial Hemp
Act.
Cannabis business establishment: means a processing organization, dispensing organization, or
transporting organization.
Cannabis-infused product: means a beverage, food, oil, ointment, tincture, topical formulation, or another
product containing cannabis that is not intended to be smoked.
Dispensary: means a facility operated by a dispensing organization at which activities licensed by the Act
may occur.
Dispensing organization: means a facility operated by an organization or business that is licensed by the
Department of Financial and Professional Regulation to acquire cannabis from a cultivation center, craft
grower, processing organization, or another dispensary for the purpose of selling or dispensing cannabis,
cannabis-infused products, cannabis seeds, paraphernalia, or related supplies under the Act to purchasers
or to qualified registered medical cannabis patients and caregivers.
TITLE 5 – BUSINESS
Page 17-4
Infuser organization" or "infuser: means a facility operated by an organization or business that is
licensed by the Department of Agriculture to directly incorporate cannabis or cannabis concentrate into a
product formulation to produce a cannabis-infused product.
Possession limit: means the amount of cannabis under Section 10-10 of the Cannabis Regulation and Tax
Act that may be possessed at any one time by a person 21 years of age or older or who is a registered
qualifying medical cannabis patient or caregiver under the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Pilot
Program Act.
Public place: means any place where a person could reasonably be expected to be observed by others.
Public place includes all parts of buildings owned in whole or in part, or leased, by the State or a unit of
local government. “Public place” does not include a private residence unless the private residence is used
to provide licensed child care, foster care, or other similar social service care on the premises.
Purchaser means a person 21 years of age or older who acquires cannabis for a valuable consideration.
Purchaser" does not include a cardholder under the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Pilot Program
Act.
Transporting organization or transporter: means an organization or business that is licensed by the
Department of Agriculture to transport cannabis on behalf of a cannabis business establishment or a
community college licensed under the Community College Cannabis Vocational Training Pilot Program.
SECTION 5-2-4 REQUIREMENTS AND CONDITIONS FOR CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT
Permit shall be granted for the sale of cannabis or cannabis-infused products as defined in the statutes of
this State, subject to the conditions hereinafter set forth. No person, either by himself or his agent, or any
person acting as an agent of another, shall sell or offer for sale at retail in the City of West Peoria cannabis
or cannabis-infused products without first having obtained a permit from the City to do so as hereinafter
provided, and it shall likewise be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale any cannabis or cannabisinfused
products in violation of the terms and conditions of such license.
SECTION 5-2-5 CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT REQUIRED FOR EACH PLACE OWNED BY
PERMIT HOLDER; PERMIT NOT TRANSFERABLE
A separate permit shall be required for each individual cannabis business established operated by a licensee,
and such license shall not be transferable from one licensee to another licensee, except in conformance with
the laws of this State, then existing, with reference to the transfer of State licenses.
SECTION 5-2-6 APPLICATION FORMS; APPLICATION AND RENEWAL FEES
A. All applicants for a permit for the sale of cannabis or cannabis-infused products at retail in the City
shall make their application on forms provided by the City Administrator. The City Clerk shall
prepare a sufficient quantity of the forms and shall provide the same to the applicant at no additional
charge. Each applicant shall answer all questions on the application form which the City
Administrator, in his/her discretion, believes necessary in order for the City Administrator to reach
a determination.
B. Each application for a permit to operate a cannabis business establishment within the City of West
Peoria shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable payment of three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00).
This application fee shall be in addition to all other fees set forth in this Section and such application
fee shall not be apportioned even though less than twelve (12) months remain in the license year,
nor shall it be refunded in the event the application is denied.
C. Each holder of a permit to operate a cannabis business organization shall pay a renewal fee of one
thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) to be due on January 1 each year following receipt of
the license, regardless of the month and date the initial license was granted.
TITLE 5 – BUSINESS
Page 17-5
D. Permit to operate a cannabis dispensing organization within the City shall be issued at the sole
discretion of the City of West Peoria and may be terminated and revoked at the sole discretion of
the City of West Peoria for reasons deemed appropriate in the sole discretion of the City of West
Peoria.
SECTION 5-2-7 NUMBER OF CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS
The City authorizes the following organizations, as defined herein, to operate within the City and obtain
permit to operate within the City. The number of permits authorized by the City shall include those
dispensing organizations also operating with a medical cannabis dispensing license under the
Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Pilot Program Act.
Cannabis Business Establishment Number of available permits
Medical 2
Dispensing Organization 2
Infuser Organization 2
Processing Organization 2
Transportation Organization 2
SECTION 5-2-8 ZONING REQUIREMENTS
No permit shall be issued or renewed for the sale at retail of any cannabis or cannabis-infused product
unless the use of the premises for the retail sale or distribution of cannabis or cannabis-infused products is
a “special use” as defined in Title 2, Chapter 6 of the City Code Book of the City of West Peoria.
SECTION 5-2-9 DISPLAY OF LICENSE
Every licensee shall cause his local permit to be framed and hung in plain view in a conspicuous place on
the licensed premises.
SECTION 5-2-10 REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF PERMIT
The City Council may, after proper hearing, fine, revoke, or suspend for not more than thirty (30)
business days any permit issued by the City under the terms of this Chapter, for any of the following
reasons:
Violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter or any violation of any provision of the
laws of the State relating to the sale of cannabis or cannabis-infused products.
The willful making of false statements as to a material fact in an application for a permit
or the renewal thereof; however, no such license shall be revoked or suspended except after
a public hearing by the City Council with a three (3) business days written notice to the
licensee affording said licensee an opportunity to appear and defend.
If the City Council has reason to believe that any continued operation of a particular
licensed premises will immediately threaten the welfare of the community, he may, upon
the issuance of a written order stating the reason for such conclusion, and without notice
or hearing, order the licensed premises closed for not more than seven (7) business days,
giving the licensee any opportunity to be heard during that period.
In lieu of suspension or revocation, the City Council may instead levy a fine on the licensee for
such violations. The fine imposed shall not exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each
TITLE 5 – BUSINESS
Page 17-6
violation; each business day on which a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
Not more than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) in fines under this Section may be imposed against
any licensee during the period of his permit without additional hearings. Proceeds from such fines
shall be paid into the general corporate fund.
The City Council, upon probable cause that a violation of this Chapter or any violation of any
provision of the laws of this State relating to the sale of cannabis or cannabis-infused products has
occurred, shall cause a written notice to appear to be issued to the permit. Such notice to appear
shall inform the licensee of the nature of the charges and set a time and place for hearing not less
than three (3) business days from the date of the notice.
Such hearing shall be public and a verbatim transcript shall be made. The licensee may be
represented by legal counsel licensed to practice law in the State. All witnesses shall testify under
oath administered by the City Clerk or other person authorized to administer such oath in Illinois.
Such hearing need not be conducted according to the strict rules of evidence and procedure
followed in a court of law; however, such hearings shall be conducted in a fair and impartial manner
to all concerned. On motion of the licensee, the three (3) business day written notice of hearing
may be waived in whole or in part. Any licensee may, at his option, waive his right to a public
hearing on the suspension or revocation of his / her permit. In such an event, the City Council may
order any suspension, revocation, or make any other order which would be appropriate upon a
finding of a violation at the conclusion of a public hearing. The licensee shall indicate such waiver
in writing to the City Council at any time prior to the commencement of the actual public hearing.
The City Council shall within five (5) business days after such hearing, if it determines after such
hearing that the permit should be revoked, or suspended, state the reason or reasons for such
determination in a written order of revocation or suspension and shall serve a copy of such order
within the said five (5) business days upon said permit holder.
Any five (5) residents of the City shall have the right to file a complaint with the City Council
stating that any retailer permit, subject to the jurisdiction of the City, has been or is violating the
provisions of the Act or the rules or regulations issued pursuant thereto. Such complaint shall be
in writing in the form prescribed by the City and shall be signed and sworn to by the parties
complaining. The complaint shall state the particular provision, rule, or regulation believed to have
been violated and the facts in detail upon which belief is based. If the City Council is satisfied that
the complaint substantially charges a violation and that from the facts alleged there is reasonable
cause for such belief, it shall set the matter for hearing and shall serve notice upon the licensee of
the time and place of such hearing and of the particular charge in the complaint.
SECTION 5-2-11 HOURS OF SALE GENERALLY
No dispensing organization holding a permit to operate within the City shall sell or offer for sale at
retail, any cannabis or cannabis-infused products or furnish or give away, or allow or permit the
same to be consumed on the licensed premises, or any other premises under the control,
directly or indirectly, of the licensee between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on all
days.
No person other than the holder of a permit to operate dispensing organization or any of the
licensee’s employees while actually in the performance of their duties shall be permitted to enter
or remain upon the premises, nor shall any person consume any cannabis or cannabis-infused
product on such premises, nor shall any cannabis or cannabis-infused product be exposed upon
such premises in any open container beyond thirty (30) minutes after the prescribed closing time
for such licensed premises.
TITLE 5 – BUSINESS
Page 17-7
It shall be unlawful to keep open for business or to permit the public to patronize any premises
where cannabis or cannabis-infused products are sold at retail during the hours within which the
sale of such cannabis or cannabis-infused products is prohibited.
SECTION 5-2-12 ON-SITE CONSUMPTION
The City authorizes permitted dispensing organizations to allow on-site consumption of cannabis and
cannabis-infused products in a manner consistent with the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act (410 ILCS
705/1-1 et seq.), and such organizations shall not be deemed a public place within the meaning of the Smoke
Free Illinois Act.
SECTION 5-2-13 SANITATION GENERALLY
All premises used for the retail sale of cannabis or cannabis-infused products, or for the storage of such
cannabis or cannabis-infused products, shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition pursuant to the
Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, 410 ILCS 705/1-1 et seq.
(Ord. 2019-42)
TITLE 5 – BUSINESS
Page 18
TITLE 5 BUSINESS REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 3 ADULT BUSINESSES
5-3-1 Definitions
5-3-2 Limitations on Adult Uses
5-3-3 Measurement of Distance
5-3-4 License Required; Filing of Application; Filing Fees
5-3-5 Contents of Application For License
5-3-6 Issuance of Adult Use License
5-3-7 Suspension or Revocation of License For Adult use
5-3-8 Display of License and Permit
5-3-9 Employment of Persons Under Age 18 Prohibited
5-3-10 Illegal Activities on Premises
SECTION 5-3-1 DEFINITIONS
Adult Bookstore: Any establishment that has as its stock in trade, or any significant or substantial portion
thereof, books, magazines, films, records, recording tapes, video tapes, or other periodicals, for sale or for
viewing either on or off the premises, which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter
depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, or any
establishment that holds itself out to the public as a purveyor of such based upon its signage, advertising,
displays, actual sales, presence of video preview or coin operated booths, exclusions of minors from the
establishment’s premises, or any other factors showing the establishment’s primary purpose is to purvey
such material.
Adult Device Store: An establishment having as a substantial portion of its stock in trade any device,
appliance, instrument, or object which is represented either by the operator of the establishment or by its
packaging, advertising, or other literature furnished therewith as enhancing, assisting, representing,
depicting, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or an establishment with a
segment or section devoted to the sale or display of such material, or any establishment that holds itself out
to the public as a purveyor of such based upon its signage, advertising, displays, actual sales, presence of
video preview or coin operated booths, exclusions of minors from the establishment’s premises, or any
other factors showing the establishment’s primary purpose is to purvey such material.
Adult Entertainment Cabaret: A public or private establishment which is licensed to serve food and/or
alcoholic beverages, which features entertainers, dancers, waitresses, waiters, or any other employees acting
in such a way as to display, depict, describe, or relate to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas for observation by patrons therein.
Adult Mini Motion Picture Theater: An enclosed building or drive-in theater with a capacity of less than
fifty (50) persons used regularly and routinely for presenting motion pictures having as a dominant theme
material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein.
Adult Motion Picture Theater: An enclosed building or drive-in theater with a capacity of fifty (50) or
more persons used regularly and routinely for presenting motion pictures having as a dominant theme
material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein.
Adult Use: Adult bookstores, adult device stores, adult entertainment cabarets, adult mini motion picture
theaters, adult motion picture theaters, body shops, model studios, and massage establishments.
Body Shop or Model Studio: Any public or private establishment which describes itself as a body shop or
model studio, or where for any form of consideration or gratuity figure models who display specific
TITLE 5 – BUSINESS
Page 19
anatomical areas are provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or
similarly depicted by persons paying such consideration or gratuity, or where for any form of consideration
or gratuity nude or semi-nude dancing, readings, counseling sessions, body painting, and other activities
that present materials distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or
relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas are provided for observation by or
communication to persons paying such consideration or gratuity.
Building Structure: Any structure or group of structures housing two (2) or more businesses which share
a common entry, exit, wall or frontage wall, including, but not limited to, shopping centers, shopping plazas,
or shopping squares.
Massage: Any method of pressure on or friction against or stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding,
vibrating, or stimulating of the external soft parts of the body with the hands or other parts of the human
body or with the aid of any mechanical or electrical apparatus or appliance with or without such
supplementary aids as rubbing alcohol, liniments, antiseptics, oils, powders, creams, lotions, ointments, or
other similar preparations commonly used in this practice.
Massage Establishment: An establishment having a fixed place of business where any person, firm,
association, or corporation engages in or carries on or permits to be engaged in or carried on any of the
activities mentioned in the definition of massage in this Section; provided, however, that the term massage
establishment shall not apply to the following:
Hospitals, nursing homes, or sanitaria; or
Barber shops or cosmetology establishments, not operated as a home occupation as defined under
the West Peoria Zoning Regulations, where a barber or cosmetologist, holding a valid, unrevoked
license or certificate of registration issued by the State of Illinois and a valid, unrevoked masseur
permit issued by the City of West Peoria, administers a massage in conjunction with and incidental
to the lawful performance of the barber’s or cosmetologist’s particular profession or business; or
Barber shops or cosmetology establishments, not operated as a home occupation as defined under
the West Peoria Zoning Regulations, where a barber or cosmetologist, holding a valid, unrevoked
license or certificate of registration issued by the State of Illinois, allows a person holding a valid,
unrevoked license or certificate of registration issued by the State of Illinois and a valid, unrevoked
masseur permit issued by the City of West Peoria and working under the direction of the barber or
cosmetologist, to administer a massage in conjunction with and incidental to the lawful
performance of the barber’s or cosmetologist’s particular profession or business.
Nudity: The showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, or buttocks with less than a fully
opaque covering, showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the
nipple, or the showing of the covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state.
Specified Anatomical Areas: Any of the following:
Less than completely and opaquely covered:
1. Human genitals, pubic region, or pubic hair; or
2. Buttock; or
3. Female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; and
Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely covered and opaquely
covered.
Specified Sexual Activities: Any of the following conditions:
The performance of acts or simulated acts of sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality,
oral copulation, flagellation, or any sexual acts which are prohibited by law.
The actual or simulated touching, caressing, or fondling of the breast, buttocks, anus, or genitals.
TITLE 5 – BUSINESS
Page 20
The actual or simulated display of the breasts, buttocks, pubic hair, anus, vulva, or genitals.
Excretory or urinary function as part of or in conjunction with any activities set forth in Paragraphs
a through c of this Subsection.
SECTION 5-3-2 REQUIRED AND CONDITIONS FOR LICENSE LIMITATIONS ON ADULT
USES
Adult uses shall be permitted subject to the following restrictions:
An adult use shall not feature:
1. A person who knowingly or intentionally, in a public place:
2. Engages in sexual intercourse; or
3. Engages in deviant sexual conduct; or
4. Appears in a state of nudity; or
5. Fondles the genitals of himself or another person.
All adult uses shall be located only in B-1, General Business District, with a special use permit,
and B-2, Highway and Service Business District, with a special use permit, and within such districts
an adult use shall not be located within seven hundred-fifty (750) feet of another pre-existing adult
use.
An adult use shall not be located within five hundred (500) feet of a pre-existing school or place of
worship.
1. An adult use shall not be located in a building structure which contains another business
that sells or dispenses in some manner alcoholic beverages.
2. Any adult use doing business at the time this chapter takes effect shall have one (1) year
from the effective date hereof to comply with the provisions of Subsections A through D
of this Section.
3. Any adult use doing business at the time this Chapter takes effect shall have thirty (30)
days from the effective date hereof for the issuance of an adult use license.
No adult use shall be conducted in any manner that permits the observation of any material depicting,
describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas by display, decoration,
sign, show window, or other opening from any public way or from any property not registered in the license
as the location where the adult use is to be operated.
SECTION 5-3-3 MEASURE OF DISTANCE
For the purposes of this Chapter, measurements shall be made in a straight line, without regard to
intervening structures or objects, from the property line of the lot or parcel containing the adult use to the
property line of the lot or parcel containing the nearest adult use, school or place of worship.
SECTION 5-3-4 LICENSE REQUIRED; FILING OF APPLICATION; FILING FEES
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in, conduct, carry on, or to permit to be engaged in, conducted,
or carried on, in or upon any premises in the City of West Peoria, the operation of an adult use as herein
defined without first having obtained a separate license for such adult use from the Mayor.
Every applicant for a license to maintain, operate, or conduct an adult use shall file an application in
duplicate under oath with the Mayor upon a form provided by the City Clerk and pay a non-refundable
filing fee, which shall be set by the City Council by resolution as it shall deem necessary from time to time,
to the City Clerk, who shall issue a receipt, which shall be attached to the application filed with the Mayor.
See Title 11, Fee Schedule.
Within thirty (30) days after receiving the application, the Mayor shall notify the applicant that his
application is granted, denied, or held for further investigation. Such additional investigation shall not
TITLE 5 – BUSINESS
Page 21
exceed an additional thirty (30) days unless otherwise agreed to by the applicant. Upon the conclusion of
such additional investigation, the Mayor shall advise the applicant in writing whether the application is
granted or denied.
When an application is denied or held for further investigation, the Mayor shall advise the applicant in
writing of the reason for such action.
Failure or refusal of the applicant to give any information relevant to the investigation of the application,
or his or her refusal or failure to appear at any reasonable time and place for examination under oath
regarding said application, or his or her refusal to submit to or cooperate with any inspection or investigation
required by this Chapter shall constitute an admission by the applicant that he or she is ineligible for such
permit and shall be grounds for denial thereof by the Mayor.
SECTION 5-3-5 CONTENTS OF APPLICATION FOR LICENSE
The term "applicant" as used in this Chapter shall include any partner or limited partner of a partnership
applicant and any officer or director of a corporate applicant and any stockholder holding more than ten
(10) percent of the stock of a corporate applicant and any manager or member of a limited liability company
or any other person who is interested directly in the ownership or operation of the business. An applicant
for a license shall furnish the following information under oath:
Name and address; and
Written proof that the individual is at least eighteen (18) years of age; and
Location of where the adult business is to be operated.
SECTION 5-3-6 ISSUANCE OF ADULT LICENSE
The Mayor shall issue a license to maintain, operate, or conduct an adult use unless he finds:
That the applicant is under the age of eighteen (18) years or under any legal disability; or
The location where the adult business is proposed to be operated does not comply with the
limitations set forth in Section 5-3-2 of this Chapter.
The applicant or an owner of applicant or the person in control has any sex-based felony, violent
crime felony, or felony involving moral turpitude or dishonesty convictions within the last ten (10)
years. (Ord. 2015-30)
"Person in control" shall be deemed to include any person who, through ownership or management
position, exerts or can rightfully exert control over the operations of a licensed adult use business.
(Ord. 2015-30)
Every adult use license issued pursuant to this Chapter will terminate at the expiration of one (1)
year from the date of its issuance, unless sooner revoked.
SECTION 5-3-7 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE FOR ADULT USE
Any license issued for an adult use may be revoked or suspended by the Mayor if the Mayor shall find:
That the licensee has violated any of the provisions of this Chapter regulating adult uses; or
That the licensee has knowingly furnished false or misleading information or withheld relevant
information on any application for any license or permit required by this Chapter or knowingly
caused or suffered another to furnish or withhold such information on his or her behalf.
The licensee shall be responsible for the acts of his agents, servants, and employees; provided,
however, that in the case of a first offense by a licensee where the conduct was solely that of an
TITLE 5 – BUSINESS
Page 22
employee, the penalty shall not exceed a suspension of thirty (30) days if the Mayor shall find that
the licensee had no actual or constructive knowledge of such violation and could not in the exercise
of due diligence have had such actual or constructive knowledge.
The Mayor, before revoking or suspending any license, shall give the licensee at least ten (10) days
written notice of the charges against him or her. The licensee may, within five (5) days of receipt
of said notice, request a public hearing before the Mayor at which time the licensee may present
evidence bearing upon the question. Any notice by the Mayor may be delivered personally to the
licensee or be posted on the premises where the adult use is located.
SECTION 5-3-8 DISPLAY OF LICENSE AND PERMIT
Every licensee shall display a valid license in a conspicuous place within the premises where the adult use
is operated so that it may be readily seen by persons entering the premises.
SECTION 5-3-9 EMPLOYMENT OF PERSONS UNDER 18 PROHIBITED
It shall be unlawful for any adult use licensee or his manager or employee to employ in any capacity within
the adult business any person who is not at least eighteen (18) years of age.
SECTION 5-3-10 ILLEGAL ACTIVITIES ON PREMISES
No licensee or any officer, associate, member, representative, agent, or employee of such licensee shall
engage in any activity or conduct or permit any other person to engage in any activity or conduct in or about
the licensed premises which is prohibited by an ordinance of the City of West Peoria or laws of the State
of Illinois or of the United States. (Ord. 1999-16)
TITLE 5 – BUSINESS
Page 23
TITLE 5: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 4 MASSAGE BUSINESSES
5-4-1 Definitions
5-4-2 Operating Requirements
5-4-3 Advertising
5-4-4 Off-Site Services
5-4-5 Employment of Person Under the Age of 18 is Prohibited
5-4-6 Employment of Masseurs and Masseuses
5-4-7 Display
5-4-8 Time Limit for Filing Application for Permit
5-4-9 Review
5-4-10 Violation and Penalty
5-4-11 Maintaining Public Nuisance
5-4-12 Nonapplicability of Article
5-4-13 Establishment Permit Required
5-4-14 Filing of Application and Fee
5-4-15 Application Contents
5-4-16 Issuance
5-4-17 Transfer
5-4-18 Revocation or Suspension
5-4-19 Required; Application Generally; Fee
5-4-20 Application Contents
5-4-21 Issuance
5-4-22 Revocation or Suspension
Persons engaged in the provision of massage for compensation must obtain a license pursuant to the
Massage Licensing Act from the Department of Professional Regulation. (Ord. 2007-08)
SECTION 5-4-1 DEFINITIONS
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Article, shall have the meanings ascribed to
them in this Section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Employee: means any and all persons other than the masseurs or masseuses, who render any service to the
permittee, who receive compensation directly from the permittee, and who have no physical contact with
customers and clients.
Massage: means any method of pressure on or friction against or stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping,
pounding, vibrating or stimulating of the external soft parts of the body with the hands or other parts of the
human body, or with the aid of any mechanical or electrical apparatus or appliance, with or without such
supplementary aids as rubbing alcohol, liniments, antiseptics, oils, powder, creams, lotions, ointments or
other similar preparations commonly used in this practice.
Massage Therapist: means a graduate with a minimum of five hundred (500) hours of education in
massage therapy from an institution that is approved or accredited by the Illinois State Board of Education
or holds current certification from the National Certification Board for Therapeutic Massage and
Bodywork. (Ord. 2000-09)
Massage Therapy Facility: means any establishment having a fixed place of business where any person
engages in or carries on, or permits to be engaged in or carried on, any of the activities mentioned under
definition of "massage" in this Section provided, however, that the term massage therapy facility shall not
apply to the following:
TITLE 5 – BUSINESS
Page 24
Hospitals, nursing homes or sanitaria; or
Barber shops or cosmetology establishments, not operated as a home occupation as defined under
the West Peoria Zoning Regulations where a barber or cosmetologist, holding a valid, unrevoked
license or certificate of registration issued by the State of Illinois and a valid, unrevoked masseur
permit issued by the City, administers a massage in conjunction with and incidental to the lawful
performance of the barber's or cosmetologist's particular profession or business; or
Barber shops or cosmetology establishments, not operated as a home occupation as defined under
the West Peoria Zoning Regulations, where a barber or cosmetologist, holding a valid, unrevoked
license or certificate of registration issued by the State of Illinois, allows a person, holding a valid
unrevoked licensee or certificate of registration issued by the State of Illinois, allows a person,
holding a valid unrevoked masseur or masseur permit issued by the City and working under the
direction of the barber or cosmetologist, to administer a massage in conjunction with and incidental
to the lawful performance of the barber's or cosmetologist's particular profession or business.
Masseur or masseuse: means any person who, for any consideration whatsoever, engages in the practice
of massage as herein described.
Off-site Service: means any business, the function of which is to engage in or carry on massages at a
location designated by the customer or client rather than at a massage establishment.
Permittee: means the operator of a massage therapy facility.
Sexual or Genital Area: means the genitals, pubic area, buttocks, anus or perineum of any person, or the
vulva or breasts of a female.
SECTION 5-4-2 OPERATING REQUIREMENTS
Every massage establishment in the City shall conform to the following operating requirements:
Every portion of the establishment, including appliances and apparatus, shall be kept clean and
operated in a sanitary condition.
Price rates for all services shall be prominently posted in the reception area in a location available
to all prospective customers.
All employees, including masseurs and masseuses, shall be clean and wear clean, nontransparent
outer garments, covering the sexual and genital areas, whose use is restricted to the massage
establishment. A separate dressing room for each sex must be available on the premises with
individual lockers for each employee. Doors to such dressing rooms shall open inward and shall
be self-closing.
The sexual or genital area of patrons must be covered by towels, cloths or undergarments when in
the presence of employees, masseurs or masseuses.
It shall be unlawful for any person, knowingly, in a massage therapy facility to place his hand upon,
to touch with any part of his body, to fondle in any manner, or to massage, a sexual or genital area
of any other person.
No masseur or masseuse, employee or operator shall perform, offer or agree to perform, any act,
which would require the touching of the patron's genital area.
Oils, creams, lotions or other preparations used in administering massages shall be kept in clean,
closed containers or cabinets.
Eating in the massage work area shall not be permitted. Animals, except for Seeing-Eye dogs, shall
not be permitted in the massage work areas.
TITLE 5 – BUSINESS
Page 25
No masseur or masseuse shall administer a massage to a patron exhibiting any skin fungus, skin
infection, skin inflammation or skin eruption, unless a physician duly licensed by the State certifies
in writing that such person may be safely massaged prescribing the conditions thereof.
Each masseur and masseuse shall wash his hands in hot running water, using a proper soap or
disinfectant before administering a massage to each patron.
No massage therapy facility shall allow any massage to be performed except by a person holding a
masseur or masseuse permit hereunder and who is a graduate with a minimum of five hundred
(500) hours of education in massage therapy from an institution that is approved or accredited by
the Illinois State Board of Education or holds current certification from the National Certification
Board for Therapeutic Massage and Bodywork.
SECTION 5-4-3 ADVERTISING
No massage therapy facility granted a permit under provisions of this Article shall place, publish or
distribute or cause to be placed, published or distributed any advertising matter that depicts any portion of
the human body that would reasonably suggest to prospective patrons that any services are available other
than those services described under the definition of "massage" above, or that employees, masseurs or
masseuses are dressed in any manner other than prescribed in the portion of this Section headed "Operating
Requirements"; nor shall any massage therapy facility indicate in the text of such advertising that any
services are available other than those services described in the definition of "massage" above.
SECTION 5-4-4 OFF-SITE SERVICES
No “out-call massage service” may be operated other than by a licensed massage therapy facility. All
massages performed as an “out-call massage service” must be performed in the manner prescribed
elsewhere in this Section.
SECTION 5-4-5 EMPLOYMENT OF PERSON UNDER THE AGE OF 18 IS PROHIBITED
It shall be unlawful for any owner, proprietor, manager or other person in charge of any massage therapy
facility to employ any person who is not at least eighteen (18) years of age.
SECTION 5-4-6 EMPLOYMENT OF MASSEURS AND MASSEUSES
It shall be the responsibility of the permittee for the massage therapy facility or the employer of any persons
purporting to act as masseurs or masseuses to ensure that each person employed as a masseur or masseuse
shall first have obtained a valid permit pursuant to this Section.
SECTION 5-4-7 DISPLAY
Every permittee under this Article shall display a valid permit in a conspicuous place within the massage
therapy facility so that persons entering the premises readily see the same.
SECTION 5-4-8 TIME LIMIT FOR FILING APPLICATION FOR PERMIT
Applications for renewal of permits under this Section must be filed not more than two (2) months nor less
than one (1) month prior to termination of any existing permit.
SECTION 5-4-9 REVIEW
The decision of the Mayor with regard to the issuance, suspension or revocation under this Section shall be
reviewable under the Illinois Administrative Review Act.
TITLE 5 – BUSINESS
Page 26
SECTION 5-4-10 VIOLATION AND PENALTY
Every person except those persons who are specifically exempted by this Article, whether acting as an
individual, owner, employee of the owner, operator or employee of the operator, or whether acting as a
mere helper for the owner, employee or operator, or acting as a participant or worker in any way, who gives
massages or conducts a massage therapy facility without first obtaining a permit and paying a license fee
to do so from the City, or shall violate any of the provisions of this Article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine of at least One Hundred ($100.00) Dollars, but
no more than Seven Hundred Fifty ($750.00) Dollars.
SECTION 5-4-11 MAINTAINING PUBLIC NUISANCE
Any building used as a massage therapy facility in violation of this Article with the intentional, knowing,
reckless or negligent permission of the owner thereof, or the agent of the owner managing the building,
together with fixtures and other property used in violation of this article are hereby declared to be a
nuisance.
SECTION 5-4-12 NONAPPLICABILITY OF ARTICLE
This Article shall not apply to hospitals, nursing homes or sanitaria.
SECTION 5-4-13 ESTABLISHMENT PERMIT REQUIRED
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in, conduct or carry on, or to permit to be engaged in,
conducted or carried on, in or upon any premises in the City, the operation of a massage therapy facility as
herein defined, without first having obtained a permit from the Mayor.
SECTION 5-4-14 FILING OF APPLICATION AND FEE
Every applicant for a permit to maintain, operate or conduct a massage therapy facility shall file an
application in duplicate under oath with the City Clerk upon a form provided by the City Clerk and
pay a nonrefundable filing fee to the City Clerk in an amount determined by City Council resolution
as it shall deem necessary from time to time, who shall issue a receipt which shall be attached to
the application filed with the Mayor.
Whenever an application is denied or held for further investigation, the Mayor shall advise the
applicant in writing of the reasons for such action.
The failure or refusal of the applicant to promptly give any information relevant to the investigation
of the application or his refusal or failure to appear at any reasonable time and place for examination
under oath, regarding such application or his refusal to submit to or cooperate with any inspection
required by this Section shall constitute an admission by the applicant that he is ineligible for such
permit and shall be grounds for denial thereof by the Mayor.
SECTION 5-4-15 APPLICATION CONTENTS
The application for a permit to operate a massage therapy facility shall set forth the exact nature of
the massage to be administered, and the proposed place of business and facilities therefore.
In addition to the foregoing, any applicant for a permit, including any partner or limited partner of
a partnership applicant, and any officer or director of a corporate applicant and any stockholder
holding more than ten percent of the stock of a corporate applicant, shall furnish the following
information:
1. Name and address.
2. Written proof that the individual is at least eighteen (18) years of age.
TITLE 5 – BUSINESS
Page 27
3. All residential addresses for the past three (3) years.
4. The applicant's height, weight, color of eyes and hair.
5. The business, occupation or employment of the applicant for the three (3) years
immediately preceding the date of application.
6. The massage or similar business license history of the applicant; whether such person, in
previously operating in this or another city or state under license, has had such license
revoked or suspended, the reason therefore, and the business activity or occupation
subsequent to such action of suspension or revocation.
7. All criminal or City ordinance violation convictions, forfeiture of bond and pleadings of
nolo contendre on all charges, except minor traffic violations.
8. If the applicant is a corporation, or a partner of a partnership in a corporation, the name of
the corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation and the
state of incorporation shall be set forth.
SECTION 5-4-16 ISSUANCE
Upon receipt of the application and fee, the Mayor shall issue a permit to maintain, operate or
conduct a massage therapy facility, unless he finds:
1. That the operation, as proposed by the applicant, if permitted, would not have complied
with all applicable laws, including but not limited to, the building, health, planning,
housing, zoning and fire codes of the City;
2. That the applicant and any other person who will be directly or indirectly engaged in the
management and operation of a massage therapy facility have ever been convicted of:
3. A felony;
4. An offense involving sexual misconduct with children; or
5. Prostitution, soliciting for a prostitute, pandering, keeping a place of prostitution, pimping
or other offense opposed to decency and morality.
The Mayor is, by the filing of an application, authorized to conduct a criminal background check
of the applicant. The Mayor, at his discretion, may issue a permit to any person convicted of any
of the crimes in Paragraph (a) (2) of this Section if he finds that such conviction occurred at least
four (4) years prior to the date of application, the applicant has had no subsequent convictions and
the applicant has shown evidence of rehabilitation sufficient to warrant the public trust.
Every massage therapy facility permit issued pursuant to this division will terminate at the
expiration of one year from the date of its issuance, unless sooner suspended or revoked.
SECTION 5-4-17 TRANSFER
No permit for the operation of a massage therapy facility issued pursuant to the provisions of this division
shall be transferable except with the written consent of the
Mayor; provided, however, that upon the death or incapacity of the permittee the massage therapy facility
may continue in business for a reasonable period of time to allow for an orderly transfer of the permit.
SECTION 5-4-18 REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION
Any permit issued for a massage therapy facility may be revoked or suspended by the Mayor after
a hearing for good cause or in any case where any of the provisions of this division are violated or
any employee of the permittee, including a masseur or masseuse, is engaged in any conduct at
permittee's place of business, which violates any of the provisions of this division or any State law
which provides for imprisonments, and permittee has actual or constructive knowledge of such
violations or the permittee should have actual or constructive knowledge by due diligence, or where
any applicant has made a false statement on an application for a permit under this division or in
TITLE 5 – BUSINESS
Page 28
any case where the permittee or licensee refuses to permit any duly authorized police officer of
health inspector of the City and the County to inspect the premises or the operations therein. Such
permit may also be revoked or suspended by the Mayor after hearing upon the recommendation of
the Code Enforcement Officer that such business is being managed, conducted or maintained
without regard for the public health or health of patrons or customers without due regard to proper
sanitation or hygiene.
Any violation of this Section by any employee of the permittee, including a masseur or masseuse,
shall be cause for suspension of the permit for not more than thirty (30) days in the first instance.
Any subsequent violation of this Article by any employee of the permittee, including a masseur or
masseuse, shall be cause for suspension or revocation of the permit.
The Mayor, before revoking or suspending any permit, shall give the permittee at least ten (10)
days' written notice of the charges against him and the opportunity for a public hearing before the
Mayor, at which time the permittee may present evidence bearing upon the question. In such cases,
the charges shall be specific and in writing.
SECTION 5-4-19 REQUIRED; APPLICATION GENERALLY; FEE
Any person, including an applicant for massage therapy facility permit, who engages in the practice of
massage shall file an application for a masseur or masseuse permit with the City Clerk upon a form provided
by the City Clerk and shall pay a nonrefundable filing fee for an original application and for a renewal
application to the City Clerk in an amount as determined by City Council resolution as it shall deem
necessary from time to time, who shall issue a receipt which shall be attached to the application filed with
the Mayor.
SECTION 5-4-20 APPLICATION CONTENTS
The application for a masseur or masseuse permit shall contain the following:
Name and residence address.
Social Security number and driver's license number, if any.
Applicant's weight, height, color of eyes and hair.
Written evidence that the applicant is at least eighteen (18) years of age.
Business, occupation or employment of the applicant for the three (3) years immediately preceding
the date of application.
Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of, pleaded nolo contender to or suffered forfeiture
on a bond charge of committing any crime except minor traffic violations. If the answer is in the
affirmative, a statement must be made giving the place and the court in which such conviction plea
or forfeiture was had, the specific charge under which the conviction plea or forfeiture was obtained
and the sentence imposed as a result thereof.
Evidence that said person is a graduate with a minimum of five hundred (500) hours of education
in massage therapy from an institution that is approved or accredited by the Illinois State Board of
Education or holds current certification from the National Certification Board for Therapeutic
Massage and Bodywork (NCBTMB). Such evidence must include, at a minimum, where the
applicant is not certified by the NCBTMB, a transcript from such an accredited institution showing
the completion of said five hundred (500) hours of education.
SECTION 5-4-21 ISSUANCE
The Mayor may issue a masseur or masseuse permit within twenty-one (21) days following
application, unless he finds that the applicant for masseur or masseuse permit is not qualified as
TITLE 5 – BUSINESS
Page 29
specified in Subparagraph (7) of the above Section entitled “Application Contents” or has been
convicted of:
1. A felony;
2. An offense involving sexual misconduct with children; or
3. Keeping or residing in a house of ill fame, solicitation of a lewd or unlawful act, prostitution
or pandering.
The Mayor, in his discretion, may issue a permit to any person convicted of such crimes if he finds
that such conviction occurred at least four (4) years prior to the date of the application and the
applicant has had no subsequent convictions.
Every masseur or masseuse permit issued pursuant to this division shall terminate at the expiration
of one (1) year from the date of its issuance, unless sooner suspended.
SECTION 5-4-22 REVOCATION
A masseur or masseuse permit issued by the Mayor shall be revoked or suspended where it appears
that the masseur or masseuse has been convicted of any offense which would be cause for denial
of a permit upon an original application, has made a false statement on an application for a permit,
or has committed an act in violation of this article.
The Mayor in revoking or suspending a masseur or masseuse permit shall give the permit holder a
written notice specifying the grounds therefor. Such person may within ten (10) days of such
revocation or suspension file a written request with the Mayor for a hearing before the Mayor, at
which time the masseur or masseuse may present evidence bearing upon the question.
(Ord. 2000-23)
TITLE 5 – BUSINESS
Page 30
TITLE 5 BUSINESS REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 5 PAWNBROKERS
5-5-1 Definitions
5-5-2 License required
5-5-3 License application
5-5-4 Application Fees
5-5-5 Bond
5-5-6 License Fee
5-5-7 Issuance of license
5-5-8 Duration of license
5-5-9 Transferability of license
5-5-10 Possession and display of license required
5-5-11 Signed memorandum, contract, or note
5-5-12 Records required
5-5-13 Identification required
5-5-14 Inspection
5-5-15 Daily report
5-5-16 Property from minor
5-5-17 Property from intoxicated person or thief; Return of stolen property
5-5-18 Sale of property
5-5-19 Employment of minor prohibited
5-5-20 Hours of business
5-5-21 Weapons
5-5-22 Penalty
5-5-23 Revocation of license
SECTION 5-5-1 DEFINITIONS
Pawnbroker: shall mean every person or company engaged in the business of receiving tangible personal
property in pledge or as security for money or other thing advance to the pawner or pledger.
SECTION 5-5-2 LICENSE REQUIRED
It shall be unlawful for any person to do business as a pawnbroker within the City without having first
obtained a license therefore.
SECTION 5-5-3 LICENSE APPLICATION
Application for a license to do business as a pawnbroker within the City shall be made in writing to the City
Clerk on a form provided by the City Clerk for that purpose and must state thereon the following
information:
The name of applicant
The permanent business address of the applicant.
The permanent business telephone number of the applicant.
In the case of a firm, limited liability company, or corporation, the names, permanent residence
addresses, and permanent residence telephone numbers of the partners or officers and all
shareholders owning more than five percent (5%) of the outstanding shares of stock. If a listed
shareholder is a firm, limited liability company, or corporation, the above information shall be
provided for that entity and other such entities in the line of ownership.
TITLE 5 – BUSINESS
Page 31
The location of the property for which the license is requested.
Whether the applicant, partners, officers, or listed shareholders have been convicted of any criminal
offense in any jurisdiction and, if so, a list of such convictions with the date and prosecuting
jurisdiction.
SECTION 5-5-4 APPLICATION FEE
Each application for a license to do business as a pawnbroker within the City from an applicant who, at the
time of application, does not hold a valid license to do business as a pawnbroker within the City shall be
accompanied by an applicant fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). This application fee shall be in
addition to all other fees set forth in this Article and shall not be refunded in the event that the application
for a license to do business as a pawnbroker within the City is denied.
SECTION 5-5-5 BOND
No license to do business as a pawnbroker within the City shall be issued unless or until the applicant
therefore shall file with the City a license and permit bond in the penal sum of one thousand dollars
($1,000.00), approved by the City Attorney, with the City as oblige, conditioned for the faithful and due
performances of the provisions of this Title and the laws of the State of Illinois concerning the operation of
the licensed business and the payment of all fines and penalties by reason of the violation thereof.
SECTION 5-5-6 LICENSE FEE
No license to do business as a pawnbroker within the City shall be issued unless or until the applicant
therefore shall pay to the City Clerk a license fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00).
SECTION 5-5-7 ISSUANCE OF LICENSE
The Mayor shall issue all applications for licenses to do business as a pawnbroker within the City according
to the terms of the provisions of this Title.
SECTION 5-5-8 DURATION OF LICENSE
All licenses to do business, as a pawnbroker within the City granted under this Title shall expire one (1)
year from the date of issuance.
SECTION 5-5-9 TRANSFERABILITY OF LICENSE
No license to do business, as a pawnbroker within the City granted under this Title shall be transferable.
SECTION 5-5-10 POSSESSION AND DISPLAY OF LICENSE REQUIRED
Any pawnbroker licensed under this Title shall keep said license in his possession at all times while doing
business as a pawnbroker within the City and shall cause his license to be framed and hung in plain view
in a conspicuous place on the licensed premises.
SECTION 5-5-11 SIGNED MEMORANDUM, CONTRACT, OR NOTE
Every pawnbroker licensed under this Title shall, at the time of making any advancement or loan, deliver
to the person pawning or pledging any tangible personal property, a memorandum, contract, or note signed
by him containing an accurate account and description, in the English language, of all goods, articles, or
other things pawned or pledged, the amount of money, value of things loaned thereon, the time and date of
pledging the same, the rate of interest to be paid on the loan, the name and residence of the person making
TITLE 5 – BUSINESS
Page 32
the pawn or pledge, and the amount of any fees. No charge shall be made or received by any pawnbroker
licensed under this Title for any such memorandum, contract, or note.
SECTION 5-5-12 RECORDS REQUIRED
Every pawnbroker licensed under this Title shall keep a standard record book that has been approved by
the Peoria County Sheriff’s Department, in which shall be written in ink, at the time of each and every loan
or taking of a pledge, an accurate account and description, in the English language, of all the goods, articles
and other things pawned or pledged, the amount of money, value or thing loaned thereon, the time and date
of pledging the same, the rate of interest to be paid on such loan, and the name and residence of the person
making such pawn or pledge. Such entry shall include the serial number or identification number of items
received which are required to bear such number. Every pawnbroker licensed under this Title shall also
record in his book an accurate description, in the English language, of all goods, articles and other things
purchased or received for the purpose of resale or loan collateral by the pawnbroker from any source, not
in the course of a pledge or loan, the time and date of such purchase or receipt, and the name and address
of the person or business which sold or delivered such goods, articles, or other things to the pawnbroker.
No entry in such book shall be erased, mutilated, or changed. Every pawnbroker licensed under this Title
shall preserve the records required by this Section for one (1) year from the date of the pledge or purchase
or until the item is sold, whichever occurs later.
SECTION 5-5-13 IDENTIFICATION REQUIRED
Every pawnbroker licensed under this Title shall require two (2) forms of identification to be shown him
by each person pledging or pawning any goods, articles, or things to the pawnbroker. One (1) of the two
(2) forms of identification must include his or her residence address. These forms of identification shall
include, but not be limited to, any of the following:
• Driver’s license, Social Security card, utility bill, employee or student identification card, credit
card, or a civic, union, or professional association membership card.
A photocopy of the forms of identification shown shall be made and kept for one (1) year by every
pawnbroker licensed under this Title.
SECTION 5-5-14 INSPECTION
This said book, as well as every article or other thing of value so pawned or pledged, shall at all times be
open to the inspection of the Mayor, his authorized agent, or any law enforcement officer.
SECTION 5-5-15 DAILY REPORT
It shall be the duty of every pawnbroker licensed under this Title to make out and deliver to the Peoria
County Sheriff’s Department, on each day before the hours of twelve o’clock noon (12:00 p.m.), a legible
and exact copy from the standard record book, as required in Section Nine of this Title, that lists all tangible
personal property and other valuable things received on deposit or purchased during the preceding day,
together with the exact time and date when received or purchased, and a description of the person or person
by whom left in pledge, or from whom the same were purchased.
SECTION 5-5-16 PROPERTY FROM MINORS
No pawnbroker licensed under this Title shall take or receive any pawn or pledge for any advancement or
loan any tangible personal property of any kind from any minor which is under eighteen (18) years of age,
or the ownership of which is in, or which is claimed by, any such minor, or which may be in the possession
or under the control of any such minor.
TITLE 5 – BUSINESS
Page 33
SECTION 5-5-17 PROPERTY FROM INTOXICATED PERSON OR THIEF; RETURN OF
STOLEN PROPERTY
No pawnbroker licensed under this Title shall purchase or take any article in pawn or pledge from any
person appearing to be intoxicated, nor from any person known to have been convicted of theft. A law
enforcement officer may provide such criminal conviction information to a pawnbroker. When any person
is found to be the owner of stolen tangible personal property which has been pawned, such tangible personal
property shall be returned to the owner thereof without the payment of the money advanced by the
pawnbroker thereon or any costs or charges of any kind which the pawnbroker may have placed upon the
same.
SECTION 5-5-18 SALE OF PROPERTY
No tangible personal property received on deposit or pledge, or purchased by any such pawnbroker, shall
be sold or permitted to be redeemed or removed from the place of business of such pawnbroker for the
space of twenty-four (24) hours after the delivery of the copy and statement required by Section 5-5-12 of
this Title to be delivered to the Peoria County Sheriff’s Department; and no tangible personal property
pawned or pledged shall be sold or disposed of by any such pawnbroker within one (1) year from the time
when the pawner or pledger shall make default in the payment of interest on the money so advanced by
such pawnbroker, unless by the written consent of such pawner or pledger.
SECTION 5-5-19 EMPLOYMENT OF MINOR PROHIBITED
No pawnbroker licensed under this Title shall employ any person less than eighteen (18) years of age to
take or receive pledges or pawns.
SECTION 5-5-20 HOURS OF BUSINESS
No pawnbroker licensed under this Title shall transact any business with any person between the hours of
nine o’clock (9:00) p.m. and seven o’clock (7:00) a.m.
SECTION 5-5-21 WEAPONS
No pawnbroker licensed under this Title shall take or receive as a pawn or pledge for any advance or any
loan blackjack, Bowie knife, derringer, dirk, pistol, revolver, sawed-off shotgun, or other deadly weapon
of like character, capable of being secreted upon the person and no pawnbroker licensed under this Title
shall display in his window or store any such weapons for sale.
SECTION 5-5-22 PENALTY
Any pawnbroker required to be licensed under this Title who shall violate any of the provisions of this Title
shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a penalty of not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more
than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each and every offense.
SECTION 5-5-23 REVOCATION OF LICENSE
The license of any pawnbroker licensed under this Title who shall violate any of the provisions of this Title
shall, upon conviction thereof, in addition to any other penalties provided for in this Title be revoked.
TITLE 5 – BUSINESS
Page 34
TITLE 5 BUSINESS REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 6 ITINERANT MERCHANTS
5-6-1 Definitions
5-6-2 Prohibition
5-6-3 Penalty
SECTION 5-6-1 DEFINITIONS
Itinerant Merchant: shall mean any person or entity engaging temporarily in the retail sale of collectibles
or consumer goods, wares or merchandise within the City who for the purpose of conducting such business,
rents, uses or leases any room, building, hotel, roominghouse, structure or lot of any kind, regardless of
whether such goods, wares or merchandise are peddled from house to house, place to place, or sold from
the room, building, hotel, roominghouse, structure or lot.
The term shall not include the following persons:
Persons, who without receiving any compensation for their services, solicit contributions or sell
goods, wares or merchandise for civic, patriotic, fraternal, educational, religious or benevolent
organizations.
Persons who sell goods, wares and merchandise on City-owned public grounds as part of an event
which has been approved by the City Administrator.
Persons who sell at events which are sponsored by civic, patriotic, fraternal educational,
governmental, religious or benevolent organizations goods, wares or merchandise which they have
made themselves such as handicrafts and home-sewn items.
To the extent allowed by state and federal law, this Section shall not be considered violated by the use of a
property by an itinerant merchant for the sale of consumer fireworks, as defined by state law, where the
property so used was annexed to the City of West Peoria within the six (6) months preceding the enactment
of this Title or hereafter annexed, if the said annexed property has been used by an itinerant merchant for
the sale of consumer fireworks, as defined by state law, at least once annually for each of the last five years.
(Ord. 2010-25)
SECTION 5-6-2 PROHIBITION
It shall be unlawful for any Itinerant Merchant to operate or do business in the City of West Peoria.
SECTION 5-6-3 PENALTY
Any person found guilty of the violation of this Chapter shall be punished by a fine not to exceed five
hundred dollars ($500.00), with each day the violation continues to be considered a separate offense.
(Ord 206-15)
TITLE 5 – BUSINESS
Page 35
TITLE 5 BUSINESS REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 7 CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE
5-7-1 Definitions
5-7-2 Cable/Video Service Provider Fee Imposed
5-7-3 PEG Access Support Fee Imposed
5-7-4 Applicable Principles
5-7-5 No Impact on Other Taxes Due from Holder
5-7-6 Audits of Cable/Video Service Provider
5-7-7 Late Fees/ Payments
SECTION 5-7-1 DEFINITIONS
Cable service: means that term as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 522(6).
Commission: means the Illinois Commerce Commission.
Gross revenues: means all consideration of any kind or nature, including, without limitation, cash, credits,
property, and in-kind contributions received by the holder for the operation of a cable or video system to
provide cable service or video service within the holder’s cable service or video service area within the
City.
Gross revenues shall include the following:
1. Recurring charges for cable or video service.
2. Event-based charges for cable service or video service, including, but not limited to, payper-
view and video-on-demand charges.
3. Rental of set top boxes and other cable service or video service equipment.
4. Service charges related to the provision of cable service or video service, including, but
not limited to, activation, installation, and repair charges.
5. Administrative charges related to the provision of cable service or video service, including,
but not limited to, service order and service termination charges.
6. Late payment fees or charges, insufficient funds check charges, and other charges assessed
to recover the costs of collecting delinquent payments.
7. A pro rata portion of all revenue derived by the holder or its affiliates pursuant to
compensation arrangements for advertising or for promotion or exhibition of any products
or services derived from the operation of the holder’s network to provide cable service or
video service within the City. The allocation shall be based on the number of subscribers
in the City divided by the total number of subscribers in relation to the relevant regional or
national compensation arrangement.
8. Compensation received by the holder that is derived from the operation of the holder’s
network to provide cable service or video service with respect to commissions that are
received by the holder as compensation for promotion or exhibition of any products or
services on the holder’s network, such as a “home shopping” or a similar channel, subject
to subsection (I).
9. In the case of a cable service or video service that is bundled or integrated functionally
with other services, capabilities, or applications, the portion of the holder’s revenue
attributable to the other services, capabilities, or applications shall be included in the gross
revenue unless the holder can reasonably identify the division or exclusion of the revenue
from its books and records that are kept in the regular course of business.
10. The service provider fee permitted by 220 ILCS 5/21-801(b).
Gross revenues do not include any of the following:
TITLE 5 – BUSINESS
Page 36
1. Revenues not actually received, even if billed, such as bad debt, subject to 220 ILCS 5/21-
801(c)(1)(vi).
2. Refunds, discounts, or other price adjustments that reduce the amount of gross revenues
received by the holder of the State-issued authorization to the extent the refund, rebate,
credit, or discount is attributable to cable service or video service.
3. Regardless of whether the services are bundled, packaged, or functionally integrated with
cable service or video service, any revenues received from services not classified as cable
service or video service, including, without limitation, revenue received from
telecommunication services, information services, or the provision of directory or Internet
advertising, including yellow pages, white pages, banner advertisement, and electronic
publishing or any other revenues attributed by the holder to noncable service or nonvideo
service in accordance with the holder’s books and records and records kept in the regular
course of business and any applicable laws, rules, regulations, standards, or orders.
4. The sale of cable services or video services for resale in which the purchaser is required to
collect the service provider fee from the purchaser’s subscribers to the extent the purchaser
certifies in writing that it will resell the service within the City and pay the fee permitted
by 220 ILCS 5/21-801(b) with respect to the service.
5. Any tax or fee of general applicability imposed upon the subscribers or the transaction by
a city, state, federal, or any other governmental entity and collected by the holder of the
State-issued authorization and required to be remitted to the taxing entity, including sales
and use taxes.
6. Security deposits collected from subscribers.
7. Amounts paid by subscribers to “home shopping” or similar vendors for merchandise sold
through any home shopping channel offered as part of the cable service or video service.
Revenue of an affiliate of a holder shall be included in the calculation of gross revenues to the
extent the treatment of the revenue as revenue of the affiliate rather than the holder has the effect
of evading the payment of the fee permitted by 220 ILCS 5/21-801(b) which would otherwise be
paid by the cable service or video service.
Holder: means a person or entity that has received authorization to offer or provide cable or video service
from the Commission pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-401.
PEG: means public, education and governmental.
PEG access support fee: means the amount paid under this Article [Chapter] and 220 ILCS 5/21-801(d)
by the holder to the City for the service areas within its territorial jurisdiction.
Service: means the provision of “cable service” or “video service” to subscribers and the interaction of
subscribers with the person or entity that has received authorization to offer or provide cable or video
service from the Commission pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-401.
Service provider fee: means the amount paid under this Article [Chapter] and 220 ILCS 5/21-801 by the
holder to a City for the service areas within its territorial jurisdiction.
Video service: means video programming and subscriber interaction, if any, that is required for the
selection or use of such video programming services, and which is provided through wireline facilities
located at least in part in the public right-of-way without regard to delivery technology, including Internet
protocol technology. This definition does not include any video programming provided by a commercial
mobile service provider defined in 47 U.S.C. § 332(d) or any video programming provided solely as part
of, and via, service that enables users to access content, information, electronic mail, or other services
offered over the public Internet.
TITLE 5 – BUSINESS
Page 37
SECTION 5-7-2 CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE IMPOSED
Fee Imposed. A fee is hereby imposed on any holder providing cable service or video service in
the City.
Amount of Fee. The amount of the fee imposed hereby shall be five percent (5%) of the holder’s
gross revenues.
Notice to the City. The holder shall notify the City at least ten (10) days prior to the date on which
the holder begins to offer cable service or video service in the City.
Holder’s Liability. The holder shall be liable for, and pay, the service provider fee to the City. The
holder’s liability for the fee shall commence on the first day of the calendar month following thirty
(30) days after receipt of the ordinance adopting this Article [Chapter] by the holder. The ordinance
adopting this Article [Chapter] shall be sent by mail, postage prepaid, to the address listed on the
holder’s application notice sent pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-401(b)(6) to the City.
Payment Date. The payment of the service provider fee shall be due on a quarterly basis, forty-five
(45) days after the close of the calendar quarter. If mailed, the fee is considered paid on the date it
is postmarked. Each payment shall include a statement explaining the basis for the calculation of
the fee.
Exemption. The fee hereby imposed does not apply to existing cable service or video service
providers that have an existing franchise agreement with the City in which a fee is paid.
Credit for Other Payments. An incumbent cable operator that elects to terminate an existing
agreement pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-301(c) with credit for prepaid franchise fees under that
agreement may deduct the amount of such credit from the fees that operator owes under the
foregoing sections.
SECTION 5-7-3 PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEE IMPOSED
PEG Access Support Fee Imposed. A PEG access support fee is hereby imposed on any holder
providing cable service or video service in the City in addition to the fee imposed pursuant to the
foregoing sections.
Amount of Fee. The amount of the PEG access support fee imposed hereby shall be one percent
(1%) of the holder’s gross revenues or, if greater, the percentage of gross revenues that incumbent
cable operators pay to the City or its designee for PEG access support in the City.
Payment. The holder shall pay the PEG access support fee to the City or to the entity designated
by the City to manage PEG access. The holder’s liability for the PEG access support fee shall
commence on the date set forth in the foregoing sections.
Payment Due. The payment of the PEG access support fee shall be due on a quarterly basis, fortyfive
(45) days after the close of the calendar quarter. If mailed, the fee is considered paid on the
date it is postmarked. Each payment shall include a statement explaining the basis for the
calculation of the fee.
Credit for Other Payments. An incumbent cable operator that elects to terminate an existing
agreement pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-301(c) shall pay, at the time they would have been due, all
monetary payments for PEG access that would have been due during the remaining term of the
agreement had it not been terminated pursuant to that Section. All payments made by an incumbent
cable operator pursuant to the previous sentence may be credited against the fees that that operator
owes under the foregoing sections.
SECTION 5-7-4 APPLICABLE PRINCIPLES
TITLE 5 – BUSINESS
Page 38
All determinations and calculations under this Article [Chapter] shall be made pursuant to generally
accepted accounting principles.
SECTION 5-7-5 NO IMPACT ON OTHER TAXES DUE FROM HOLDER
Nothing contained in this Article [Chapter] shall be construed to exempt a holder from any tax that is, or
may later be, imposed by the City, including any tax that is or may later be required to be paid by or through
the holder with respect to cable service or video service. A State-issued authorization shall not affect any
requirement of the holder with respect to payment of the City’s simplified municipal telecommunications
tax or any other tax as it applies to any telephone service provided by the holder. A State-issued
authorization shall not affect any requirement of the holder with respect to payment of the local unit of
government’s 911 or E911 fees, taxes or charges.
SECTION 5-7-6 AUDITS OF CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER
Audit Requirement. The City will notify the holder of the requirements it imposes on other cable
service or video service providers to submit to an audit of its books and records. The holder shall
comply with the same requirements the City imposes on other cable service or video service
providers in its jurisdiction to audit the holder’s books and records and to recompute any amounts
determined to be payable under the requirements of the City. If all local franchises between the
City and cable operator terminate, the audit requirements shall be those adopted by the City
pursuant to the Local Government Taxpayers’ Bill of Rights Act, 50 ILCS 45/1 et seq. No
acceptance of amounts remitted should be construed as an accord that the amounts are correct.
Additional Payments. Any additional amount due after an audit shall be paid within thirty (30) days
after the municipality’s submission of an invoice for the sum.
SECTION 5-7-7 LATE FEES/ PAYMENTS
All fees due, and payments which are past due, shall be governed by ordinances adopted by this
municipality pursuant to the Local Government Taxpayers’ Bill of Rights Act, 50 ILCS 45/1 et seq.
(Ord. 2007-16)
TITLE 5 – BUSINESS
Page 39
TITLE 5 BUSINESS REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 8 GARAGE SALES
5-7-1 Definitions
5-7-2 Hours of Operation
5-7-3 Provisions
5-7-4 Advertising
5-7-5 Penalty
SECTION 5-7-1 DEFINITIONS
Garage Sales: shall mean and include all sales entitled “garage sale,” “lawn sale,” “attic sale,” “rummage
sale,” “flea market sale,” or any similar casual sale of tangible personal property, not associated with a
commercial business properly licensed to do business in the City within an area properly zoned for such
commercial business, which is advertised by any means whereby the public at large is or can be made aware
of the garage sale.
Goods: are meant to include any goods, warehouse merchandise or other property capable of being the
object of a sale regulated hereunder.
Person: shall mean and include individuals, partnerships, voluntary associations, and corporations.
SECTION 5-7-2 HOURS OF OPERATION
Garage sales shall not be conducted more than one (1) time or for more than three (3) consecutive days
each calendar quarter. In no event shall a garage sale be conducted either before 7:00 a.m. or after 7:00
p.m. on any one (1) day of sale. Residents are advised that all public works projects are almost impossible
to reschedule and will proceed as planned, regardless of garage sales. It is recommended that residents
check with City Hall about planned public works before scheduling a garage sale.
SECTION 5-7-3 PROVISIONS
The provisions of this Section shall not apply to or affect the following persons or sales:
Persons selling goods pursuant to an order or process of a court of competent jurisdiction.
Any person selling or advertising for sale an item or items of personal property which are
specifically named or described in the advertisement.
SECTION 5-7-4 ADVERTISING
All garage sale advertising shall have the date, time and address of any such sale included thereon. All
signs advertising any garage sale shall removed within twenty-four (24) hours after the conclusion of the
sale.
SECTION 5-7-5 PENALTY
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions or terms of this Section or owing or
occupying real property on which a violation occurs shall be guilty and be subjected to a fine not to exceed
the sum of Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) for each offense; and each and every day such violation is
continued shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense.
TITLE 5 – BUSINESS
Page 40
TITLE 5 BUSINESS REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 9 AUTO RACING
5-9-1 Definitions
5-9-2 Enforcing Officer
5-9-3 Permit
5-9-4 General Conditions
SECTION 5-9-1 DEFINITIONS
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Article shall have the meanings ascribed to them
in this Section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Holiday: A legal holiday as designated by the Illinois State Legislature.
Holiday weekend: A weekend with a legal holiday immediately preceding or occurring on the following
day.
Motor racing facility: Any facility or course upon which is conducted motor racing activities or events.
Motor vehicle: Every vehicle which is self-propelled and any combination of vehicles which are propelled
or drawn by a vehicle which is self-propelled.
Muffler: A device for abating the sounds of escaping gases of an internal-combustion engine. A muffler
may be one (1) of the following types:
• Annular swirl flow (auger-type) mufflers: The exhaust gases in the annular swirl
flow muffler follow a circular path down the length of the muffler. The inner design
is like an auger.
• Perforated straight core mufflers with sound-absorbing medium: In this type
muffler, the central tube shall be perforated and shall be fully surrounded from
beginning to end with an absorbing medium (e.g. fiberglass, steel wool or similar
material).
• Reverse flow (baffle) mufflers: The reverse flow devices incorporate a multitube
and baffled design. The exhaust gases do not flow straight through these devices, but
take a multipath, back-and-forth route through the device.
• Stacked 360° diffuser discs mufflers: This type of muffler works by causing the
exhaust gases to bend ninety (90) degrees and then flow through the stacked three
hundred sixty (360) degrees diffuser discs.
• Properly installed muffler: A properly installed muffler is one which is:
o Correctly installed per the manufacturer's instructions; and;
o Fully functional; and
o Has no leaks or holes in the walls of the exhaust tubing or muffler body; and
o Has no defect or modifications to reduce its sound reduction capabilities.
Racing event: Any time, speed, pulling or distance competition using motor vehicles.
Racing vehicle: Every self-propelled device, in, upon or by which any person may be transported, and
which is participating in a motor racing activity or event at a motor racing facility.
Top fuel-burning drag vehicles: Drag vehicles operating on more than fifty (50) percent alcohol fuel, or
on nitromethane, and are commonly known as "funny cars" and "top fuel cars."
TITLE 5 – BUSINESS
Page 41
Turbocharger: An exhaust gas-driven supercharger. Turbochargers meet the requirements for a wellmaintained
muffler system. However, superchargers mechanically driven by the engine are not defined as
a well-maintained muffler system.
Vehicle: Every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported, including
but not limited to go-karts, motorcycles and snowmobiles.
Weekend: The period of time starting at 12:00 p.m. Friday and continuing until 5:00 p.m. on Sunday.
Well-maintained muffler: A device or combination of devices free of defects or modifications that reduce
its sound reduction capabilities, which effectively decreases the sound energy of internal-combustion
engine exhaust without a muffler by a minimum of five (5) dba at trackside.
SECTION 5-8-2 ENFORCING OFFICER
This Article shall be administered and enforced by the zoning enforcing officer appointed by the County
Board, who is hereby designated as the enforcing officer, and who shall make or cause to be made, periodic
inspections of all authorized permits issued in accordance with this article to insure compliance with the
provisions of the same; he shall make or cause to be made, investigations of violations of this Chapter and
shall cause any violations to be corrected. (Ord. of 5-12-81, § IV)
SECTION 5-8-3 PERMIT
Before commencing the operation of any race or racing event as defined above in the County, any
person operating such race, except those excluded in the Illinois Compiled Statutes, 1992, Chapter
55, Act 5, Sections 5-9001 and 5-9002, as amended, shall obtain a written permit from the County
Board. Each application for a permit shall specify the day or days for which the permit is effective.
The applicant shall disclose the name and address of all owners and operators of the motor racing
facility on the permit application. The County Board shall have the authority to establish the form
for the permit application and all questions shall be answered by the applicant. The zoning
administrator shall be the designated permit officer and all applications for a permit shall be made
in the Zoning Department.
The fee shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00) for all races and events held by a person, other than
a County fair association, state fair, or other not-for-profit association or corporation, on a single
day. No permit shall be issued unless the fee is fully paid in advance of issuance.
Any racing organization or person who sponsors more than ten (10) racing events on different days
within one (1) calendar year, may obtain an annual racing permit by the payment of the sum of one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for the entire period. This shall be payable at the rate of five hundred
dollars ($500.00) at the time of the issuance of the permit and five hundred dollars ($500.00) within
sixty (60) days thereafter. The annual racing permit shall expire December 31 of each year.
The County Board shall pay one-half (1/2) of each fee into the County Treasury and shall transfer
the remainder to the road and bridge fund of the township or road district wherein the race or event
takes place. If the race or event for which the permit is issued is rained out or postponed for other
good cause shown, the permit shall be valid for use within the next eight (8) days of the date
specified in the permit.
(Ord. of 5-12-81, § II(a), (b); Res. of 3-9-82, §§ 8, 9; Amend. of 4-13-93, § 2)
SECTION 5-8-4 GENERAL CONDITIONS
No racing event shall start after 10:15 p.m. and all racing events shall end by 11:00 p.m. on the
following days:
1. Between June 1 and August 31;
2. On holidays and holiday weekends; and
TITLE 5 – BUSINESS
Page 42
3. On weekends from September 1 to May 31.
All other days of the year, racing events shall end by 10:00 p.m.
The permit holder is bound to comply with all other applicable County ordinances; Chapters 3, 10
and 24 of this Code; and the applicable laws of the State and the United States.
Every racing vehicle entered in any racing event, except top fuel-burning drag vehicles and tractor
and truck pulls, shall be equipped with a properly installed and well-maintained muffler meeting
or exceeding the following standards as appropriate:
ENGINE SIZE TYPE
Muffler Type
Larger
than 1600 cc
1600 cc or less 4-cycle motorcycle 2 cycle motorcycle
Annular swirl
flow
16" in length 10" in length
Perforated
straight core
with soundabsorbing
medium (not
installed on a
rotary engine)
20" inner core
length
12" inner core length
6" inner core
length
8" inner core
length
Reverse flow
(baffle)
Meeting the 5 dba noise reduction standard of a well-maintained muffler
Stacked 360°
diffuser disks
Turbocharger
Go-kart
muffler
As defined by the international Karting Federation as specified in Motor Race
Vehicle and Facility Sound Measurement and Procedure Manual NPCS-35 which is
hereby adopted by reference
Original
equipment
manufacturer
motorcycle
muffler
When installed on a motorcycle model for which such muffler is designated by the
manufacturer
Any other
device
Which the County zoning enforcing officer determines qualified as a well-maintained
muffler
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page 1
THE CITY OF WEST PEORIA
TABLE OF CONTENTS
TITLE 6: EROSION CONTROL
CHAPTER 1 - EROSION, SEDIMENT AND STORM WATER CONTROL REGULATIONS
PERMIT
APPENDIX A.
APPENDIX B.
TITLE 6 – EROSION CONTROL
Page 1
TITLE 6: EROSION CONTROL
CHAPTER 1 EROSION, SEDIMENT AND STORM WATER CONTROL
REGULATIONS
6-1-1 Definitions
6-1-2 Applicability
6-1-3 Standards for Design and Maintenance of Control Measures
6-1-4 Maintenance of Control Measures
6-1-5 Erosion, Sediment and Storm Water Control Permits
6-1-6 Maintenance of Permanent Storm Water Control Measures
6-1-7 Enforcement and Stop Work Order Fee
6-1-8 Penalty
6-1-9 Appeals
6-1-10 Appendices
SECTION 6-1-1 DEFINITIONS
For the purposes of these regulations, the following words, terms and phrases shall have the meanings
respectively ascribed to them in this section, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise.
Adjacent lands: At a minimum is an area within fifty (50) feet of the project area, and includes all
surrounding land that may either impact a site, or be impacted by potential soil erosion, sediment and/or
storm water run-off as a result of land disturbing activities conducted on a site.
Areas of concentrated flow or bodies of water: Any area where water may accumulate or flow, whether
continual or as a result of a storm event, including but not limited to lakes, rivers, streams, creeks, ponds,
ditches, swales, gullies, ravines, street gutters and other similar features.
City: The City of West Peoria
City Council: The West Peoria City Council
Control measure: Any proposed temporary or permanent measures to be installed to control erosion,
sediment and storm water run-off from a project area.
County: The County of Peoria, Illinois.
Development: The division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels; the construction,
reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration, relocation or enlargement of any structure; any mining,
excavation, landfill or land disturbance; and any use or extension of the use of land.
Disturbed area: From any point where water leaves the site; it is the land over which water flows toward
the point.
Erosion Control Administrator: The person appointed by the West Peoria City Council to administer
this ordinance.
Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM): Maps prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA) that depict the special flood hazard areas (SFHA) within a community. These maps include
insurance rate zones and flood plains and may or may not depict floodways.
Five-year frequency storm event: The storm event rainfall depth during a 24-hour
period which is exceeded, on the average, once every five (5) years.
TITLE 6 – EROSION CONTROL
Page 2
Institutional use: A religious, or public use, such as a church, library, public or private school, hospital, or
government owned or operated building, structure, or land used for public purpose.
Land disturbing activity: Any change in land, which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and
the movement of sediments into State or County waters or on to lands in the City, or a change in the amount
and/or intensity of storm water run-off, including but not limited to, the covering with an impervious
surface, stockpiling, clearing, grading, excavating, rehabilitating, transporting, depositing or filling of land.
Normal agricultural practices: Activities associated with the preparation and tilling of land for the
purposes of growing crops, or raising livestock.
Perimeter control: Any control measure installed between the down slope side of disturbed area and the
property line and/or between the down slope side of the disturbed area and any area of concentrated
flow.
Pre-project condition: A condition that impacts erosion, sediment, or storm water run- off characteristics
of a site prior to start of construction activity. The pre-project condition shall be based on the
predominant land use for the past five (5) years. For example, if a site has been cropland for four (4) of the
past five (5) years and in grass just prior to development, the land use would be cropland for the pre-project
condition.
Project: Any development involving modification to land which involves a land disturbing activity.
Regional storm water management system: A system which is designed, constructed and
maintained to provide storm water control for multiple land owners.
Road: Any right-of-way that has been improved for the purposes of providing a surface for vehicular traffic,
including any Federal, State, County, Township, and City controlled facilities.
Single family dwelling: A building designed for or occupied by one family.
Site: The lot or parcel on which the project is to be developed.
Standards: The Illinois Environmental Protection Agency’s Illinois Urban Manual, A
Technical Manual Designed for Urban Ecosystem Protection and Enhancement published in 1955 and
Illinois Procedures and Standards for Urban Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control published in 1988 by
the Urban Committee of the Association of Illinois Soil and Water Conservation Districts now in effect, or
as hereafter amended which is incorporated by reference herein, the City of West Peoria standards for Storm
Water Design Analyses, found at Appendix “A” of this article, and the erosion and sediment control criteria
and specifications found in Appendix “B” of this section.
Substantial completion: The point at which all exterior work is completed and the site can be used for the
use intended.
Twenty-five year frequency storm event: The storm event rainfall depth during a twenty-four hour period
which is exceeded, on the average, once every twenty-five (25) years.
Two family dwelling: A building designed for or occupied by two families.
Two-year frequency storm event: The storm event rainfall depth during a 24-hour period which is
exceeded, on the average, once every two (2) years.
Utility service line: The means by which utility service is provided to service users,
such as electric, telephone, television cable; gas, water and sewer pipes.
Working day: Shall not include Saturday, Sunday or any holiday when the West Peoria City Hall is closed.
TITLE 6 – EROSION CONTROL
Page 3
SECTION 6-1-2 APPLICABILTY
These regulations shall apply to:
All projects within the boundaries and jurisdiction of the City. No land surface shall be disturbed
unless an erosion and sediment control permit, or an erosion, sediment and storm water control
permit has first been issued for that project: This article shall not apply to the following:
Land disturbing activities that disturb less than once acre of area and are also not part of a
larger common plan of development or sale. ;
Normal agricultural practices; or
Routine maintenance of roads, access ways and utility service lines.
The Erosion Control Administrator reserves the right to require any non-agricultural, construction
development activity, regardless of disturbed area or type of activity, to comply with this article if
it is determined to be the cause of or a contributor to an existing or potential erosion, sediment, or
storm water impact.
Any land within the boundaries and jurisdiction of the City on which there is located a permanent
storm water control measure, which was installed pursuant to this section.
SECTION 6-1-3 STANDARDSFORDESIGNANDMAINTENANCE OFCONTROLMEASURES
Erosion and Sediment Control Measures
All control measures required under this section shall conform to the design criteria, standards, and
specifications provided in the applicable standards now in effect or as hereafter amended. Appendix
“B” provides a list of common measures that can be used to control erosion and sediment. All
control measures installed shall be sufficient to prevent sediment from leaving the permit site
during a five (5) year frequency storm event. Measures shall be taken to prevent sediment from
leaving the site. When sediment does leave the site, the owner, developer or contractor shall remove
the sediment and return it to the site within four hours or by no later than the end of the workday.
For example, installing a rock construction drive, or cleaning tires could be used to minimize
tracking of sediment onto public roads.
Permanent Storm Water Control Measures
All storm water controls shall be designed so that the peak discharge rate from the permitted area
resulting from the two-year and twenty-five year frequency storm events for the post-project
condition do not exceed the corresponding storm event peak discharges for the pre-project
condition. Evaluation of submitted plans shall be based on the Storm Water Design Analysis
Standards in Appendix “A” at the end of this section.
Regional Storm Water Control Systems
To allow for the beneficial development and maintenance of the regional storm water management
systems, where they are available and they are appropriate, an applicant may submit a design
dependent on such a system. The applicant shall submit documentation of the approval for the use
of the regional storm water management facility from the governmental agency having jurisdiction
over it. The applicant shall submit evidence showing that there will be no adverse flooding impact
to any receiving stream between the point of discharge and the regional storm water facility. If the
applicant is approved to use the regional storm water management system, the applicant may
request exemption from the requirements in this section for permanent on site storm water controls
from the Erosion Control Administrator. Such exemption shall not apply to any temporary storm
water control measures required by this section.
SECTION 6-1-4 MAINTENANCE OF CONTROLMEASURES
Erosion, Sediment and Temporary Storm Water Control Measures
TITLE 6 – EROSION CONTROL
Page 4
On-site sediment control measures shall be constructed and functional prior to initiating clearing,
grading, stripping, excavating, or fill activities on the site.
Sediment control measures and temporary storm water control measures are to be maintained so
they are operating effectively until permanent ground surface protection and permanent storm water
control measures are established in a manner specified in the applicable permit issued pursuant to
this section.
Fully functioning temporary sediment control measures (including, but not limited to perimeter
sediment controls) shall remain in place until the ground is stabilized with permanent ground cover.
The intent of this section is to keep the sites protected at all times until the ground is permanently
stabilized. In cases where it is not practical to leave the temporary sediment control measures in
place prior to establishing ground cover (for example, when control measures need to be removed
in order to grade the area or install pavement or sod), an exception will be made only if one of the
conditions listed below will be met. In no way does adhering to one of the conditions below relieve
the owner of responsibility to clean-up or repair any damages caused from sediment or storm water
run-off leaving the site
Permanent ground cover shall be established with pavement, aggregate or sod within three
days of the removal of sediment barriers.
Permanent vegetation shall be established by seeding with anchored mulch within three
days of removal of sediment barriers during the spring or fall seeding periods. Summer
seeding is acceptable on project areas which shall be watered; it is not acceptable in
concentrated flow areas.
Additional Control Measures
The Erosion Control Administrator may require additional control measures pursuant to the
Standards if determined as necessary after site inspection and prior to issuing the permit.
SECTION 6-1-5 EROSION, SEDIMENT, AND STORM WATER CONTROL PERMITS
Before commencing any project that will disturb greater than or equal to one acre of land or a project with
less than one acre that is part of a larger common plan of development, the owner of the land, or his
representative, shall be required to file an application for an Erosion, Sediment, and Storm Water Control
Permit.
Application
The applicant shall file the application with the City on forms provided by the City. The applicant
shall supply the number of copies of application documents as provided in the application. Each
application shall be accompanied by the following information:
Existing site conditions map. A map of existing site conditions on a scale, of at least oneinch
equals one hundred (100) feet, showing the project area and immediately adjacent
areas and the locations of the following site information;
a) Site boundaries and adjacent lands which accurately identify site location;
b) Lakes, streams, wetlands, channels, ditches, and other water courses on and
immediately adjacent to the site;
c) Floodways and/or Zone A of the Floodplain as determined on the Flood Insurance
Rate Map (FIRM), and indicating the map panel number;
d) All off-site drainage onto or through the project site;
e) Location and dimensions of storm water management components on or adjacent
to site;
f) Locations and dimensions of structures, roads, highways, easements and paved
areas; and
TITLE 6 – EROSION CONTROL
Page 5
g) Site topography: show contours at vertical intervals as follows:
(i) Slope of six percent (6%) or less, two-foot interval.
(ii) Slope of over six percent (6%) but less than fifteen percent (15%), fivefoot
interval.
(iii) Slope of over fifteen percent (15%) ten-or twenty-foot intervals.
Plan of final site conditions.
A plan of final site conditions drawn to the same scale as the existing site map submitted
pursuant to subsection (1)a, and which includes information to accurately depict postconstruction
appearance of site, e.g., paved areas, building, landscaping, and other changes
to the site, along with other predominate site features, e.g., open areas, bodies of water.
Sediment and Erosion control practices.
A site construction plan including:
a) Locations and dimensions of all proposed land disturbing activities;
b) Locations and dimensions of all temporary soil and aggregate stockpiles;
c) Location, dimension and construction details of all construction site management
control measures necessary to meet the requirements of this article and including
proposed re-vegetation of disturbed areas;
d) Statement regarding provisions for maintenance and maintenance requirements of
the construction site management control measures during construction.
Storm water management plans and controls. Design calculations and information related
to the permanent storm water management system for any project (except single-family
residential developments) with a net increase of impervious area. The following
information shall also be provided by the applicant:
a) A map showing the drainage area boundaries, including of-site drainage areas that
drain into or onto the site;
b) Location and identification of soil types for all drainage areas;
c) Location and identification of vegetative cover for all drainage areas;
d) Run-off curve number calculations for both pre-and post- project conditions for
each drainage area;
e) Time of concentration calculations for both pre-and post-project conditions for
each drainage area, and include a map showing hydraulic flow lengths used;
f) Peak flow-rate calculations for 2 year and 25 year storms for both pre-and postproject
conditions;
g) Design calculations for detention basin outlets for both 2 year and 25 year storms,
include stage-storage table and discharge rating curve data or out-flow calculations
(refer to optional form in Appendix A);
h) Location, dimensions, and construction details of proposed detention basins and
outlets;
i) Detention volume calculations;
j) Summary of peak flow-rates for pre-, post- and proposed conditions with detention
showing that the requirements of this section are met (refer to optional form in
Appendix A);
k) An analysis of the stormwater detention outlet adequacy for a 50- year storm and
100-year storm and;
Schedule or sequence of development or installation of the elements of the site
management control measures proposed above.
A detailed estimate of quantities and estimated costs, prepared by a registered professional
engineer, of all control measures required under this section.
A plan of the continued management and maintenance of such permanent control measures.
Application fee. An application fee shall be submitted at the time of application. The fee
shall be set by the City Council in its Fee Schedule resolution.
TITLE 6 – EROSION CONTROL
Page 6
A fractional acre shall be rounded to the nearest whole acre. There shall be no refund of
any fees paid and no application shall be accepted for filing unless the fee has been paid in
full.
Application Review
Within five (5) working days of submittal of the application, the Erosion Control Administrator
shall respond in writing to the sediment and erosion control practices portion. Within twenty (20)
working days of submittal of the application, the Erosion Control Administrator shall respond to
the storm water management plans and control portion of the application by either issuing a permit,
issuing a request for additional information, or issuing a statement denying the permit with an
explanation of cause. The application shall be deemed approved if no response is made within the
time frames stipulated above.
Financial Security Agreement
Before any Erosion, Sediment and Storm Water Control Permit is issued, the applicant shall deliver
to the Erosion Control Administrator a surety bond, irrevocable letter of credit or executed escrow
agreement in the name of the City of West Peoria for one hundred percent (100%) of the applicant’s
engineer’s estimated cost for all control measures required under this section. A signed contractor’s
bid that meets the specifications of the engineer’s estimate for the work can be used to establish the
amount of security required, if such estimate is accepted by the Erosion Control Administrator.
Duration
The Erosion, Sediment and storm Water Control Permit shall be issued for a period not exceeding
two years.
Permit Conditions
The Erosion, Sediment and Storm Water Control Permit shall contain at a minimum the following
general conditions:
That written approval shall be obtained from the Erosion Control Administrator prior to
making any modification to the approved erosion and sediment control plan as set forth in
the permit;
That all control measures required in the permit shall be installed unless otherwise directed
by the Erosion Control Administrator;
That all control measures shall be maintained during construction;
Such other conditions as the Erosion Control Administrator deems appropriate.
Permanent Ground Surface Cover
Without exception, all disturbed areas must have permanent ground cover within six months of
completion, or within six months of occupancy, whichever comes first.
Final Inspection; Notice of Permanent Storm Water Control Measures
Within fourteen (14) days after completion of construction, the applicant shall notify the Erosion
Control Administrator that the permanent storm water control measures are ready for final
inspection. If the inspection shows that the control measures and maintenance plan comply with
the Standards in Appendix “A” of this section, the Erosion Control Administrator shall issue a
Notice of Permanent Storm Water Control Measures. The owner shall record the Notice with the
Peoria County Recorder of Deeds within fifteen (15) days after the Notice is issued.
SECTION 6-1-6 MAINTENANCE OF PERMANENT STORM WATER CONTROL MEASURES
Anyone owning property with a permanent storm water control measure existing thereon and installed
pursuant to this section shall maintain the control measure so that it functions in compliance with these
regulations.
TITLE 6 – EROSION CONTROL
Page 7
SECTION 6-1-7 ENFORCEMENT AND STOP WORK ORDER FEE
This section shall be administered and enforced by the Erosion Control Administrator, who shall make or
cause to be made, periodic inspections of all work authorized by permits issued in accordance with this
section to insure that said construction is in compliance with its provisions; he shall make or cause to be
made, investigations of violations of this section and shall cause any violations to be corrected.
Any permit issued pursuant to this section shall be revoked by the Erosion Control Administrator when he
finds from personal inspection or from competent evidence that the rules, regulations
or standards under which said permit was issued are being violated. To defray costs of administering stop
work orders posted by field inspectors as a result of a violation of any terms of the ordinance, a fee of one
hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) plus ten dollars ($10.00) per day that violation exists per stop work order
will be charged.
SECTION 6-1-8 PENALTY
The violation of any of the terms of this section shall constitute an offense punishable by a fine not to
exceed seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00), - with each day the violation remains uncorrected constituting
a separate offense. Such fine is in addition to any other remedy provided by law.
SECTION 6-1-9 APPEALS
The City Council shall consider and decide upon appeals any decision, order, or requirement of the Erosion
Control Administrator made pursuant to this section.
Any person directly aggrieved by any decision, order, requirement, or determination of the Erosion Control
Administrator made pursuant to this section shall have the right to appeal such action to the City Council.
Such appeal shall be made within thirty-five (35) days from the date of the action appealed form, shall be
filed in writing, and shall include a short, concise statement of why the action is being appealed. The fee
for such an appeal shall be set by the City Council in its Fee Schedule resolution and is due with the
application. In addition, the person filing the appeal shall pay all required publication costs associated with
the appeal.
Upon receipt of a notice of appeal, the City shall set a date for a public hearing before the City Council.
Such public hearing shall commence not sooner than fifteen (15) days nor more than thirty (30) days after
the date of the receipt of the notice of appeal. At least fifteen (15) days of notice of the time and place of
such hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the City. The City Council shall
decide the appeal within twenty-one (21) days after the conclusion of the public hearing. The City Council
may affirm, modify or reverse any appealed action.
Appeals from the City Council shall be made in conformity with the provisions of the Illinois
Administrative Review Act, 735 ILCS 5/3-101 et.seq. Copies of any orders or proceedings ordered by the
appellant shall be furnished to him at his own cost.
SECTION 6-1-10 APPLICATION
The attached appendices are fully incorporated herein.
Page 1 of 8
City of West Peoria, Illinois / Erosion, Sediment, & Storm Water Control Permit
CITY OF WEST PEORIA
EROSION, SEDIMENT AND STORM WATER CONTROL
PERMIT APPLICATION
Before commencing any project that will disturb greater than or equal to one acre of land or a project with
less than one acre that is part of a larger common plan of development, the owner of the land or his
representative, shall be required to file an application for an erosion, sediment, and storm water control
permit.
A copy of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency (IEPA) National Pollution Discharge
Elimination System (NPDES) Permit shall be attached as well. Information on how to submit a
Notice of Intent and Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan can be found at epa.illinois.gov.
1. Application Fee: Fee : $ ____________________________ .
The fee shall be set by ordinance of the City of West Peoria. See Title 11 - Fee Schedule of the
City Code Book for the current fees. The full fee is due upon submission of this Application.
2. General Site Information:
Project Name: _________________________________________________
Project
Location: Address:__________________________________________
Tax ID No.:________________________________________
Zoning Classification: _________________________________________________
Size of Property: (Acres or Square Feet)_______________________________
TO BE COMPLETED BY THE CITY OF WEST PEORIA ONLY:
Date Permit Received:
Date Permit Approved:
Schedule Provided (Y/N):
Financial Security (Y/N):
Permit Approved By/Title:
Date Permit Expires:
Page 2 of 8
City of West Peoria, Illinois / Erosion, Sediment, & Storm Water Control Permit
3. Contact Information
Information for Owner of Property:
Name/Company:
Address:
City/State/Zip Code:
Phone No.: Cell No.:
Fax No.: E-Mail Address:
Information for Developer of Property (if different than owner):
Name/Company:
Address:
City/State/Zip Code:
Phone No.: Cell No.:
Fax No.: E-Mail Address:
Information for Contractor:
Name/Company:
Address:
City/State/Zip Code:
Phone No.: Cell No.:
Fax No.: E-Mail Address:
Information for Engineer:
Name of Licensed Professional Engineer:_
Name of Company:
Street Address:
City/State/Zip Code:
Telephone No.: Cell No.:
Fax No.: E-Mail Address:
Page 3 of 8
City of West Peoria, Illinois / Erosion, Sediment, & Storm Water Control Permit
4. Site Plan Information
A site plan must be submitted with this application as required by the ordinance. Additional
required information must also be included as required for your project.
Two (2) complete copies of plans and documentation that provide the information required
below. If item is not applicable, mark item with N/A.
Plan sheet (minimum scale of 1" = 100') with all dimensions and information including:
Existing Conditions:
a) ________ Property Lines & Adjacent Lands
b) ________ Lakes, Steams, wetlands, channels, ditches, other water courses on and
immediately adjacent to site. Including off site drainage onto and
through project site.
c) ________ Floodways and/or Zone A of the floodplain as determined on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map (“the “FIRM”), and indicating the Map Panel
Number
d) ________ Existing Buildings and Structures, Roads, Highways, Paved Areas
including any existing storm water management components.
e) ________ Existing contours:
________ i. slope of six percent (6%) or less, two foot intervals
________ ii slope greater than six percent (6%) , five foot intervals
________ iii slope over fifteen percent (15%), twenty foot intervals
f) ________ Abutting roadways and alleys
g) ________ Right-of-Way lines
h) ________ Utility easements
i) ________ Temporary easements
j) ________ Existing utilities (gas, water, electric, fiber optic, telephone, sanitary,
storm, cable) locations and sizes
k) ________ Zoning classifications (proposed site and adjacent sites)
l) ________ North arrow
m) ________ Scale – at least 1 inch = 100 Feet
Page 4 of 8
City of West Peoria, Illinois / Erosion, Sediment, & Storm Water Control Permit
Final Site Conditions:
a) ________ Scale – same as existing conditions not less than 1 inch = 100 feet.
b) ________ Proposed structures (size and location) and Building setbacks
c) ________ Parking
________ i. paved areas
________ ii. pavement design
________ iii. traffic circulation patterns
________ iv. number of spaces required per ordinance
________ v. number of spaces provided
________ vi. parking lot layout and dimensions
________ vii. handicap spots
d) ________ Handicap accessible ramps
e) ________ Driveway locations and dimensions
f) ________ Landscaping
g) ________ Exterior lighting
h) ________ Proposed utilities (gas, electric, water, sanitary, storm, cable) location
and size of hook-ups and transformer pad locations
i) ________ Grading/drainage plan
________ i. storm water calculations by a Registered Licensed
Professional Engineer
________ ii. storm water detention calculations
________ iii. storm water detention location and size
________ iv. contour lines, spot elevations, and slopes of proposed
improvements
________ v. finished floor elevations
________ vi. drainage structures (type, size, rim elevations, invert
elevation, location)
________ vii. erosion and sediment control measures (permanent and
temporary)
Additional information and plans should be included depending upon the size, configuration, and
characteristics of the site and the proposed development indicating compliance with the
requirements of the ordinance.
Page 5 of 8
City of West Peoria, Illinois / Erosion, Sediment, & Storm Water Control Permit
5. Sediment and Erosion Control Practices - A site construction plan including:
________ Locations and Dimensions of all proposed land disturbing activities.
________ Location, dimension, and construction details of all construction site
management control measures necessary to meet requirements of the
ordinance and including proposed re-vegetation of disturbed areas.
________ Location of temporary soil and aggregate piles.
Note: Soil storage piles should be placed behind a sediment fence, a 10’foot
(minimum) wide vegetative strip, or should be covered with a tarp & be
located more than 25’ from any downslope road or drainage way.
________ Location of temporary perimeter sediment control measures.
Note: Perimeter sediment controls such as silt fence, straw bales, 10’ wide
vegetative strips should be installed between disturbed areas and property
lines or drainage ways to prevent eroded soil from leaving the site.
________
Location of temporary Inlet & Pipe Protection.
Note: Storm sewer inlets and structures should be protected to prevent
sediment from entering the system. Common methods of protection include
staked straw bales, silt fence, and inlet filters.
________
Location of temporary stabilized construction entrance.
Note: Access drive should have aggregate stone laid at least 14’ Wide and
6” Thick. Drives should extend 70 feet from the existing roadway into the
site.
________
Location of temporary Channel Protection.
Note: Unstabilized drainage ways, ditches, and diversions should be
temporarily protected from erosion through use of straw bales, rolled
excelsior, urethane foam/geotextiles, georidge, and aggregate ditch checks
until the area is permanently stabilized
________
Location of temporary diversions.
Note: Surface runoff from adjacent areas should be diverted around
disturbed areas to stable outlets to reduce erosion due to surface runoff.
________
Location of temporary sedimentation basins.
Note: Sedimentation basins should be located at the outlets of disturbed
areas and anywhere the sediment-laden runoff has the potential to enter
streams, lakes, or drainage ways.
________
Location of temporary seeding.
Note: Temporary seeding should be used to provide a quick cover to
control erosion when permanent seeding is not desired or the time of year is
inappropriate.
Page 6 of 8
City of West Peoria, Illinois / Erosion, Sediment, & Storm Water Control Permit
________
Location of permanent Channel Protection.
Note: Permanent drainage ways and ditches with high flow velocities should
be protected against erosion by utilizing, paved ditches, riprap, concrete
revetment mat, or turf reinforcement mat.
________
Location of permanent Outlet Pipe Protection.
Note: All storm and culvert outlets should be stabilized to prevent
downstream areas from erosion. Culvert and pipe outlets should be designed
at minimal slopes to reduce velocities out of the pipe thus preventing erosion.
Culverts and storm sewer outlets should not be located at the top of a hill.
The pipe should be extended down the hill and outlet to a flat area or the
flowline of the downstream channel. Outlets with very high velocities may
need energy dissipators such as a riprap energy dissipater.
________
Location of permanent Vegetation and Erosion Control Blanket.
Note: All unpaved areas should be seeded or sodded within 3 days of final
grading. All seeding should be in conjunction with mulch or erosion control
blanket.
6. Storm Water Management Plans and Controls: During and Post Construction.
Required for any project (except single-family residential developments) with a net increase of
impervious area. All calculations must be signed and sealed by a licensed professional engineer.
________ A map showing drainage area boundaries, including off-site drainage areas
that drain into the site.
________ Location and identification of vegetative cover for all drainage areas.
________ Location and identification of soil types for all drainage areas.
________ Run-off curve number calculations for both pre and post project conditions
for each drainage area.
________ Time of concentration calculations for both pre and post project conditions for
each drainage area including map showing hydraulic flow lengths used.
________ Peak flow rate calculations for 2 year and 25 year storms for both pre and post
project conditions.
________ Design calculations for detention basin outlets for both 2 year and 25 year
storms, including stage-storage table and discharge rating curve data or outflow
calculations.
________ Location, dimensions, and construction details of proposed detention basins
and outlets.
________ Detention volume calculations
________ Time of concentration calculations for both pre and post project conditions for
each drainage area including a map showing the hydraulic flow lengths used.
Page 7 of 8
City of West Peoria, Illinois / Erosion, Sediment, & Storm Water Control Permit
7. Management Strategies: During and Post Construction.
________ Provide a plan for continued management and maintenance of all permanent
control measures.
________ Permanent Ground Cover will be established within six months of project
completion, or within six of occupancy, which ever occurs first.
________ Indicate re-vegetation method: Seed ____ Sod ___ Other______
________ Expected date of permanent re-vegetation: _____________________
________ Is temporary seeding or mulching planned if site is not seeded by Sept 15 or
sodded by November 15? Yes ____ No ____
________ Permanent ground cover is the responsibility of: Builder ___ Owner__
Required Maintenance Practices:
________ Written approval must be obtained from the Erosion Control
Administrator prior to making any modifications to the erosion,
sediment, and storm water control plan as set forth in this application.
________ Sediment must be removed from behind sediment fences and barriers
before it reaches a depth that is equal to half the barrier’s height
________ Breaks and gaps in sediment fences and barriers shall be repaired
immediately.
________ Decomposing straw bales and fabric fences will be replaced.
________ All sediment that moves off-site due to construction activity will be
cleaned up before the end of the same workday.
________ All sediment that moves off-site due to storm events will be cleaned
up before the end of the next workday.
________ Gravel access drives will be maintained throughout construction.
________ All installed erosion control practices will be installed and maintained
until the areas they protect are stabilized.
9. Schedule:
Schedule or sequence of construction or installation of the proposed elements of the construction
site management control measures proposed above.
10. Estimates:
A detailed estimate of quantities and estimated costs, prepared by a registered professional
engineer, or all control measures required.
Page 8 of 8
City of West Peoria, Illinois / Erosion, Sediment, & Storm Water Control Permit
11. Financial Security
Before any Erosion, Sediment and Storm Water Control Permit is issued, the applicant shall
deliver to the Erosion Control Administrator a surety bond, irrevocable letter of credit or executed
escrow agreement in the name of the City of West Peoria for one hundred percent (100%) of the
applicant’s engineer’s estimated cost for all control measures required. A signed contractor’s bid
that meets the specifications of the engineer’s estimate for the work can be used to establish the
amount of security required, if such estimate is accepted by the Erosion Control Administrator and
City Engineer.
12. Final Inspection
Within fourteen (14) days after completion of construction, the applicant shall notify the Erosion
Control Administrator that the permanent storm water control measures are ready for final
inspection.
13. Certification:
I, ____________________________________, do hereby certify that the above stated
information is true and correct; that I have carefully read the above application; and in
consideration of the issuance of an erosion control permit I agree that all the requirements above
will be met.
Signature of Owner or Owner’s Representative Required:
Signed:_____________________________________
Title: ______________________________________
Date: ___________________________
This application is subject to the approval of the City of West Peoria Erosion Control
Administrator and City Engineer. The City reserves the right to accept or reject any
changes to the plan of the approved Permit Application.
If the applicant desires changes to the plans set forth in an approved Permit Application,
the party causing and/or desiring the changes shall be responsible to notify the City of West
Peoria Erosion Control Administrator in writing, with a full explanation of the changes
prior to commencing any additional work, or the original Permit will be null and void.
TITLE 6 – EROSION CONTROL
Appendix |A 1
SECTION 2-16 (APPENDIX A)
CITY OF WEST PEORIA
STANDARDS FOR STORM WATER DESIGN ANALYSES
The following are the minimum standard methods and procedures to be used to comply with the
storm water design requirements of the City of West Peoria Erosion, Sediment, and Storm Water Control
Ordinance. If an applicant determines that different methods are necessary based on site specific
conditions, the applicant must request approval from the erosion control administrator to use other
methods prior to submittal.
The design methods listed below are readily available in a number of computer programs, including
the Soil Conservation Service's TR 20 (SCS) and HEC-1 (U.S. Army Corps of Engineers). Additionally, a
simplified methodology which is based on the use of these methods is available in TR 55 (SCS, 1986).
TR 55 can be applied using either manual computations or a computerized version.
Rainfall Depth and Intensity Data
Use data for Peoria County (Illinois State Water Survey, BUL-70/89, 1989) as presented in
attached Table 1 (see below).
Storm Event Rainfall Runoff
Use the SCS Runoff Curve Number method to determine rainfall runoff depth. See Figure 2-1
and Tables 2-2a through 2-2c (attached) from TR 55. Soil type information is available from the
SCS Peoria County Soil Survey, 1992.
Storm Distribution (Cumulative Rainfall Versus Time)
Use the SCS Type II storm distribution. See attached Table 3 and Figure 3.
Runoff Hydrograph
Use the SCS dimensionless hydrograph. See SCS (1974) for information regarding this
procedure. As a substitute for detailed hydrograph analysis, TR 55 (SCS, 1986) can be used,
either manually or computer program.
Storage Routing (Detention Pond Analysis)
Use the continuity equation, also known as the modified-Puls and storage indication methods.
As a substitute for detailed storage routing of a hydrograph, TR 55 (SCS, 1986) can be used,
either manually or computer program. If TR 55 is used and a detention basin with a two-stage
outlet control structure including a rectangular weir and/or orifice outlet is included as a part of
the control measures, use the attached detention basin outlet worksheet to determine and present
the structure design information.
TITLE 6 – EROSION CONTROL
Appendix |A 2
Table 1. Rainfall Depth-Duration-Frequency Data for Peoria County
Rainfall Depth (inches) for Given Frequency
Duration 2-yr. 5-yr. 10-yr. 25-yr. 50-yr. 100-yr
5-min. 0.36 0.45 0.53 0.64 0.73 0.83
10-min. 0.66 0.83 0.98 1.17 1.34 1.52
15-min 0.81 1.02 1.20 1.44 1.64 1.87
30-min. 1.12 1.39 1.64 1.97 2.25 2.56
1-hr. 1.42 1.77 2.09 2.50 2.86 3.25
2-hr. 1.78 2.22 2.62 3.14 3.59 4.08
3-hr. 1.93 2.41 2.85 3.41 3.89 4.43
6-hr. 2.26 2.82 3.33 3.99 4.56 5.19
12-hr. 2.62 3.27 3.87 4.63 5.29 6.02
18-hr. 2.75 3.46 4.09 4.90 5.59 6.37
24-hr. 3.02 3.76 4.45 5.32 6.08 6.92
48-hr. 3.38 4.19 4.86 5.78 6.62 7.51
72-hr. 3.70 4.55 5.26 6.15 7.25 8.16
5-day 4.17 5.11 5.84 6.96 7.98 9.21
10-day 5.12 6.27 7.10 8.19 9.10 10.18
Source: ISWS/BUL-70/89
TITLE 6 – EROSION CONTROL
Appendix |A 3
Figure 2-1. Solution of Runoff Equation
Source: TR-55 SCS TR 55, 1986
TITLE 6 – EROSION CONTROL
Appendix |A 4
Table 2-2a. Runoff Curve Numbers for Urban Areas 1
Cover Description
Curve Numbers for
Hydrologic Soil
Group
Cover Type and Hydrologic Condition Average percent
impervious area
2
A B C D
Fully developed urban areas (vegetation established)
Open space (lawns, parks, golf course, cemeteries, etc.):
Poor condition (grass cover < 50%) 68 79 86 89
Fair condition (grass cover 50% to 75%) 49 69 79 84
Good condition (grass cover > 75%) 39 61 74 80
Impervious areas:
Paved parking lots, roofs, driveways, etc. (excluding right-ofway)
98 98 98 98
Streets and roads:
Paved; curbs and storm sewers (excluding right-of-way) 98 98 98 98
Paved; open ditches (including right-of-way) 83 89 92 93
Gravel (including right-of-way) 76 85 89 91
Dirt (including right-of-way) 72 82 87 89
Urban districts:
Commercial and business 85 89 92 94 95
Industrial 72 81 88 91 93
Residential districts by average lot size:
1/8 acre or less (town house) 65 77 85 90 92
¼ 38 61 75 83 87
1/3 30 57 72 81 86
½ acre 25 54 70 80 85
1 acre 20 51 68 79 84
2 acres 12 46 65 77 82
Developing urban areas
Newly graded areas (pervious areas only, no vegetation) 77 86 91 94
1 Average runoff condition and I 2 .
2 The average percent impervious area shown was used to develop the composite CN's. Other assumptions
are as follows: impervious areas are directly connected to the drainage system, impervious areas have a
CN of 98, and pervious areas are considered equivalent to open space in good hydrologic condition. CN's
for other combinations of conditions may be computed using Figure 2-3 or 2-4 in TR 55.
Source: SCS TR 55, 1986
TITLE 6 – EROSION CONTROL
Appendix |A 5
Table 2-2b. Runoff Curve Numbers for Agricultural Lands 1
Cover Description
Curve Numbers for
Hydrologic Soil
Group
Cover Type Treatment 2 Hydrologic
Condition
3
A B C D
Fallow Bare Soil — 77 86 91 94
Crop residue cover (CR) Poor 76 85 90 93
Good 74 83 88 90
Row Crops Straight row (SR) Poor 72 81 88 91
Good 67 78 85 89
SR + CR Poor 71 80 87 90
Good 64 75 82 85
Contoured (C) Poor 70 79 84 88
Good 65 75 82 86
C + CR Poor 69 78 83 87
Good 64 74 81 85
Contoured & terraced
(C&T)
Poor 66 74 80 82
Good 62 71 78 81
C&T + CR Poor 65 73 79 81
Good 61 70 77 80
Small Grain SR Poor 65 76 84 88
Good 63 75 83 87
SR + CR Poor 64 75 83 86
Good 60 72 80 84
C Poor 63 74 82 85
Good 61 73 81 84
C + CR Poor 62 73 81 84
Good 60 72 80 83
C&T Poor 61 72 79 82
Good 59 70 78 81
C&T + CR Poor 60 71 78 81
Good 58 69 77 80
Close-seeded or broadcast legumes or
rotation meadow
SR Poor 66 77 85 89
TITLE 6 – EROSION CONTROL
Appendix |A 6
Good 58 72 81 85
C Poor 64 75 83 85
Good 55 69 78 83
C&T Poor 63 73 80 83
Good 51 67 76 80
1 Average runoff condition 1 2 = 0.2S.
2 Crop residue cover applies only if residue is on at least 5% of the surface throughout the year.
3 Hydrologic condition is based on combination of factors that affect infiltration and runoff, including (a)
density and canopy of vegetative areas, (b) amount of year-round dover, (c) amount of grass or closeseeded
legumes in rotations, (d) percent of residue cover on land surface (good = 20%), and (e) degree of
surface roughness.
Good: Factors encourage average and better than average infiltration and tend to decrease runoff.
Source: SCS TR 55, 1986.
TITLE 6 – EROSION CONTROL
Appendix |A 7
Table 2-2c. Runoff Curve Numbers for other Agricultural Lands 1
Cover Description
Curve Numbers for
Hydrologic Soil
Group
Cover Type Hydrologic
Condition 2
A B C D
Pasture, grassland, or range—continuous forage for grazing. 3 Poor 68 79 86 89
Fair 49 69 79 84
Good 39 61 74 80
Meadow—continuous grass, protected from grazing and generally
mowed for hay.
Poor 30 58 71 78
Brush—brush-weed-grass mixture with brush the major element 2; Poor 48 67 77 83
Fair 35 56 70 77
Good 30 4 48 65 73
Woods—grass combination (orchard or tree farm). 5 Poor 57 73 82 86
Fair 43 65 76 82
Good 32 58 72 79
Woods. 6 Poor 45 66 77 83
Fair 36 60 73 79
Good 30 4 55 70 77
Farmsteads—buildings, lanes, driveways, and surrounding lots. Poor 59 74 82 86
1 Average runoff condition and I 2 = 0.2S.
2 Poor: < 50% ground cover.
Fair: 50 to 75% ground cover.
Good: > 75% ground cover.
3 Poor: < 50% ground cover or heavily grazed with no mulch.
Fair: 50 to 75% ground cover and not heavily grazed.
Good: > 75% ground cover and lightly or only occasionally grazed.
4 Actual curve number is less than 30; use CN = 30 for runoff computations.
5 CN's shown were computed for areas with 50% woods and 50% grass (pasture) cover. Other
combinations of conditions may be computed from the CN's for woods and pasture.
6 Poor: Forest litter, small trees, and brush are destroyed by heavy grazing or regular burning.
Fair: Woods are grazed but not burned, and some forest litter covers the soil.
Good: Woods are protected from grazing, and litter and brush adequately cover the soil.
Source: SCS TR 55, 1986
TITLE 6 – EROSION CONTROL
Appendix |A 8
Computation Sheet for 2-Stage Detention Basin Outlet Design (to be used with TR 55 worksheet 6a
or computer printout for storage routing)
Project Name: ____________ Structure ID: ____________ Date: ____________
Note: Attach TR 55 worksheet 6a or computer printout with basin routing information
FIRST STAGE
Maximum stage for 2-year storm (E 2-yr ) = ____________ ft.
First stage control elevation (E 1 )= ____________ ft.
Head on first stage structure (H 2-yr = E 2-yr - E 1 ) ____________ ft.
Allowable discharge for 2-yr storm (q 2-yr- ) = ____________ ft.
For rectangular weir outlet:
Required weir length L 1 = q 2-yr /(3.2*H 2-yr
1.5 ) ____________ /(3.2*
____________ 1.5 ) =
____________ ft.
For orifice outlet:
required orifice area A 1 = q 2-yr /(4.98* H 2-yr
0.5 )
+ ____________ /(4.98* ____________ 0.5 ) =
____________ sq.
ft.
SECOND STAGE
Maximum stage for 25-year storm (E 25-yr ) = ____________ ft.
Second stage control elevation (E 2 ) = ____________ ft.
Head on second stage structure (H 25-yr = E 25-yr ;minus; E 2 ) = ____________ ft.
Allowable discharge for 25-yr storm (q 25-yr ) = ____________ cfs.
25-yr. Storm Discharge through first stage:
Weir: q' = 3.2 * L 1 * (E 25-yr ;minus; E 1 ) 1.5 = 3.2* ____________ * (
____________ ;minus; ____________ ) 1.5 =
____________ cfs.
Orifice: q'; = 4.98 * A 1 *(E 25-yr ;minus; E 1 ) 0.5 = 4.98* ____________ * (
____________ ;minus; ____________ ) 0.5 =
____________ cfs.
Allowable discharge through second stage (q") = q 25-yr ;minus; q' = ____________ cfs.
For rectangular weir outlet:
Required weir length L 2 = q"/(3.2* H 25-yr
1.5 ) = ____________ /(3.2*
____________ 1.5 ) =
____________ ft.
For orifice outlet:
Required orifice area A 2 = q"/(4.98 * H 25-yr
0.5 ) = ____________ /(4.98*
____________ 0.5 ) =
____________ sq.
ft.
TITLE 6 – EROSION CONTROL
Appendix |A 9
Table 3. SCS Type II Rainfall Distribution
Time
Hour Fraction
of Total
Fraction of
Total Rainfall
0.50 0.021 0.005
1.00 0.042 0.011
1.50 0.063 0.017
2.00 0.083 0.023
2.50 0.104 0.029
3.00 0.125 0.035
3.50 0.146 0.042
4.00 0.167 0.049
4.50 0.188 0.056
5.00 0.208 0.064
5.50 0.229 0.072
6.00 0.250 0.080
6.50 0.271 0.090
7.00 0.292 0.100
7.50 0.313 0.110
8.00 0.333 0.120
8.50 0.354 0.134
9.00 0.375 0.147
9.50 0.396 0.163
10.00 0.417 0.181
10.50 0.438 0.204
11.00 0.458 0.235
11.25 0.468 0.260
11.50 0.479 0.300
11.75 0.490 0.420
12.00 0.500 0.663
12.25 0.510 0.710
12.50 0.521 0.735
13.00 0.542 0.772
13.50 0.563 0.799
14.00 0.583 0.820
14.50 0.604 0.835
TITLE 6 – EROSION CONTROL
Appendix |A 10
15.00 0.625 0.850
15.50 0.646 0.865
16.00 0.667 0.880
16.50 0.688 0.889
17.00 0.708 0.898
17.50 0.729 0.907
18.00 0.750 0.916
18.50 0.771 0.925
19.00 0.792 0.934
19.50 0.813 0.943
20.00 0.833 0.952
20.50 0.854 0.958
21.00 0.875 0.964
21.50 0.896 0.970
22.00 0.917 0.976
22.50 0.938 0.982
23.00 0.958 0.988
23.50 0.979 0.994
24.00 1.000 1.000
Figure 3. SCS Type II Storm Distribution
SECTION 2-16 (APPENDIX B)
EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL CRITERIA AND SPECIFICATIONS
There are three ways to accomplish urban soil erosion and sedimentation control:
• Allow erosion to take place and then control sediment before it leaves a site.
• Stop erosion in the watershed (project area), by soil stabilization or runoff control measures.
• A combination of the two. (most desirable)
The following is a list of common measures that can be used to control erosion and sediment. It is by no
means an exhaustive list. Some standard drawings are included in this appendix, and are referenced with
the Appendix page numbers. Additional drawings, standards and specifications can be found in the
current edition of the Illinois Urban Manual, An Erosion and Sediment Control Best Management Practice
Manual, owned by the Association of Illinois Soil and Water Conservation Districts and the current edition
of the Illinois Department of Transportation’s Bureau of Design and Environment Manual Construction
Site Storm Water Pollution Control chapter.
SEDIMENT CONTROL
A. PERIMETER SEDIMENT CONTROL MEASURES: To be installed between disturbed areas
(including stockpiles) and property lines or drainage ways in order to protect off-site areas. Control
measures should be installed on the down-slope sides of the disturbed areas where runoff will leave
the site.
Slope
Range
Control Measure Comments
Less than
2%
vegetative (grass) filter strips (PG B4)
no minimum width requirement
2% to
<5%
vegetative (grass) filter strips (PG B4)
10' wide, minimum
size should be increased in proportion to the
drainage area and slope
silt fence (PG B5)
drainage area less than ½ ac per 100 ft.; see standard
for spacing criteria
straw bales
for use in small drainage areas; see standard for
spacing criteria; maximum life is 3 months
vegetative buffer area (other than
grass), about 50' wide, minimum
minimizing disturbed areas is desirable; increase
buffer size in proportion to drainage area and slope
5% to
<10%
vegetative (grass) filter strips 20' wide,
minimum (PG B4)
size should be increased in proportion to the
drainage area and slope
APPENDIX B1
silt fence (PG B5)
drainage area less than ½ ac per 100 ft.; see standard
for spacing criteria
straw bales
for use in small drainage areas; see standard for
spacing criteria; maximum life is 3 months
vegetative buffer area (other than
grass), about 100' wide, minimum
minimizing disturbed areas is desirable; increase
buffer size in proportion to drainage area and slope
>10% silt fence (PG B5)
drainage area less than ½ ac per 100 ft.; see standard
for spacing criteria
B. INLET SEDIMENT CONTROL: To be installed around storm sewer or other inlets to prevent
sediment from entering the system. There are many different types depending on the type of inlet.
Common measures include:
Inlet Protection—Paved Areas Drop-In Protection (PG B6)
Inlet Protection—Monofilament Fabric Barrier Fence (PG B7)
Inlet Protection – Log Type (PG B8)
Inlet Protection—Manufactured Above Grade (PG B9)
C. MUD AND DUST CONTROL: To prevent mud and dust from leaving the site.
Common measures include:
Stabilized Construction Entrance (PG B10)
Dust control – Sap, Water, Prime
RUNOFF CONTROL
A. CONCENTRATED FLOW AREAS: Temporary erosion control measures should be installed to
protect drainage ways such as road ditches and waterways until the area is permanently stabilized.
Common measures include:
Rock Checks for Waterways (PG B11)
Ditch Check – Rolled (PG 12)
Ditch Check – Urethane Foam Geotextiles (PG B13)
Erosion Blanket (PG B14)
Turf Reinforcement Mat (PG B15)
B. PIPE OUTLET PROTECTION: All outlets should be stabilized to prevent downstream areas from
erosion.
APPENDIX B2
Common measures include:
Pipe Outlet to Channel (PG B16)
Pipe Outlet to Flat Area (PG B17)
C. SEDIMENTATION CONTROL: Located where sediment laden water is discharged from a site or
construction zone.
Common measures include:
Sediment Trap (PG B18)
Sediment Basin (PG B19)
D. DIVERSIONS: Surface runoff from adjacent areas should be diverted around disturbed areas to
stable outlets to reduce erosion due to surface runoff.
SOIL STABILIZATION (Recommended seeding dates for Central Illinois are shown in bold.)
A. VEGETATIVE SOIL COVER:
1. Temporary Seeding: Provides a temporary quick cover to control erosion when permanent
seeding is not desired or the time of year is inappropriate. [Early Spring - September 30]
2. Permanent Seeding: Provides permanent vegetative cover to control erosion, filters sediment
from water. May be part of final landscaping plan. [Spring seeding: Early Spring - May 15],
[Fall seeding: August 1 - September 10]
3. Dormant seeding: Same as permanent seeding except seeding is done during dormant season.
Higher rates of seed application are required. If no mulch is applied, then perimeter controls
should be maintained until the vegetation is established. [November 15 - March 1]
4. Sodding: Quick, permanent cover to control erosion. Quick way to establish vegetative filter
strip. Can be used on steep slopes or in drainage ways where seeding may be difficult.
[Anytime, except when the ground is frozen]
5. Ground Cover: Provides ground cover, shrubs and trees in addition to permanent vegetation.
May be used as part of a final landscape plan along with shrubs and trees.
B. NON-VEGETATIVE SOIL COVER:
1. Mulching: Added insurance of a successful temporary or permanent seeding. Controls
unwanted vegetation and preserves moisture. Provides cover where vegetation cannot be
established.
2. Erosion Control Blanket & Turf Reinforcement Mat (PG B14 & B15) – provides cover and
protects soil while vegetation is being established. Choose the material right for your slope and
runoff and the need for the material to be temporary or permanent.
3. Aggregate cover: Provides soil cover on roads and parking lots and areas where vegetation
cannot be established. Prevents mud from being picked up and transported off site.
4. Paving: Provides permanent cover on parking lots, roads or other areas where vegetation
cannot be established.
APPENDIX B3
APPENDIX B4
APPENDIX B5
APPENDIX B6
APPENDIX B7
APPENDIX B8
APPENDIX B9
APPENDIX B10
APPENDIX B11
APPENDIX B12
APPENDIX B13
Staking Pattern Guide
2" or less
the end of Wattle
Stake within 2" of
Wood Stake
Flow
Soil
Soil Soil
Soil
ILLINOIS URBAN MANUAL
ROLLED EROSION CONTROL PRODUCTS
Checked
Approved
REFERENCE
Project
Designed Date
Date
Date
STANDARD DWG. NO.
IUM-514
SHEET 1 OF 1
DATE 8-19-11
in 3" Deep Trench
Rolled Excelsior
Straw Wattle or
4. Or space according to manufacturer’s specifications.
3. 2’ spacing for rolled excelsior.
2. 4’ spacing for wattles.
1. Overlap minimum is the diameter of the roll.
Notes:
D
Trench
3" Deep
Stake Detail
(To only penetrate netting)
Wood Stake
Channel Bottom
Control Product
Rolled Erosion
Soil
Flow
Material
Compost Filler
(or equal)
Wood Stake
1"x2"
and the ground.
seam between the tube
Filler Material to fill the
Place additional Compost
Compost Filter Sock Detail
upstream of the filter sock (see IUM 805). A trench is not required.
6. When compost filter sock ditch check is used, place a compost berm
line with the top of the downstream ditch check.
5. Spacing: The toe of the upstream ditch check shall create a horizontal
4. Stakes shall not extend above the straw wattle more than 2".
3. Recommended stakes are 1 1/8" wide x 1 1/8" thick x 30" long
2. Ends of wattles or rolled excelsior shall be turned at least 6" upslope.
1. Drawings are not to scale.
Notes:
sock (see IUM 805). A trench is not required.
place a compost berm upstream of the filter
When compost filter sock ditch check is used,
Min.
6"
APPENDIX B14
Apron
Staples
Dike Section
Trench
3" to 6"
Staples Staples
Flow
ILLINOIS URBAN MANUAL
URETHANE FOAM GEOTEXTILES
STANDARD DWG. NO.
IUM-514
SHEET 1 OF 1
DATE 6-30-11
Checked
Approved
REFERENCE
Project
Designed Date
Date
Date
Water Flow
APPENDIX B15
APPENDIX B16
APPENDIX B17
APPENDIX B18
APPENDIX B19
(PIPE OUTLET)
TEMPORARY SEDIMENT TRAP
NOTES:
1.
2.Slots shall be cut cleanly and deburred. Ends of slots may be round
or square.
3.
4.
5.
OUTLET PROTECTION
FLOW
EMBANKMENT
COMPACTED EARTH
RISER
RECEIVING CHANNEL
STORM DRAIN SYSTEM, OR
DISCHARGE TO STABLE AREA,
W= MIN.
Riser Dia
W=
ISOMETRIC VIEW
(OPTIONAL)
TRASH RACK
Dia.
Drain Pipe
Filter
Gravel
Base
Concrete
Square
Protection
Riprap
Max.
5 Ft
0% Slope
Wire Mesh
Class IV Over
Table 1
Geotextile
Class I
Table 2,
Geotextile
W
L
L=
DRAIN PIPE
SPILLWAY
EMERGENCY
based upon overflow velocities.
Min.
1.5'
Embankment Elev
Top of Settled
Natural Ground
Principal Spillway
DRAINAGE AREA LIMITED TO 1-5 ACRES
IUM-660P
Max.
2:1
Max.
2:1
Total
1/2
Total
1/2
Storage
Detention
Live
Gravel filter, if used, shall be a maximum stone diameter of 2".
The emergency spillway must be stabilized and/or armored as appropriate
Storage
Dead
Riser with slotted inlets shall be fabricated from corrugated metal,
polyethylene or smooth steel.
with one end embedded in concrete.
standard tee with the pipe or plug in upstream end; or standard tee
Principal spillway shall be fabricated or standard elbow; fabricated or
6.Minimum top width of compacted earth embankment shall be 5'.
(Minimum)
0.5' Free Board
(Max. Flow Depth 1')
Design HWEL
12" Min. Under Pipe
Riprap Extended
Min.
3 Ft.
REFERENCE STANDARD DWG. NO.
SHEET 1 OF 1
DATE 10-05-2017
Project
Designed
Checked
Approved
Date
Date
Date
APPENDIX B20
APPENDIX B21
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page 1
THE CITY OF WEST PEORIA
TABLE OF CONTENTS
TITLE 7: SUBDIVISION
CHAPTER 1 - TITLE, PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY
CHAPTER 2 - GENERAL PROVISIONS
CHAPTER 3 - OFFICIAL MAP
CHAPTER 4 - REVIEW OF SUBDIVISION
CHAPTER 5 - GENERAL DESIGN REQUIREMENTS
CHAPTER 6 - IMPROVEMENTS
CHAPTER 7 - ADMINISTRATION; LEGAL DATA
TITLE 7 - SUBDIVISION
Page 1
TITLE 7 SUBDIVISION
CHAPTER 1 TITLE, PURPOSE & AUTHORITY
7-1-1 Title
7-1-2 Purpose & Authority
SECTION 7-1-1 TITLE
This Title shall be known as and may be referred to and cited as “The City of West Peoria, Illinois,
Subdivision and Official Map Ordinance”. It embraces all the lands and properties lying within said City
limits and within the areas set forth and described as being contiguous or adjacent to said City within one
and one-half (1 1/2) miles from the said City limits, but outside said City. The map or maps herein referred
to and identified by the title thereon as “Official Map, City of West Peoria” is adopted herein as a part
hereof, together with all explanatory matters thereon.
SECTION 7-1-2 PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY
The subdivision regulations and Official Maps as herein set forth and made a part hereof have been made
for these purposes and objectives: to provide for the harmonious development of the City and its environs
as outlined, and for the coordination of streets and subdivisions with other existing or planned streets, and
for the preservation of adequate open spaces for traffic, light and air, and for the distribution of population
and traffic to the extent that favorable conditions in regard to health, safety, and general welfare are
protected or created; to assure that development will follow proposals of the overall Comprehensive Plan
for the City, and the environs embraced herein; to assure that adjacent developments will properly relate to
one another; to assure that a coordinated effort will be made between utilities, services and developers so
that streets and other improvements will be properly installed; and to assure a minimum level of
improvement for all subdivisions.
This Title is adopted under the authority of Division 12, Illinois Municipal Code.
TITLE 7 - SUBDIVISION
Page 2
TITLE 7 SUBDIVISION
CHAPTER 2 GENERAL PROVISIONS
7-2-1 Rules
7-2-2 Definitions
SECTION 7-2-1 RULES
The language set forth in this Code shall be interpreted in accordance with the following rules of
construction, unless the context clearly required a different construction:
The singular includes the plural and the plural the singular;
The present tense includes the past and the future and the future includes the present.
The words “should” or “shall” are mandatory, while the word “may” is permissive.
Terms connotating a particular gender include each and every other gender.
Whenever a word or term defined hereinafter appears in the text of this Code, its meaning shall be
construed as set forth in the definition thereof, and any word appearing in the parenthesis between
a word and its definition shall be construed in the same sense as that word.
All words and terms not defined herein shall be construed in their generally accepted meaning.
SECTION 7-2-2 DEFINITIONS
The following words and terms, whenever they occur in this Code, shall be interpreted as herein defined.
Abutting (Contiguous, Adjacent): Abutting means have one (1) or more common boundary lines or
district lines.
Alley: An alley is a public right-of-way, which affords a secondary means of access to abutting property.
Frontage on an alley shall not be construed as satisfying the requirements related to frontage on a public
street.
Area, Gross: The entire area within the lot lines of the property proposed for subdivision/development,
including any areas to be dedicated/reserved for street and alley right-of-way and for public uses.
Basement: The story of a building which is partly below and partly above grade and having at least one
half (1/2) its height above grade.
Block: A block is a tract of land bounded by streets, or by a street or streets and any combination of
boundary lines of public or institutionally owned lands, railroad right-of-way, rivers and lakes and/or other
lines of demarcation. A block may be located in part within an incorporated city or town.
Building: Any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy.
Building Setback Line: Is a line within a lot, or other parcel of land, so designated on the preliminary plat
and the final plat, which denotes the area between such line and the adjacent street right-of-way line where
an enclosed building, and other obstructions are prohibited, except those permitted obstructions as regulated
by the West Peoria Zoning Code.
Cellar: The story of a building which is partly below and partly above grade and having at least one half
(1/2) its height below grade.
City: The City of West Peoria, Illinois.
City Clerk: The City Clerk of West Peoria, Illinois, or his/her duly authorized representative.
TITLE 7 - SUBDIVISION
Page 3
City Engineer: The term “City Engineer” shall mean a person designated to act in the capacity of City
Engineer in the review of engineering data as outlined herein where the services of a City Engineer are
specifically mentioned.
Collection Tile System: A tile system-serving individual lots for the purpose of receiving water discharge
from such as footing tiles.
Collector Street or Collector Road: The terms “collector street” or “collector road” shall mean traffic
ways which carry traffic between sections of the community or which serve as a connector between rural
areas and the community, and designated on the Official Map herein, as “Collector”.
Comprehensive Plan: The Official Comprehensive Plan is the composite of the functional and
geographical elements of the Comprehensive Plan of the City of West Peoria, or any segment thereof in the
form of plans, maps, charts, textual materials and the official map, as adopted by the City Council.
Developer: (See “Owner”)
Development: Development means both the act of changing a tract of land and the state of a tract of land
after its function has been purposefully changed by man including, but not limited to, construction of
structures on the land, and alterations to the land, except grading that does not alter the natural flow of storm
water.
Dedicate: Transfer of ownership of right-of way, parcel of land or improvement to this municipality or
other public or quasi entity without compensation.
Double Frontage: The term “double frontage” shall mean a condition whereby both fronts and rears of
property face on streets.
Driveway: A driveway is a private access way for motor vehicles between a public or private street and
one or more structures or off-street parking areas.
Dwelling: A dwelling is a building designed or used principally for residential occupancy, including,
without limitation, single-family dwellings, two (2) family dwellings and multiple-family dwellings.
Easement: A quantity of land set aside over or under which a liberty, privilege, or advantage in land
without profit, is dedicated and is distinct from ownership of the land. May be granted either to the public,
a particular person, a utility company, or a combination thereof.
Engineer: A licensed professional Engineer licensed by the State of Illinois.
Excavation: Any act which organic matter, earth, sand, gravel, rock, or any other similar material is cut
into, dug, quarried, uncovered, removed, displaced, relocated or bulldozed and shall include the conditions
resulting therefrom.
Escrow Deposit: A deposit in cash or other approved securities to assure the completion of improvements
within a subdivision or planned unit development.
Fill: Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other material is deposited, placed, pushed, dumped,
pulled, transported or moved by man to a new location and shall include the conditions resulting therefrom.
Final Plat: A map or plan of a subdivision and any accompanying material as described hereafter.
Flood: A general or temporary condition of inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow, the
unusual and rapid accumulation or the runoff of surface waters from any source.
Frontage: Frontage is the measure of lineal contiguity between a lot or portion thereof and another lot,
public street, alley or public way.
Frontage Road: A local street which is parallel to and either adjacent to or within the right-of-way of an
arterial street.
Half Street: The term “half street” shall mean a street dedicated to less than its full planned width.
TITLE 7 - SUBDIVISION
Page 4
Local Street or Local Road: The terms “local street” or “local road” shall mean traffic ways which serve
primarily for access to abutting property and designated on the Official Map herein as “Local”.
Lot: A quantity of land capable of being described with such certainties that its location and boundaries
may be established and which is designated by its owner or developer as land to be converted, used or
developed as a unit or which has been conveyed, used or developed as a unit, including any easements
appurtenant thereto. Such lot shall have frontage on public or private street.
Lot Area: The area of a horizontal plane bounded by the vertical planes through front, side, and rear lot
lines.
Lot Depth: Any distance between the midpoints of straight lines connecting the foremost points of the
side lot lines in front and the rearmost points of the side lot lines in the rear.
Lot, corner: A lot located at the intersection of two (2) or more streets. A lot abutting on a curved street
or streets shall be considered a corner lot if straight lines drawn from the foremost points of the side lot
lines to the foremost point of the lot meet at an interior angle less than one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees.
Lot, Double Frontage: A lot which has a pair of opposite lot lines along two (2) substantially parallel
streets.
Lot, Interior: A lot which faces on one (1) street or with opposite sides on two (2) streets.
Lot of Record: A lot which is part of a subdivision recorded in the office of the Peoria County Recorder
of Deeds, or a lot or parcel described by metes and bounds, the description of which has been legally
recorded.
Lot, Through: A lot other than a corner lot with frontage on more than one (1) street. Through lots abutting
two (2) streets may be referred to as double frontage lots.
Lot, Out: A lot depicted on a preliminary plan or final plat which does not meet the requirements of this
Code for lots of record and which may not be used for construction of buildings or parking lots.
Major Street or Major Highway: The terms “major street” or “major highway” shall mean traffic ways
connecting communities or connecting to limited access traffic ways which, in turn, connect to other
communities, and designated on the Official Map herein as “Major”.
Median: An area between opposite traffic lanes of a street or roadway or an area between two parallel
streets or roadways.
Minor Arterial: A street system that interconnects with, and augments, the urban principal arterial system
and provides service to trips of moderate length and a lower level of travel mobility than principal arterials.
This system contains facilities that place more emphasis on land access and a lower level of traffic mobility.
Minor arterials may carry local bus routes and provide intra-community continuity, but ideally would not
penetrate identifiable neighborhoods.
No-Access Strip: An area at least three (3) feet wide along a lot line within which no vehicular driveways
shall be permitted.
Official Map: The Official Map is the map adopted by the City Council as part of the Comprehensive Plan
which is designated “Official Map” in that plan.
Official Zoning Map: (See Zoning Map).
Outlot: (See Lot, Out)
Owner: Means any person, firm, association, partnership, private corporation, public or quasi-public
corporation, or a combination of any of them, or other legal entity having sufficient proprietary interest in
the land sought to be subdivided or developed to commence and maintain proceedings under the provisions
of this Code.
Parcel: All contiguous land used or legally described and recorded as a single unit.
TITLE 7 - SUBDIVISION
Page 5
Parking Lot: An area not on public right-of-way, exclusive of driveways, which is used for the parking
of motor vehicles.
• For purposes of computing the number of parking space in a lot, all areas used for parking under
unified control on the same or contiguous parcels of land shall be considered as one (1) lot.
Parking Space/Pad: A parking pad is an off-street area adjacent to a driveway which provides parking for
a single motor vehicle.
Parkway: The area of land within a street right-of-way which is located between the back of the curb and
the right-of-way line.
Pavement: The portion of a street designated for vehicular use measured from face of curb to face of curb
or edge to edge of paved street surface where there are no curbs.
Pedestrian Way: A right-of-way or easement across or within a block designated for pedestrian use.
Planning Commission: The Planning Commission of the City of West Peoria, Illinois.
Plat Officer: The term “Plat Officer” shall mean the person appointed to occupy the office created herein,
in which office is vested the chief administrative and enforcement duties as outlined herein.
Preliminary Plat: A tentative map or plan of a proposed subdivision as described in this Chapter of the
Municipal Code.
Project: All of the various parts of proposed construction submitted to the City for approval.
Property Line: The lines bounding a lot or parcel and delineating the land in individual ownership.
Public Improvements: Public improvements include streets, sidewalks, public utilities and other
structures, fixtures or land appurtenances which are or are intended to be dedicated to the City of West
Peoria and the public generally.
Reserve: To set aside a parcel of land in anticipation of its acquisition by this municipality (or other
government entity) for public purposes.
Reserve Strip: The term “reserve strip” shall mean a narrow strip of land between a street adjacent to the
property line and the adjacent property, the strip being retained in private ownership to prevent access of
neighboring property to an improved and dedicated street.
Right-of-Way: A strip of land dedicated to or used by the public for vehicular and/or pedestrian passage;
storm, surface or ground water drainage; or public utility placement.
Roadway: A portion of a right-of-way designated for motorized vehicular use.
Setback: The minimum longitudinal distance between the building line or structure and the related front,
side or rear property line.
Setback Line: A line shown on a plat delineating the setback.
Sidewalk: A portion of a right-of-way used or intended principally for pedestrian passage, which meets or
exceeds the design standards for public sidewalks.
Story: A portion of a building included between the upper surface of a floor and the upper surface of the
floor or roof next above. A basement shall be counted as a story and a cellar shall not be counted as a story.
Story Height: The vertical distance from top to top of two (2) successive tiers of beams or finished floor
surfaces, and, for the topmost story, from the top of the floor finish to the top of the ceiling joists, or, where
there is not a ceiling, to the top of the roof rafters.
Street, Road or Alley: The terms “street”, “road” or “alley” shall mean rights-of-way dedicated to and for
the public use and affording principal means of access to abutting property.
TITLE 7 - SUBDIVISION
Page 6
Street: A street is that portion of a right-of-way used and maintained as principal means of access to
adjacent lots of record or property and meets the design and construction standards for the classification it
holds.
Street, Cul-de-sac: A local street with one (1) outlet which ends with a turn around.
Street, Public: A street owned and maintained by the public.
Street, Private: A street owned and maintained by private entity.
Street, Exterior: A street on the perimeter of a subdivision.
Street, Interior: A street entirely within the confines of a subdivision.
Structure. Anything that is built or constructed, including but not limited to, any usable, permanent, in
place device or appliance outside the building setback line within the lot making a projection of six (6)
inches or more above grade and having a base greater than twelve (12) square feet. This does not, however,
exclude such underground or surface structures such as tunnels, future foundations, or swimming pools in
whole or in part below grade.
Subdivide: To subdivide means (1) the division of land into two (2) or more lots, parcels, or tracts; (2) the
dedication of streets, ways, or other areas for use of the public; (3) any development of property which
according to City Codes necessitates the extension of public utilities to such property by main or by service
connection; (4) any development of property which requires that a new street be constructed; (5) long term
land lease for new development.
Subdivision: Subdivision means the configuration of lots of record, outlots, public right-of-way and public
improvements which result from subdividing land in accordance with the procedures, requirements and
standards of this Code.
Trail: A trail is that portion of right-of-way physically separated from motorized vehicles and intended for
non-motorized transportation and recreational uses.
Use: The use of property is the purpose or activity for which the land, or building thereon, is designed,
arranged, or intended, or for which it is occupied or maintained, and shall include any manner of
performance of such activity with respect to the regulations of the Zoning Code.
Vacate: To terminate the legal existence of right-of-way or easement or subdivision, and to so note on the
final plat recorded with the Peoria County Recorder of Deeds.
Waiver: Deviation, relaxation, adjustment or modification of a requirement of this Title.
TITLE 7 - SUBDIVISION
Page 7
TITLE 7 SUBDIVISION
CHAPTER 3 OFFICIAL MAP
7-3-1 Establishment
7-3-2 Procedures
7-3-3 Amendments or Additions
SECTION 7-3-1 ESTABLISHMENT
There is hereby established for the City and contiguous areas on Official Map which is included herein and
adopted as part of this Section.
SECTION 7-3-2 PROCEDURES
Planned Public Improvements May Be Indicated on Official Map: The Official Map may show
indication of sites for planned public facilities. Public facility sites which may be indicated on the
Official Map may include, but are not limited to, sites for new traffic ways or widening of existing
traffic ways, school and recreational sites, public building sites for future storm drainage, electrical
or other public service or utility easement.
Planned Public Facilities on Official Map to be Required on Subdivision Plat: Whenever the
Official Map indicates the necessity for providing a site for a planned public facility, the Council
may require that the site for the public use be designated on the subdivision plat before granting
approval to such plat; and, furthermore, that such site be held for that specific public use for a
period of one year from date of final plat approval.
Responsible Agency to Begin Negotiations to Purchase Public Site Within One (1) Year:
Whenever a site for public use shown on the Official Map has been required to be indicated on a
subdivision plat, the responsible agency having jurisdiction of such use shall acquire such land by
condemnation within one (1) year from date of approval of such plat; and if it does not do so within
such period of one (1) year, the land so designated may then be used by the owners in any other
manner consistent with this Title and the appropriate zoning regulations.
SECTION 7-3-3 AMENDMENT OR ADDITIONS
Amendments to the Official Map, including the indication of additional public sites to be shown on the
Map, shall be considered amendments to this Section and therefore shall be as specified in Section 7-2.
Any agency requesting the establishment on the Official Map of a future public site or easement which is
not included in the Comprehensive Plan shall indicate to the Planning Commission the need for the site in
the particular location specified. The Planning Commission, before making a favorable recommendation
for the inclusion on the Official Map of such site by the Council, shall find that the public site location is
consistent with the Comprehensive Plan of the Community and shall so indicate in its minutes and
recommendation to the Council.
TITLE 7 - SUBDIVISION
Page 8
TITLE 7 SUBDIVISION
CHAPTER 4 REVIEW OF SUBDIVISION
7-4-1 Council Approval
7-4-2 Sketch Plan Discussion
7-4-3 Preliminary Plat; Preparation and Filing
7-4-4 Preliminary Plat; Review and Approval
7-4-5 Preliminary Plat Approval not to Constitute Subdivision Approval
7-4-6 Time Limitation of Preliminary Approval
7-4-7 Final Plat; Preparation and Filing
7-4-8 Final Plat; Review and Approval
7-4-9 Time Limitation for Recording of Plat
7-4-10 Release Expiration, or Extension of Subdivision Guarantee
7-4-11 Plans and Specifications for Land Improvements
SECTION 7-4-1 COUNCIL APPROVAL
It is hereby required that no subdivision of any block, lot or out lot or any part thereof, or any piece or
parcel of land within the City or in contiguous territory of subdivision review jurisdiction as indicated on
the attached map shall be entitled to record in its respective County or have any validity until it has been
approved by the Council. Each person seeking the Council’s approval of a map, plat or subdivision shall
follow the procedure herein outlined.
SECTION 7-4-2 SKETCH PLAN DISCUSSION
Prior to the filing of a preliminary plat, the subdivider may submit to the Plat Officer material relating to
the proposed subdivision in order to avail himself of the advice and assistance of the City Staff. This may
include information relative to the site and conditions of the site, existing community facilities and utilities
on and adjacent to this site, number and size of lots proposed. It is suggested that for the maximum benefit
the material should include as a minimum:
A. Location Map: Location map should show relationship of the proposed subdivision to the streets
and other community facilities serving it.
B. Sketch Plan: The sketch plan, drawn to scale, should show in simple sketch form proposed layout
of streets, lots, and other features in relation to existing conditions.
The sketch plan discussion does not require formal application, fee, or filing of the plat. The Plat Officer
shall arrange a meeting between the subdivider and the City Manager, City Engineer and other City Staff
Members deemed appropriate.
SECTION 7-4-3 PRELIMINARY PLAT; PREPARATION AND FILING
The subdivider shall cause to be prepared a preliminary plat and shall file eight (8) paper copies and one
(1) mylar reproducible copy having a minimum size of 24” x 18” and a maximum size of 24” x 36” and
other required material with the Plat Officer in application for preliminary approval. The application for
preliminary approval shall include the following:
Location Map: Sketch map showing relationship of the proposed subdivision to the streets and
other community facilities serving it. Such map shall include:
Subdivision name, not duplicating the name of any plat previously recorded in the City.
Outline of area to be subdivided.
Existing streets on adjoining property.
TITLE 7 - SUBDIVISION
Page 9
North point, scale, and date of preparation.
Preliminary Plat: A preliminary plat of the subdivision drawn to the scale of not smaller than one
inch (1”) to one hundred feet (100’) and including:
Name of the proposed subdivision, boundary line bearings and distances, legal description,
and acreage.
Name and address of owner and developer.
Names of persons who prepared the plat, owner’s attorney, representative or agent.
North point, graphic scale, and date.
Contours at two-foot (2’) intervals or less, except in areas of ten percent (10%) or greater
slopes where five-foot (5’) contour intervals are acceptable.
Location of existing lot lines, streets, public utilities, watermains, sewers, drain pipes,
culverts, water courses, special flood hazard area, bridges, railroads, and buildings in the
proposed subdivision within and to a distance of one hundred feet (100’) beyond the tract.
Layout of proposed blocks (if used) and lots including the dimensions of each, and the lot
and block number in numerical order, and front yard setbacks.
Location and widths, other dimensions and names of the proposed streets, alleys, roads,
utility and other easements, parks and other open spaces or reserved areas.
Grades of proposed streets and alleys and locations of proposed street lights.
A cross section of the proposed streets showing roadway locations, type of curb and gutter,
paving and sidewalks to be installed.
The layout of proposed watermains and sanitary sewers with elevations.
The drainage of the land including proposed storm sewers with elevations, ditches,
culverts, bridges, and other structures and direction of water runoff from each proposed lot.
List of any variances or waivers requested. Notices shall be typed or stamped on the
preliminary plat.
Proposed sidewalks.
Preliminary Plat Subdivision Fee: Appropriate fees as described in the latest edition of the City’s
Planning and Zoning Fee Schedule shall be required for submittal of the preliminary plat.
SECTION 7-4-4 PRELIMINARY PLAT; REVIEW AND APPROVAL
Review by City Engineer, Plat Officer, appropriate Fire Protection District, Public Water Company
and Sanitary District, and County Engineer: Immediately upon the filing of eight (8) paper and one
(1) mylar copies of the Preliminary Plat, the Plat Officer shall retain one (1) paper copy and one
(1) mylar copy for his file (on which copy is to be indicated Planning Commission and/or Board
action on the plat) and shall distribute the remaining copies of the plat as follows: One (1) copy
to the City Engineer, one (1) copy to the appropriate Fire District, Public Water Company and
Sanitary District, Tri-County Erosion Control Ordinance, two (2) copies to the Planning
Commission; and where proposed plat is outside the City limits, but within the area of subdivision
jurisdiction, one (1) copy to the County Engineer for the appropriate county involved.
The City Engineer, Plat Officer, appropriate Fire Protection District, Public Water Company and
Sanitary District, Tri-County Erosion Control Ordinance and where concerned, the County
Engineer, shall have opportunity to review the plat and application materials to assure the proposed
subdivision complies with applicable regulations and requirements, and report upon such to the
Planning Commission. The Plat Officer shall confer with the appropriate Zoning Officer to
determine that the proposed subdivision complies with the Zoning Ordinance. The Plat Officer
shall also report upon conditions of the site or adjacent properties which, while not evident in the
application materials, may affect development upon the site.
Review by Planning Commission: The Planning Commission shall review the preliminary plat and
application materials to assure compliance with the City Plan and Official Map of the City.
Particular note shall be made that any planned major streets or other planned public facilities of the
TITLE 7 - SUBDIVISION
Page 10
community falling in the area of the subdivision being reviewed are accommodated in the proposed
plat; the Planning Commission shall review the reports of the Plat Officer, Fire Protection District,
Public Water Company and Sanitary District, Tri-County Erosion Control Ordinance where
concerned, the County Engineer and City Engineer with regard to the proposed subdivision. Within
forty five (45) days of the subdivider’s filing for preliminary approval, the Planning Commission
shall make known to the Council and Clerk that the preliminary plat has been (1) approved, (2)
approved subject to modification, or (3) disapproved; if disapproved, the Planning Commission
shall submit to the subdivider, with a copy to the Clerk, a statement setting forth reasons for
disapproval, indicating particularly the aspects in which the proposed plat fails to conform to
Official Map and other requirements of this Title. Failure of the Planning Commission to act within
forty-five (45) days of filing the plat with the Plat Officer shall be deemed approval of the plat
unless, however, an extension of time is mutually agreed upon by the subdivider and Planning
Commission. The Planning Commission shall maintain one copy of the Preliminary Plat in its files
with Planning Commission action noted upon it.
Approval or Rejection by Council: If the Preliminary Plat is approved by the Planning
Commission, the Council shall approve or reject the plat within thirty (30) days after the first
regular Council meeting following the action of the Planning Commission; provided, however, that
any action not concurring with the Planning Commission’s action shall require a two-thirds (2/3)
vote of the entire Council membership. However, if the Planning Commission action was merely
the lapse of time listed in 7-4-4B, a simple majority of the City Council may change the default
acceptance.
Action on Preliminary Plat to be Filed With Clerk: A certified copy of the order or resolution
approving the Preliminary Plat or disapproving the Preliminary Plat and stating the reasons
therefore shall be attached to a copy of the Preliminary Plat by the Clerk and filed in the office of
the Clerk.
SECTION 7-4-5 PRELIMINARY PLAT APPROVAL NOT TO CONSTITUTE SUBDIVISION
APPROVAL
Approval of the preliminary plat by the Council does not constitute approval of the subdivision but is merely
an authorization to the subdivider to proceed with the preparation of the final plat.
SECTION 7-4-6 TIME LIMITATION OF PRELIMINARY APPROVAL
Approval of the Preliminary Plat shall be effective for twenty-four (24) months; except, however, the
Planning Commission, upon written request of the subdivider and advice of the Plat Officer, may grant an
extension of time. If the Final Plat is not filed with the Plat Officer within twenty-four (24) months or
authorized extension thereof, of Council approval of the Preliminary Plat, all previous approvals of the
Preliminary Plat shall become null and void.
SECTION 7-4-7 FINAL PLAT PREPARATION AND FILING
Following approval of the Preliminary Plat, the subdivider shall cause to be prepared a Final Plat and other
material required in filing for final approval. Application for final approval shall consist of filing with the
Plat Officer four (4) paper copies and one (1) mylar reproducible copy of the Final Plat and such additional
information outlined here:
Final Plat: Final Plat drawn to the scale of not smaller than one inch equals one hundred feet (1” =
100’). The Final Plat may include all or only part of the Preliminary Plat and should include or
indicate the following:
Accurate tract boundary lines with dimensions and angles which provide a survey of the
tract, closing with an error of not more than one foot (1’) in five thousand feet (5,000’).
TITLE 7 - SUBDIVISION
Page 11
Property lines of residential lots and other sites with accurate dimensions of all straight
lines and arcs, bearings of property lines or other means of accurately locating property
lines.
Accurate bearings and distances to known monuments.
Accurate locations of existing and recorded streets intersecting the boundaries of the tract.
Front yard setbacks.
Accurate legal description of the property.
Street names.
Curve notes, complete and accurate for all street curves included in the plan.
Street right of way lines.
Lot and block numbers.
Property to be dedicated or reserved for public, semi-public, or community use, with
accurate dimensions.
Markers or monuments indicating location, type, material, and size.
Subdivision name.
Name and address of the owner and subdivider.
North point, scale, and date.
Certification by a registered Illinois land surveyor certifying to accuracy of survey and plat.
Certification of dedication of streets and other public property with notary’s seal.
Final approval by Council with signature and date spaces for Mayor and Clerk,
respectively.
Sidewalks required by the City
Other Required Documents:
Certification of title showing that applicant is the landowner.
Restrictive covenants, if any, in form for recording.
Subdivider’s estimate of cost of minimum improvements required and acknowledged
statement of City Engineer concurring with the Subdivider’s estimate.
Approved subdivision improvement plans and specifications.
Subdivision Guarantee.
a) Completion of Project – At the time of filing an application for approval of a Final
Plat, an owner or subdivider shall submit to the City Clerk an agreement that shall
state that the improvements required by this Chapter will be constructed according
to the plans and specifications approved by the City Engineer within two (2) years
after approval of the Final Plat and before final acceptance of improvements and
release of bond.
b) Filing of Surety Bond – The subdivider shall file with the City Clerk a surety bond
insuring the satisfactory construction of all improvements required by this Chapter
within two (2) years after approval of the Final Plat. This bond shall also guarantee
the improvements against faulty materials and workmanship for one (1) year
following written acceptance by the City Engineer. No such bond shall be
accepted unless it is enforceable by and payable to the City in a sum at least equal
to the cost of constructing the improvements, as estimated by the City Engineer,
and in a form with surety and conditions approved by the City Attorney. The City
Attorney, after approving said bond, shall transmit a copy thereof to the City
Engineer.
Instead of the bond, the owner or Subdivider may provide an escrow account to be
held at a local bank or loan association conditioned upon the satisfactory
construction of the improvements that are set forth on the final plat, the amount of
the escrow account to be equal to the estimated cost of said improvements, as
estimated by the City Engineer plus an additional ten percent (10%). All
withdrawals from the escrow account shall be made subject to the release of the
City of West Peoria by the City Engineer and the same may be paid as work
TITLE 7 - SUBDIVISION
Page 12
progresses and is completed subject also to the said Engineer's approval. Upon
completion of the improvements and written acceptance of the City Engineer, the
additional ten percent (10%) of the escrow account shall remain upon deposit until
the expiration of one (1) year from the date of completion of the improvement, and
until approval and final release by the City Engineer. The form of all escrow
accounts or agreements shall be subject to the approval of the City Attorney of the
City of West Peoria, Illinois.
Instead of a bond or escrow account, the Owner or Subdivider may provide an
Irrevocable Letter of Credit in the amount equal to the estimated cost of said
improvements as estimated by the City Engineer, plus an additional ten percent
(10%). Upon completion of the improvements and written acceptance of the City
Engineer, the estimated cost of improvements may be deleted from the Letter of
Credit and the additional ten percent (10%) of the Irrevocable Letter of Credit shall
remain in force until the expiration of one year from the date of the completion of
the improvements and until approval and final release by the City Engineer. The
form of all Irrevocable Letter of Credits shall be subject to the approval of the City
Attorney of the City of West Peoria, Illinois.
If, but only if, at the expiration of one (1) year from the date of acceptance of the
improvements, the improvements are free of defects, the City Engineer shall
release the bond or escrow account, or letter of credit. If, at the end of said year,
the improvements are not free from defects, the City Engineer shall, upon
authorization by the Council, cause the defects to be remedied and may use the
bond or escrow account as a source of funds to remedy such defects.
c) Acknowledgement of Surety Bond – The surety bond shall be acknowledged
before a notary public by the principal and surety and shall be in substantially the
form shown in the Appendix of this Chapter.
Final Plat Subdivision Fee: Appropriate fees as described in the latest edition of the City’s Planning
and Zoning Fee Schedule shall be required at the time of submittal of the Final Plat.
In addition to the preliminary and final plat subdivision fees specified herein, the Subdivider shall
reimburse the City for reproducing plats and for all engineering expenses of checking plats, water,
sewer, and other plans, and for inspection of construction of the facilities required by this Code.
SECTION 7-4-8 FINAL PLAT REVIEW AND APPROVAL
Immediately upon filing of the reproducible Final Plat and four (4) copies, the Plat Officer, maintaining
one (1) paper copy for his own files (on which is to be indicated Council action on the plat), shall distribute
the balance of the Final Plats as follows: One (1) copy to the City Engineer and the reproducible plat and
one (1) copy to the City Clerk.
Review by City Engineer: The City Engineer shall review the comments of the Plat Officer and
make its own study to assure compliance with these regulations and substantial conformity to the
approved Preliminary Plat or conditionally approved plat subject to modifications requested. The
City Engineer shall recommend approval or disapproval of the Final Plat within forty-five (45) days
after submission of Final Plat materials by the Subdivider to the Clerk; failure of the City Engineer
to act within forty-five (45) days shall be deemed to be approval; provided, however, that the
Subdivider and the Council may mutually agree to an extension of time. The City Engineer shall
make known immediately to the Clerk and Council its action upon the Final Plat.
Approval or Rejection by Council: The Council shall, after being notified of the City Engineer’s
action on the plat, or after the time or any extension thereof for City Engineer to take action, approve
or reject the final plat within thirty (30) days after the first regular Council meeting following City
Engineer Action; provided, however, that any action not in accord with the City Engineer’s
TITLE 7 - SUBDIVISION
Page 13
recommendation shall only be by a two-thirds (2/3) vote of the entire Council. However, if the
City Engineer’s action was merely the lapse of time listed in 7-4-8A, a simple majority of the City
Council may change the default acceptance.
Action on Final Plat to be Filed in Office of Clerk: A certified copy of the order or resolution of
the corporate authorities approving the Final Plat or disapproving the Final Plat and stating the
reasons therefore shall be attached to a copy of the plat by the Clerk and filed in the office of the
Clerk.
SECTION 7-4-9 TIME LIMITATION FOR RECORDING OF PLAT
The Owner or developer shall file the Final Plat with the County Recorder of the appropriate county within
sixty (60) days of date of approval by the Council, and if not filed within such time shall have no validity
and shall not be recorded without recertification by the Clerk and reapproval by the Council.
SECTION 7-4-10 RELEASE EXPIRATION OR EXTENSION OF SUBDIVISION GUARANTEE
Prior to the release or expiration of the subdivision guarantee, the Council will request the Plat Officer or
his representative to certify that he was notified by the Subdivider to witness the installation of required
improvements at key times so as to be able to certify that all required improvements were properly installed
and that neither the subdivision as built nor improvements installed deviate from the final approved plat.
Should the required improvements not be completed within the duration of the subdivision guarantee, the
Subdivider may request the Council for an extension of time for the installation of the balance of
improvements. Should such a request be granted, the Subdivider shall deposit with the City a subdivision
guarantee for the length of extension granted. Subdivision guarantee shall be approved as to form and type
by the City Attorney, and as to adequacy of amount by the City Engineer.
SECTION 7-4-11 PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS FOR LAND IMPROVEMENT
Before subdividing any land subject to the requirements of this Code, the owner or developer shall comply
with the following public improvement plan and specification submission, review, and approval procedure:
Owner or developer must have had the Preliminary Plat required by this Code approved by the
Council.
Submission Requirements: Within two (2) years from the date of Council approval of a preliminary
plan, the owner or developer shall submit five (5) sets of engineering plans and specifications and
one (1) set of supportive calculations for all public improvements proposed in or necessary to serve
lots and outlots depicted in such approved preliminary plan or portion thereof.
Review and Approval or Disapproval:
The public improvement plans and specifications shall be reviewed and approved or
disapproved by the appropriate Fire Protection District, Public Water Company and
Sanitary District, and by the City Engineer.
The City Engineer shall receive comments from the appropriate Fire Protection District,
Public Water Company and Sanitary District, Tri-County Erosion Control District and
forward said comments to developer for appropriate action prior to final approval of the
documents submitted.
The City Engineer may require the owner or developer to submit such additional data,
plans, specifications, or materials as may be necessary to completely and accurately
determine the extent of compliance or noncompliance with the City’s design standards and
accepted engineering practice and to prove that the proposed manner of construction and
installation will meet or exceed all City Construction Standards.
TITLE 7 - SUBDIVISION
Page 14
The public improvement plans and specifications shall be approved by the City Engineer
if they meet or exceed the City design standards for subdivisions and otherwise display
acceptable engineering design and practice.
Approval or disapproval by the City Engineer shall be in writing.
Required Content:
General: The Owner or developer submitting engineering plans and specifications shall
submit all the information required by this Section in the form specified. Failure of an
Owner or developer to provide this information in the form required shall be sufficient
grounds for the City to refuse to accept the filing of public improvement engineering plans
and specifications, to reject the plans and specifications at any stage in the review and
approval process, and to reject a Final Plat depicting lots or outlots served by such public
improvements.
Minimum Material to be Submitted: Engineering plans and specifications shall be
submitted for all public improvements proposed in or necessary to serve lots depicted in
an approved Preliminary Plan or portion thereof. Such materials shall include – without
limitation – plans, profiles, standard details, and special details drawn in sufficient detail
and supported with sufficient data to make possible a complete and accurate determination
of the extent or compliance or non-compliance with the City’s subdivision standards and
sufficient to permit construction and installation of the proposed improvements without
additional or supporting engineering data.
Required Form of Public Improvement Engineering Plans and Specifications: Public
improvement engineering plans and specifications, drawings, schematics and comparable
material shall be drawn with drawing pencil on transparent abelene or tracing cloth or with
waterproof drawing ink on mylar from which clear and legible transparent or contact prints
and photostatic copies can be made, with a maximum size of twenty-four (24) inches by
thirty-six (36) inches.
Required content of plans and specifications:
a) Identification and Description – the public improvement engineering plans and
specifications required by this Code shall include a Title Sheet containing the
following information:
(i) The name of the proposed subdivision within which or for which such
public improvements are proposed;
(ii) The name and address of the developer;
(iii) The name, address, and telephone number of the engineering firm
preparing any part of the engineering plans and specifications and an
indication of the part of the plans that such firm prepared;
(iv) Seal of the professional engineer preparing all or any portion of the
engineering plans and specifications certifying that the materials so
prepared conform with all applicable codes and ordinances of the City
except as specifically noted as a requested variation or exemption.
b) Materials required – A registered professional engineer shall prepare and certify
plans showing and depicting the following:
(i) Standard Details – Typical cross sections of streets, trenches, and curb
and gutter and sidewalks, sanitary sewers, storm sewers and water mains;
(ii) Specific Details – any specially constructed items pertaining to the
project;
(iii) Sanitary Sewer Plan and Profile Sheets;
(iv) Storm Sewer Plan and Profile Sheets;
(v) Drainage Way Plan and Profile Sheets;
(vi) Watermain in Overall Plan;
(vii) Sanitary, Storm Sewer, and Drainage Way Overall Plan;
(viii) Street and Sidewalk Plan and Profile Sheets;
TITLE 7 - SUBDIVISION
Page 15
(ix) Street Cross Section Sheets – on fifty (50) foot centers, or as requested
by the City Engineer;
(x) Drainage Way Cross Section Sheets – on fifty (50) foot centers;
(xi) Erosion Control Plan;
(xii) Grading Plans of Lots and Blocks which shall show:
(1). The finished elevation at four (4) corners of each lot; and
(2). The finished elevation at four (4) corners of the principal building
located on each lot. It shall be the responsibility of the owner of
each lot to see that his lot is drained in accordance with said
grading plan. It shall be unlawful for the owner to construct or
allow the construction of any building or structure which is not
informity with such grading plan; and
(3). Direction of storm water run-off from each lot and outlot.
(xiii) Miscellaneous drawings showing any other special items required by the
project.
TITLE 7 - SUBDIVISION
Page 16
TITLE 7 SUBDIVISION
CHAPTER 5 GENERAL DESIGN REQUIREMENTS
7-5-1 General Street Layout, Blocks, Lotting
7-5-2 Street & Sidewalk Regulations
SECTION 7-5-1 GENERAL STREET LAYOUT, BLOCKS, LOTTING
A. Major and Collector Streets to be Continued: New subdivisions shall make provision for the
continuation of existing major and collector streets, or provision for later construction of proposed
major and collector streets, as indicated in the Official Map herein and/or on the City Plan.
All Lots to Have Access on Public Street: Subdividing of land for residential use shall be such as
to provide that each lot shall front on an existing or proposed public way.
Streets to Intersect at Right Angles: Intersections of streets shall be as nearly right angles as
possible. No street shall intersect any other street at less than eighty degrees (80?).
Length and Widths of Blocks: In general, block lengths shall be not less than three hundred feet
(300’) nor more than twelve hundred feet (1,200’); blocks shall be of sufficient width to
accommodate two (2) tiers of lots. The subdivider may be required to construct and dedicate
pedestrian crosswalks in blocks over one thousand feet (1,000’) long.
Half-Streets Not Acceptable: “Half-streets” based on the expectation of the other one-half (1/2) of
the street being developed at the time the adjoining property is subdivided is not normally
acceptable as good land platting practice, and will not normally be permitted.
Reserve Strips Not Allowed: “Reserve strips” created by the platting of property line streets several
feet inside the property line with the objective the receiving of renumeration for access to an
improved street, will not be allowed.
Reverse Frontage Not Normally Allowed: “Reverse frontage” or “double frontage” whereby both
front and back of lot face a principal street will not be allowed except in situations where one of
the streets is a major highway or street on which the fronting of local properties would not be
desirable.
“Buffer Treatment” May be Required Between Proposed Subdivision and Adjacent Uses: Where
a proposed subdivision contains an existing or proposed major street or abuts such a street or land
use which may have an adverse effect on the residential subdivision, the Planning Commission
may require some buffer treatment such as frontage streets, double frontage with screen planting
along rear lot lines, deep lots, or any other such treatment which may protect the proposed
residential subdivision from these outside influences.
Lot Lines to be at Right Angles to Street Lines: Lot lines shall be substantially at right angles or
radial to street lines.
Corner Lots to have Extra-Width: Corner lots for residential use shall have extra width to permit
appropriate building setback from both streets.
Building Setback Lines to be Established: Building setback lines, appropriate for the location of
the subdivision and the type of development contemplated, shall be established on all lots;
provided, however, that such setback lines are not less than the applicable standards of the
appropriate zoning provisions.
TITLE 7 - SUBDIVISION
Page 17
SECTION 7-5-2 STREET AND SIDEWALK REGULATIONS
Right of Way and Pavement Width: Right of way and pavement widths will be provided as follows:
*with parking on one or both sides
Sidewalk Widths: Sidewalks, when provided, shall be of the following widths:
Maximum and Minimum Street Guides: Street grades as measured along the centerline shall not
be less than 0.4 percent and shall not be greater than the following:
Major Streets or Highways 8%
Collector Roads or Streets 10%
Local Roads or Streets 12%
Intersection Corners to be Rounded: Property lines at street intersections shall be rounded with a
radius of twenty feet (20’). The Planning Commission may permit, as a suitable equivalent, the
use of comparable cutoffs or chords in place of such rounded corners.
Not More Than Two (2) Streets to Intersect: Intersection of more than two (2) streets at a point
will be prohibited.
Obstructions to Visibility at Intersections Prohibited: There shall be no obstruction of any type to
visibility at street intersections within the sight triangle formed by the center of intersection and
two (2) points, (1) seventy five feet (75') distant, each point being on the centerline of a fronting
road or street, each designated local, or (2) one hundred twenty five feet (125’) distant where one
or both of the fronting streets is designated a collector or major street or highway.
Connecting Street Lines to be Joined by Curves: Connecting street lines deflecting from each other
at any one point by more than ten degrees (10?) shall be joined by curves, the inner radius of which
shall be not less than three hundred fifty feet (350’) for a collector street, and one hundred feet
(100’) for a local street.
Reverse Curves to be Connected by Tangent: A tangent or portion of street in straight alignment
and of one hundred feet (100’) in length shall be introduced between reverse curves on major and
collector highways, streets, and roads.
Street Type Right of Way Pavement Parking
Arterial 100’ – 120’ 36’ Prohibited
Major Highway (IL or US) 100’ – 120’ 24’ Prohibited
Major Highway (County Rte.) 67’ – 75’ 24’ Prohibited
Collector Street/Road 68’ 38’ Prohibited
Local Street/Road* 60’ 30’ – 36’ Permitted
Cul-de-sac 100’ Diameter 80’ Dia. Prohibited
Where Adjacent To: Width
Major or Collector Highways, Streets and Roads 5’
Local Streets and Roads 5’
Pedestrian Crosswalks (through blocks) 5’ (10’ ROW)
Combination curb & sidewalk 5.5'
TITLE 7 - SUBDIVISION
Page 18
Cul-de-sacs or “Dead-end” Streets: Cul-de-sacs or dead-end streets, designated to be so
permanently, shall be not longer than five hundred feet (500’) and shall be provided at the closed
end with a right of way and pavement diameter meeting the minimum requirements of these
standards, as stated in Section 7-5-2(A).
Necessary Utility Easements to be Provided: Utility easements across lots or centered on rear or
side lot lines shall be provided not less than ten feet (10’) in width.
Maintenance Easements to be Provided for Natural Water Courses: Where a subdivision is
traversed by a water course, there shall be provided a storm water easement conforming
substantially with the lines of such water course and approved as to alignment and width by the
City Engineer.
TITLE 7 - SUBDIVISION
Page 19
TITLE 7 SUBDIVISION
CHAPTER 6 IMPROVEMENTS
7-6-1 Monuments to be Installed
7-6-2 Utility and Street Improvements
SECTION 7-6-1 MONUMENTS TO BE INSTALLED
Monuments shall be placed at all block corners, angle points, points of curves in streets, and at intermediate
points as shall be required by the Plat Officer. Permanent monuments erected in such subdivisions of
galvanized iron pipe shall be not less than one inch (1”) in diameter and twenty-four inches (24”) in length;
and if stone or concrete, shall be not less than four inches (4”) in diameter and twenty-four inches (24”) in
length.
SECTION 7-6-2 UTILITY AND STREET IMPROVEMENTS
Utilities and street improvements shall be provided in each new subdivision in accordance with the
following schedules:
Industrial, Commercial, and Institutional Subdivisions: Utility and street improvements on
industrial, commercial and institutional subdivisions as required by the Council with advice of
Planning Commission; provided, however, that in no case will the requirements be less than
required for a residential subdivision.
All public water supply, sanitary sewer, storm drainage systems shall conform to the latest edition
of the Standard Specifications For Water And Sewer Main Construction in Illinois; and, the
appropriate Fire Protection District, Public Water Company and Sanitary District that has
jurisdiction over these utilities.
Residential Subdivisions: Utility and street improvements for residential subdivisions in
accordance with the following:
Water Supply: Public water supply is required within the corporate limits; public or private
water supply as approved by the Planning Commission outside the City limits but within
the area of subdivision jurisdiction.
Where public water supply is constructed, stub-up lines shall be located at each lot and
shall extend at least one foot (1’) inside the property line. The curb above such stub-up
line shall be marked with the letter “W” or other suitable marker.
Sewage Disposal: Connection to the public sanitary sewer system is required within the
corporate limits; public or private sewage disposal as approved by the Planning
Commission outside the City limits but within the area of subdivision jurisdiction.
Where public sewers are constructed, stub-up lines shall be located at each lot and shall
extend at least one foot (1’) inside the property line. The curb above such stub-up line shall
be marked with the letter “S” or other suitable marker.
Pumping stations required by virtue of the subdivision shall be installed by the developer
as approved by the Council. Pumping station, force main, equipment, site and easements
will be dedicated to the City or its assignee, prior to the issuance of building permits. If a
greater capacity system is required by the City, the subdivider shall be required to pay only
that portion of the cost attributable to his subdivision. Future subdivisions desiring to
utilize such pumping stations shall reimburse the City on a prorated basis for the City’s
investment involved.
Storm Drainage: Surface drainage shall be provided for in approved paved gutter, grass
swales, or piped underground channels, construction, capacity and flow of which are
approved by the City Engineer.
TITLE 7 - SUBDIVISION
Page 20
Street grades shall meet the foregoing design requirements and shall be approved in profile
and cross-section by the City Engineer.
Storm water detention facilities shall be constructed for all developments using the method
outlined in the latest edition of the Illinois Department of Transportation’s Drainage
Manual. Rainfall intensity shall be from the latest technical letters of the Illinois State
Water Survey. All “dry bottom” detention basins shall be designed with the minimum
bottom slope of 1.5 percent. A minimum slope of 1 percent may be used if an underdrain
tile system is installed in the basin. All detention basins shall have a minimum of 1-foot
freeboard above the 100-year high water elevation and an emergency overflow capable of
carrying the 100-year discharge.
The Developer or Owner, upon City direction, may pay a fee instead of providing on-site
storm water detention. The fee shall be based upon the prorated share of the City’s cost or
expected cost to provide a regional detention facility. Cost shall be prorated based upon
the amount of run-off contributing to the regional detention facility.
Street Right of Way, Pavement, Curb and Gutter: The subdivider shall be responsible for
the provision of right of way, street improvements, and specifications of construction as
indicated on the following schedules. All street, road, sidewalk, etc. improvements shall be
constructed in accordance with the latest edition of IDOT Standard Specifications for Road
and Bridge Construction in Illinois.
Construction Specifications of Street and Road Improvement
Road Type Base Course Surface Course
P.C. Concrete Compacted earth material 6” Thickness, Portland
Cement Concrete
Gravel Base Bit. Surface 8” aggregate base, CA 6 or CA 10 1 ½” Bit. Conc. Binder
Course, 1 ½” Bit. Conc.
Surf. Course CL I
Shoulders: 6” aggregate shoulder Type B
Curb and Gutter: Type B-6.18 combination curb and gutter in accordance with
IDOT “Highway Standards”
Sidewalk: Sidewalks, where required, shall be of P.C. concrete, 4” minimum
thickness with pitch and surface to assure adequate drainage.
Where sidewalk cross-driveways, they shall be 6” minimum
thickness.
Combination Concrete
Curb & Sidewalk:
Combination Concrete Curb & Sidewalk, where required, shall be
of P.C. concrete, 4” minimum thickness. Width of the walk shall
be 5.5 feet. The curb height above the street grade shall be a min.
of 4” to a max. of 6”. The curb height shall be adjusted as
necessary to maintain positive drainage to the street from adjacent
property areas. Sidewalk shall slope at 2% towards the street.
Exceptions to the above specifications will be as follows where changes to the curb need
to be made:
The combination concrete curb and sidewalk width shall be 5.5 feet. The curb height above
the street grade shall be a minimum of 4" to a maximum of 6". This height shall be adjusted
so that the elevation at the back of the sidewalk shall match the existing yard and so that
yard drainage to the street can be maintained. However, the curb height above the street
TITLE 7 - SUBDIVISION
Page 21
shall never be less than 4". The face shall have a minimum of 8" smooth face below grade.
The slope of the sidewalk and the apron shall be at 2% towards the street.
Saw cuts shall be required at the following locations:
a) In the street, bituminous surface 18" out from the existing curb face to facilitate
the removal and replacement of the combination curb and sidewalk.
The 18" wide strip of bituminous surface in front of the existing curb shall be
removed. The replaced bituminous surface shall meet the applicable requirements
of Section 406 of the IDOT Standard Specifications. The replaced bituminous
surface shall match the existing street slope and grade. The proposed pavement
should match the existing adjacent construction in material type and thickness.
Inspection required by the Street Department Manager before the concrete is
poured.
Building setbacks from proposed edge of right of way of major streets or highways planned
for future construction shall be not less than the appropriate front, rear, or side yard of that
particular zoning district.
Building setbacks on existing streets or roads on which the right of way width is indicated
to be below the minimum standard width as herein indicated for such type road, shall be
measured from the edge of the proposed width. (In effect, the setback will be increased by
one-half (1/2) the distance the right of way is below standard.)
Planting Strips in roadways shall be approved by the City Council as to gradient, drainage,
and surface treatment.
Street name signs conforming to the standard for the City shall be provided at all
intersections and approved by the City Council.
Street lights shall be provided in accordance with the latest regulations of the City of West
Peoria Street Lighting District. This requirement shall also include any new areas annexed
into the City.
TITLE 7 - SUBDIVISION
Page 22
TITLE 7 SUBDIVISION
CHAPTER 7 ADMINISTRATION; LEGAL DATA
7-7-1 Establishment; Appointment of Plat Officer
7-7-2 Variance and Amendments
7-7-3 Conflict with Private Deeds and Covenants
SECTION 7-7-1 ESTABLISHMENT; APPOINTMENT OF PLAT OFFICER
The office of Plat Officer is hereby established in which is vested the duty of administration of these
regulations as specified herein and such other related regulations as specified herein and such other related
regulations as are assigned to that office by the Council.
The Plat Officer is to be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the Council and shall be a
person who is qualified by professional or practical training and experience to conduct the affairs of that
office. Pay, if any, will be set by the Council via separate resolution.
section 7-7-2 variance and amendments
Variances, General: The Council of the City hereby reserves authority to vary the strict application
of any of the provisions herein contained, but such variances shall be exercised only upon written
recommendation of the Planning Commission which in turn shall make such recommendation upon
recommendation of the Plat Officer or upon its own motion.
Variances, Large Scale Development: The standards and requirements of these regulations may be
modified by the Council in case of a plan or program for a complete community or neighborhood
unit. Such modification shall not be made until after written recommendation of the Planning
Commission, which recommendation may be given when in the judgement of the Planning
Commission, the specific plan or program presented provides adequate public space and
improvements for the circulation, recreation, light, air and service needs of the tract when fully
developed and populated, and which also provides such covenants or other legal provisions as will
assure conformity to and achievement of the plan.
Amendments: Amendments to this Subdivision Title shall be made by the Council as provided by
Statute; provided, however, that no amendment shall be adopted without first referring the proposed
amendment to the Planning Commission and receiving a report therefrom, except, however, if no
report is received within ninety (90) days, it shall be deemed to be approved by the Planning
Commission.
SECTION 7-7-3 CONFLICT WITH PRIVATE DEEDS AND COVENANTS
In case of any conflict between this Title or part thereof and the whole or part of any existing or future
private covenants or deeds, the most restrictive shall apply.
TITLE 7 - SUBDIVISION
Page 23
APPENDIX A
EXHIBIT 1
PRELIMINARY PLAN APPROVAL, PLANNING COMMISSION AND CITY COUNCIL
The following notices shall be typed or stamped on the preliminary plan:
Recommendation of Preliminary Plan Approval by the Planning and Zoning Commission of West
Peoria, Illinois.
“Notice is hereby given that this preliminary plan of the subdivision shown hereon is recommended
by the Planning and Zoning Commission of West Peoria, Illinois, for City Council approval with
the modifications contained in Appendix A (if any), which is attached.”
The Planning and Zoning Commission of West Peoria, Illinois
Date , 20
By
Chairperson
By
Secretary
Notice of Approval of Preliminary Plan by the City Council of West Peoria, Illinois.
“The Preliminary Plan of the subdivision shown hereon has received approval by the City Council
of West Peoria, Illinois, subject to the modifications contained in Appendix A (if any) which is
attached.”
The City Council of West Peoria, Illinois.
Date , 20
By
Mayor
Attest
City Clerk
TITLE 7 - SUBDIVISION
Page 24
APPENDIX A
EXHIBIT 2
OWNER’S CERTIFICATE
STATE OF ILLINOIS )
) SS
COUNTY OF PEORIA )
KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS that we, the undersigned, hereby certify that we are the owners
of all premises embodied in the attached Plat of
Subdivision to the City of West Peoria, Illinois, and that we have caused said Plat to be made and that it is
a true and correct plat of Subdivision to the City of West Peoria, Illinois,
as laid off in lots and streets by ,
Registered Land Surveyor Number ; and we, the undersigned, hereby dedicate and set apart
to the City of West Peoria for general utility purposes, (and further dedicate the public use areas as shown
on said plat) *
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, we have hereunto set our hands and affixed our seals this day of
, 20 .
(SEAL)
*where dedication is required under Section 3.5
NOTARY’S CERTIFICATE
STATE OF ILLINOIS )
) SS
COUNTY OF PEORIA )
I, the undersigned, a Notary Public in and for said County and State aforesaid, do hereby certify that
Personally known to me to be the same person(s) whose name(s) (is/are) subscribed to the foregoing
instrument, appeared before me this day in person and acknowledged that (he/she/they) signed, sealed and
delivered the said instrument as (his/her/their) free and voluntary act for the uses and purposes therein set
forth, including the release and waiver of Homestead, also including the dedication of all streets and
highways to the City of West Peoria, Illinois for the public forever, and including the grant of certain general
utility easements to the City of West Peoria, Illinois (and including the grant of public service areas to the
City of West Peoria).*
Given under my hand and notarial seal this day of , 20 .
Notary Public
*where dedication is required under Section 3.5
TITLE 7 - SUBDIVISION
Page 25
APPENDIX A
EXHIBIT 3
COUNTY CLERKS CERTIFICATE
STATE OF ILLINOIS )
)SS
COUNTY OF PEORIA )
I, , County Clerk of Peoria County, State of Illinois, do hereby certify that on the
day of , 20 , there were no delinquent general or special taxes unpaid,
or any special assessments or delinquent special assessments unpaid against the tract of land shown on the
plat of the Subdivision attached to this certificate and described in the Certificate of the Surveyor attached
hereto and to said plat.
County Clerk, Peoria County, Illinois
COUNTY SEAL
TITLE 7 - SUBDIVISION
Page 26
EXHIBIT 4 PLAT CERTIFICATION
STATE OF ILLINOIS )
)SS
COUNTY OF PEORIA )
Approved by the Board of Supervisors of Peoria County, Illinois this
Day of , 20 .
County Plat Officer
*For plats outside corporation limits, form as required by Peoria County Subdivision Regulations.
TITLE 7 - SUBDIVISION
Page 27
EXHIBIT 5 CITY CLERK’S CERTIFICATE
STATE OF ILLINOIS )
)SS
COUNTY OF PEORIA )
I, , City Clerk of West Peoria, Illinois, do hereby certify that the foregoing is a true
and complete copy of an original presented, passed and approved at a regular
meeting of the Council held on the day of , 20 , by an affirmative vote
of the majority of all members elected to said Council, the vote having been taken by yeas and nays and
entered on the record of the proceedings of said Council.
Witness my hand and seal of said City of West Peoria, this day of
, 20 .
City Clerk
TITLE 7 - SUBDIVISION
Page 28
APPENDIX A
EXHIBIT 6
SURVEYOR’S CERTIFICATE
STATE OF ILLINOIS )
)SS
COUNTY OF PEORIA )
I, , hereby certify that I have surveyed, according to the laws of the State of Illinois,
and with the Ordinances of the City of West Peoria, for
, the following described property, to-wit:
I further certify that I have subdivided the same into lots, numbered
through , the streets and easements as shown on the attached plat.
Unless noted otherwise, iron pins identify all lot corners as shown on said plat.
Said subdivision is to be known as “ “, West Peoria, Peoria County, Illinois.
I further certify that (said subdivision lies within) (no portion of said subdivision lies within) 500 feet of
any surface drain or water course serving a tributary area of 640 acres or more.
Name of Firm of Surveyor
Professional Land Surveyor No.
Address
Date
TITLE 7 - SUBDIVISION
Page 29
APPENDIX A
EXHIBIT 7
CITY ENGINEER’S CERTIFICATE
STATE OF ILLINOIS )
)SS
COUNTY OF PEORIA )
I, , City Engineer for the City of West Peoria, Illinois, hereby certify that the land
improvements described in the annexed plat and the plans and specifications therefor meet the minimum
requirements of said City outlined in the West Peoria City Code.
Dated at West Peoria, Peoria County, Illinois, this day of , 20 .
TITLE 7 - SUBDIVISION
Page 30
APPENDIX A
EXHIBIT 8
SUBDIVISION BOND
KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS that _____________________________________________ as
Principal, and ____________________________________, hereinafter called Surety, ____________
are held and firmly bound unto the City of West Peoria, a municipal corporation, hereinafter called the Obligee, in the
penal sum of ________________________ ($________) lawful money of the United States, for which we, and each
of us, hereby bind ourselves as Principal and as Surety to be truly made by us, our heirs, executors, administrators,
successors and assigns, jointly and severally, by the following presents:
Sealed and dated this ___________ date of __________ , 20___ , at West Peoria, Peoria County, Illinois.
WHEREAS, a petition has been filed with the Council of the City of West Peoria for the acceptance of a tract of land
as a subdivision to the City, under the name and title of “_____________________________
___________________________ Subdivision, according to the plat of _____________________, Registered Illinois
Land Surveyor No. __________, consisting of _______________ lots and streets, dated ____________, 20___, and
the plan of which Plat has received preliminary approval by the Planning Commission of the City of West Peoria and
the City Council, and said plat will be finalized upon the Principal’s meeting the further requirements of the Land
Subdivision Code of the City of West Peoria.
The legal description of the property sought to be subdivided, and for which a final plat will be presented, and for
which property this Bond is given, is described as follows, to-wit:
WHEREAS, the Principal is required by ordinance of the City of West Peoria to provide sanitary sewer and water
conduits, curb and gutter, street base and surface, sidewalks, storm water conduits, street lights and pay all inspection
fees and other costs set forth in said Land Subdivision Code, and said work is to be done per exact specifications and
plans furnished as required by said Code and as heretofore established by the City of West Peoria; and,
WHEREAS, said Principal and Surety promise and guarantee that all construction on said proposed improvements
shall be done in a skillful manner and according to the ordinance of the City of West Peoria, and subject always to the
inspection and approval by said Obligee and its authorized officers and employees, and shall be completed on or
before__________, 20____, and further guarantees that all damage or liability incurred by the City of West Peoria, its
Officers and/or employees, which damage or liability is caused or results from defects in the construction, operation,
or repair of said improvements made by the said Principal to said improvements will be repaired and the Obligee
herein, its officers or employees saved harmless from any and all claims whatsoever arising from the operations of the
Principal for and during the period from the acceptance of this bond by said Obligee and one (1) year after the
completion and acceptance by said Obligee of all matters and things required by said Ordinance and herein bonded to
be done.
NOW, THEREFORE, the condition of this obligation is such that if the above bonded Principal shall well and truly
keep, do and perform each and every, all and singular, the matters and things in said plans and specifications required
and set forth and specified to be done by said Principal and performed by said Principal at the time and in the manner
in said ordinance specified, or shall pay over, make good, reimburse, and save the above-named Obligee harmless
from all loss and damage which said Obligee may sustain by reason of failure or default by said Principal so to do, or
from defects in those improvements appearing within one (1) year after their acceptance by the City, then this
obligation shall be invalid; otherwise, the same shall remain in full force and effect.
Principal
Surety
TITLE 7 - SUBDIVISION
Page 31
NOTARY’S CERTIFICATE
STATE OF ILLINOIS )
)SS
COUNTY OF PEORIA )
I, ________________________ , a Notary Public in and for said County, in the State aforesaid, do hereby
certify that _______________________________________________________, personally known to me
to be the same persons whose names are subscribed to the foregoing instrument, appeared before me this
day in person and acknowledged that they signed the above instrument as their own free and voluntary act
for the uses and purposes therein set forth.
Given under my hand and notarial seal this ________________ day of ___________, 20___.
Notary Public
NOTE: Such agreements, as set forth above, shall not be required for subdivisions located in the
unincorporated areas within one and one-half (1 ½) miles beyond the City limits where there is evidence
that agreements are reached between the owner or subdivider and Peoria County. However, when the City
standards of public improvements are of higher quality than Peoria County standards, such agreements shall
be required by the City.
TITLE 7 - SUBDIVISION
Page 32
APPENDIX A
EXHIBIT 9
FINAL PLAT PAYMENT, PERFORMANCE AND WORKMANSHIP BOND
SECURED BY IRREVOCABLE LETTER OF CREDIT
KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS, that
(owner and/or subdivider of the property) hereinafter called the Principal, is/are held and firmly bound unto
the City of West Peoria, Peoria County, Illinois, a Municipal Corporation, hereinafter called the Obligee,
in the penal sum of _________________ (amount of bond) lawful money of the United States, for which
he/she/they hereby bind ____________ (himself/herself/itself/themselves) to be truly made by
_____________________ his/her/their heirs, executors, administrators, successors and assigns, jointly and
severally, by the following presents.
Sealed and dated this ________ day of _______, 20____, at West Peoria, Peoria County, Illinois.
WHEREAS, a Petition has heretofore been filed with the City Council of the City of West Peoria
for the acceptance of a tract of land as a subdivision to the City of West Peoria under the name and title of
____________________________ (name of subdivision), Peoria County, Illinois per plat of
____________________________(name of subdivision), Peoria County, Illinois, per plat of
__________________ (name of Professional Land Surveyor) Illinois Professional Land Surveyor No.
____________, consisting of (number of lots in subdivision) lots and streets, dated
(date of final plat) and the plan of which Plat has received preliminary approval by the Planning
Commission and the Council of the City of West Peoria, and which Plat will be finalized upon the
Principal’s meeting the further requirements of the Land Subdivision Code of the City of West Peoria.
The legal description of the property sought to be subdivided, and for which a final plat will be
presented, and for which property this Bond is given, is describes as follows, to-wit:
(Legal Description of the property in the Subdivision)
WHEREAS said Principal is required by ordinance of the City of West Peoria to provide sanitary sewer
and water conduits, curb and gutter, street base and surface, sidewalks, storm sewer conduits, street lights,
and pay all inspection fees and other costs set forth in said ordinance and provide a complete and accurate
set of as-built plans, all of which said work is to be done per exact specifications and plans as provided by
said ordinance and as heretofore established by the City of West Peoria; and
WHEREAS said Principal’s promise and guarantee that all construction on said proposed improvements
shall be done in a workmanlike manner and in compliance with the ordinances of the City of West Peoria,
and subject at all times to the inspection and approval of said Obligee and its authorized officers and
employees, and shall be completed on or before (two years after the date of Council approval of the
subdivision) and upon further guarantee that all damage or liability is caused or results from the
construction, operation or repairs made by the said Principal to said streets, utility conduits, etc., pursuant
TITLE 7 - SUBDIVISION
Page 33
to the terms of said plans and specifications, will be repaired and the Obligee herein, its officers or
employees saved harmless from any and all claims whatsoever arising from the operations of the Principal
for and during the period from the acceptance of this bond by said Obligee and for one (1) year after the
completion and acceptance by said Obligee of all matters and things required by said ordinance and herein
bonded to be done.
NOW, THEREFORE, the condition of this obligation is such that if the above bonded Principal shall well
and truly keep, do and perform each and every, all and singular, the matters and things in said plans and
specifications, required and set forth and specified to be done by said Principal and performed by said
Principal at the time and in the manner in said documents specified, or shall pay over, make good, reimburse
and save the above-named Obligee harmless from all loss and damages which said Obligee may sustain by
reason of failure or default on the part of said Principal so to do or from defects in the aforesaid
improvements appearing within one (1) year after their acceptance by the City, then this obligation shall be
null and void; otherwise, same shall remain in full force and effect.
PRINCIPAL:
TITLE 7 - SUBDIVISION
Page 34
APPENDIX A
EXHIBIT 9
NOTARY’S CERTIFICATE
STATE OF ILLINOIS )
) SS.
COUNTY OF PEORIA )
I, the undersigned, a Notary Public in and for the County and State aforesaid, do hereby certify that
, an individual, personally known to me to be the same person whose name is subscribed
to the foregoing instrument, appeared before me this day in person and acknowledged that they signed the
above instrument as their own free and voluntary act for the uses and purposes therein set forth.
Given under my hand and notarial seal this day of , 20 .
Notary Public
TITLE 7 - SUBDIVISION
Page 35
APPENDIX A
EXHIBIT 10
IRREVOCABLE LETTER OF CREDIT
THE DATE:
(Name of financial institution)
TO: The City of West Peoria
We hereby authorize you to draw form our financial institution up to an aggregate amount of
($ ) United States Dollars (amount of security required) from the
account of (name of developer) in connection with
(name of the subdivision).
This Letter of Credit is available to you upon your presentation of a request for payment,
accompanied by: a signed statement by the City Engineer of the City of West Peoria that
(name of developer) has failed to complete the required construction of on or off-site
public improvements for the Subdivision in accordance with the City’s
Subdivision Ordinance and the Subdivider’s Final Plat Public Improvement Payment, Performance and
Workmanship Bond dated the day of , 20 .
We hereby agree to honor each draft drawn under and in compliance with the terms of this letter,
if and when dully presented at this office in , Illinois, until the expiration of one (1)
year after the approval and acceptance by the City of all subdivision improvements within said subdivision,
or until such later date as any written claim by the City against the subdivider or his financial institution is
finally resolved.
The irrevocable credit established by us shall remain in effect without regard to any default in
payments of sums owned by us, the owner and/or developer, and without regard to other claims which may
have against the owner and/or developer. Sixty (60) days prior to the expiration of this irrevocable credit
we shall notify the West Peoria City Council, by certified letter return receipt requested, of the impending
expiration date. This commitment shall not terminate without such notice. It is recognized that the
municipality is according the owner and/or developer the permission to proceed with the development
project expressly upon the guarantee of the irrevocable nature of this commitment. It is further
acknowledged that the consideration for this irrevocable commitment is provided by agreements between
this financial institution and the developer. The sum of this credit shall, however, be reduced in the amount
of disbursements made from time to time in accordance with the terms under which this credit is extended
as set out above.
________________________________
BY: ATTEST:
________________________________
Its Its
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page 1
THE CITY OF WEST PEORIA
TABLE OF CONTENTS
TITLE 8: FLOODPLAIN
CHAPTER 1 - TITLE, INTENT, STANDARDS AND OBJECTIVES
TITLE 2 – FLOOD PLAINS
Page 1
TITLE 8 FLOOD PLAINS
CHAPTER 1 TITLE, INTENT, STANDARDS AND OBJECTIVES
8-1-1 Purpose
8-1-2 Definitions
8-1-3 How to use this Chapter
8-1-4 Duties of the Enforcement Official
8-1-5 Base Flood Elevations
8-1-6 Occupation and use of Flood Fringe Areas
8-1-7 Regulatory floodways
8-1-8 Development Permit
8-1-9 Other Development Requirements
8-1-10 Variances
8-1-11 Appeals
8-1-12 Disclaimer of Liability
8-1-13 Notice of Violation
8-1-14 Penalty
8-1-15 Abrogation and Greater Restrictions
8-1-16 Separability
8-1-17 Effective date
SECTION 8-1-1 PURPOSE
This Title is enacted pursuant to the police powers granted to the City by the Illinois Municipal Code. This
Chapter is adopted in order to accomplish the following specific purposes:
To assure that new development does not increase the flood or drainage hazards to others, or create
unstable conditions susceptible to erosion;
To minimize potential losses due to periodic flooding;
To protect new buildings and major improvements to buildings from flood damage;
To protect human life and health from the hazards of flooding;
To lessen the burden on the taxpayer for flood control projects, repairs to flood-damaged public
facilities and utilities, and flood rescue and relief operations;
To make federally subsidized flood insurance available for property in the City by fulfilling the
requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program;
To comply with the rules and regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program codified as 44
CFR 59-79, as amended;
To protect, conserve and promote the orderly development of land and water resources;
To preserve the natural hydrologic and hydraulic functions of watercourses and floodplains and to
protect water quality and aquatic habitats; and
To preserve the natural characteristics of stream corridors in order to moderate flood and storm
water impacts, improve water quality, reduce soil erosion, protect aquatic and riparian habitat,
provide recreational opportunities, provide aesthetic benefits and enhance community and
economic development.
TITLE 2 – FLOOD PLAINS
Page 2
SECTION 8-1-2 DEFINITIONS
The following words, terms, and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this Section, except
where the context clearly indicates a different meaning.
"A" and "A" numbered zones: Those areas in the floodplain subject to a one (1) percent or greater
change of flooding in any given year.
Act: An act in relation to the regulation of the rivers, lakes, and streams of the State of Illinois, ILCS 5/5
et seq. 6/5
Applicant: Any person, firm, corporation or agency which submits an application.
Base flood: The flood having a one (1) percent probability of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
The base flood is also known as the one hundred (100) year frequency flood event. Application of the base
flood elevation at any location is as defined in Section 5 of this Chapter.
Base flood elevation: The elevation in relation to mean sea level of the crest of the base flood.
Building: A structure that is principally above ground and is enclosed by walls and a roof. The term
includes a gas or liquid storage tank, a manufactured home or a prefabricated building. This term also
include recreational vehicles and travel trailers to be installed on a site for more than one hundred eighty
(180) days.
Dam: All obstructions, wall embankments or barriers, together with their abutments and appurtenant
works, if any, constructed for the purpose of storing or diverting water or creating a pool. Underground
water storage tanks are not included. This definition specifically excludes "levees" as defined in this
Section.
Development: Any manmade change to real estate including:
Construction, reconstruction, repair, or placement of a building or any addition to a building;
Installing a manufactured home on a site, preparing a site for a manufactured home, or installing a
travel trailer on a site for more than one hundred eighty (180) days;
Mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, or drilling operations;
Redevelopment of a construction site;
Storage of equipment or materials;
Clearing of land as an adjunct of construction.
Channel modifications or any other activity that might change the direction, height, or velocity of
flood or surface water.
Development does not include maintenance of existing buildings and facilities such as reroofing or
resurfacing of roads when there is no increase in elevation; or gardening, plowing, and similar agricultural
practices that do not involve filling, grading, or construction of levees.
DWR: Illinois Department of Transportation, Division of Water Resources.
Elevation certificate: A form published by the federal emergency management agency that is used to
certify the elevation to which a building has been elevated.
FEMA: Federal emergency management agency and its regulations at 44 CFR 59-79 effective as of
November 1, 1989.
Fill: The placing, storing, or dumping of any material such as, but not limited to, earth, clay, sands,
concrete, rubble, or waste of any kind upon the surface of the ground which results in increasing the natural
ground surface elevation.
TITLE 2 – FLOOD PLAINS
Page 3
Flood: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas
from overflow of inland or tidal waters, or the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters
from any source.
Flood frequency: A period of years, based on a statistical analysis, during which a flood of a stated
magnitude may be equaled or exceeded.
Flood fringe: That portion of the floodplain outside of the regulatory floodway.
Flood insurance rate maps (FIRM): Maps prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency that
depict the special flood hazard areas (SFHA) within a community. These maps include insurance rate zones
and floodplains and may or may not depict floodways.
Floodplain: That area with water and ground surface elevations at or below the base flood or the one
hundred (100) year frequency flood elevation. Floodplains may also include detached special flood hazard
areas, ponding areas, etc. The floodplain is also known as the special flood hazard area (SFHA). The
floodplains are those lands within the jurisdiction of the county that are subject to inundation by the base
flood or one hundred (100) year frequency flood. The floodplains of the City are generally identified as
such on the Flood Insurance Rate Map prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency for Peoria
County dated June 1, 1983.
Floodproofing: Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to
structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and
sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
Floodproofing certificate: A form published by the Federal Emergency Management Agency that is used
to certify that a building designed and constructed to be structurally dry and floodproofed to the flood
protection elevation.
Flood protection elevation (FPE): The elevation of the base flood or one hundred (100) year frequency
flood plus two (2) feet of freeboard at any given location in the SFHA.
Floodway: That portion of the floodplain required to store and convey the base flood. The floodway for
Dry Run Creek shall be as delineated on the Flood Boundary Floodway Map prepared by FEMA. and dated
June 1, 1983. The floodways for any remaining floodplains of the City shall be according to the best data
available from Federal, State, or other sources.
Freeboard: An increment of elevation added to the base flood elevation to provide a factor of safety for
uncertainties in calculations, unknown localized conditions, wave actions and unpredictable effects such as
those caused by ice or debris jams.
Historic structure: Any structure that is:
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the
Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical
significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary
to qualify as a registered historic district;
Individually listed on a State inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation
programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation
programs that have been certified either:
By an approved State program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
TITLE 2 – FLOOD PLAINS
Page 4
Letter of map revision (LOMR): Letter that revises base flood or one hundred (100) year frequency flood
elevations, flood insurance rate zones, flood boundaries or floodways as shown on an effective FIRM.
Levee: A continuous dike or ridge of earth for confining water away from an area of land which would
otherwise flood.
Manufactured home: A structure, transportable in one (1) or more sections, which is built on a permanent
chassis and is designated for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required
utilities. The term "manufactured home" also includes park trailers, travel trailers and other similar vehicles
placed on site for more than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days.
Manufactured home park or subdivision: A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two (2)
or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
Mitigation: Mitigation includes those measures necessary to minimize the negative effects which
floodplain development activities might have on the public health, safety and welfare. Examples of
mitigation include soil erosion and sedimentation control and channel restoration.
New construction: For the purpose of determining insurance rates, structures for which the start of
construction commenced on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974,
whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain
management purposes, "new construction" means structures for which the start of construction commenced
on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes
any subsequent improvements to such structures.
NGVD: National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929. Reference surface set by the National Geodetic Survey
deduced from a continental adjustment of all existing adjustments in 1929.
Registered professional architect: An architect registered in the State of Illinois, under the Illinois
Architectural Practice Act of 1989.
Registered professional engineer: An architect registered in the State of Illinois, under the Illinois
Structural Engineering Licensing Act, (225 ILCS 340/1 & 225 ILCS 340/38), or the Professional
Engineering Practice Act of 1989.
Regulatory floodway: The channel, including on-stream lakes, and that portion of the floodplain adjacent
to a stream or watercourse as designated by DWR, which is needed to store and convey the existing and
anticipated future one hundred (100) year frequency flood discharge with no more than a one-tenth-foot
(1/10') increase in stage due to the loss of flood conveyance or storage, and no more than a ten (10) percent
increase in velocities. To locate the regulatory floodway boundary on any site, the regulatory floodway
boundary should be scaled off the regulatory floodway map (or charts consulted where applicable) and
located on a site plan, using reference marks common to both maps. Where interpretation is needed to
determine the exact location of the regulatory floodway boundary, DWR should be contacted for the
interpretation.
Riverine SFHA: Any SFHA subject to flooding from a river, creek, intermittent stream, ditch, stream lake
system or any other identified channel. This term does not include areas subject to flooding from lakes,
ponding areas, areas of sheet flow, or other areas not subject to overbank flooding.
Special flood hazard area (SFHA): Any base flood area subject to flooding from a river, creek,
intermittent stream, ditch, or any other identified channel or ponding and shown on a flood insurance rate
map as an "A" or "A" numbered zone.
Start of construction: The date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction,
repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within one hundred
eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent
construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the
construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured
home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading,
TITLE 2 – FLOOD PLAINS
Page 5
and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation
for a basement, footings piers, or foundations or the erections (of) temporary forms; nor does it include the
installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units
or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the
first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the building.
Structure: The results of a manmade change to the land constructed on or below the ground, including the
construction, reconstruction or placement of a building or any addition to a building; installing a
manufactured home on a site; preparing a site for a manufactured home or installing a travel trailer on a site
for more than one hundred eighty (180) days. This, however, does not include private antennas, fences,
mailboxes, flagpoles, birdbaths, sidewalks, driveways, and similar items used for landscaping or decorative
purposes.
Substantial damage: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the
structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the market value of
the structure before the damage occurred.
Substantial improvement: Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a
structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before
the start of construction of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred substantial
damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either (a) any
project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or
safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are
the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions or (b) any alteration of an historic structure,
provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic structure.
Variance: A deviation from the regulations and standards adopted by this Chapter which the Zoning Board
of Appeals is permitted to grant when strict enforcement would cause undue hardship owing to
circumstances unique to the individual property, lot, building, structure, use, or premises for which the
variance is sought.
Zoning Administrator: The person whom the Mayor designates to enforce this Chapter. The Mayor may
designate the County Zoning Administrator or such other person who is to enforce the provisions of this
Chapter within the City of West Peoria.
Zoning board of appeals: The County Zoning Board of Appeals, also referred to as the Zoning Board,
until such time as the City of West Peoria appoints a Zoning Board of Appeals and then the City Zoning
Board of Appeals.
SECTION 8-1-3 HOW TO USE THIS CHAPTER
The Zoning Administrator shall be responsible for fulfilling all of the duties listed in Section 8-1-4.
To fulfill those duties, the Zoning Administrator first should use the criteria listed in Section 8-1-8 to
determine whether the development site is located within a floodplain. Once it has been determined that a
site is located within a floodplain, the Zoning Administrator must determine whether the development site
is within a flood fringe or a regulatory floodway. If the site is within a flood fringe, the Zoning
Administrator shall require the minimum requirements of Section 8-1-6 be met. If the site is within a
floodway, the Zoning Administrator shall require adherence to Section 8-1-7.
In addition, the general requirements of Section 8-1-8 shall be met for all developments meeting the
requirements of Section 8-1-6. The Zoning Administrator shall assure that all subdivision proposals shall
meet the requirements of Sections 8-1-7 and 8-1-8.
TITLE 2 – FLOOD PLAINS
Page 6
Variances granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals shall comply with the requirements of Section 8-1-10.
The Zoning Board shall complete all notification requirements as set forth in Sections 8-1-10 L and 8-1-10
M.
In order to assure that property owners obtain permits as required in this Chapter, the Zoning Administrator
may take any and all actions as outlined in Section 8-1-14.
SECTION 8-1-4 DUTIES OF THE ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL
The Zoning Administrator shall be responsible for the general administration and enforcement of this
Chapter which shall include the following:
Determining floodplain designation. Check all new development sites to determine whether they
are in a special flood hazard area (SFHA). If they are in a SFHA., determine whether they are in a
floodway, or a floodplain fringe. Enforce requirements of Sections 8-1-6, 8-1-7, and 8-1-8 and on
all development in the floodplain.
Dam safety requirements. Ensure that a DWR dam safety permit has been issued or a letter
indicating no dam safety permit is required, if the proposed development activity includes
construction of a dam as defined in Section 8-1-2. Regulated dams may include weirs, restrictive
culverts or impoundment structures.
Other permit requirements. Ensure that any and all required federal, state, and local permits are
received prior to the issuance of a floodplain development permit. See Title 11, Fee Schedule.
Plan review and permit issuance. Ensure that any and all development activities within SFHAs
located within the jurisdiction of the City meet the requirements of this Chapter and issue a
floodplain development permit in accordance with the provisions of both this Chapter and other
regulations of this community when the development meets the conditions of this Chapter.
Inspection review. Inspect all development projects before, during and after construction to assure
proper elevation of structures and to ensure compliance with the provisions of this Chapter.
Elevation and floodproofing certificate. Maintain for public inspection and furnish upon request
base flood data, SFHA and regulatory floodway maps, copies, of federal and state permit
documents, documentation of variances, conditional letters of map revision, letters of map revision,
letters of map amendment, "as built" elevation and floodproofing documentation, and elevation and
floodproofing certificates for all buildings constructed subject to this Chapter. See Title 11, Fee
Schedule.
Cooperation with other agencies. Cooperate with state and federal floodplain management
agencies to improve base flood or one hundred (100) year frequency flood and floodway data and
to improve the administration of this Chapter. Submit data to DWR and the Federal Emergency
Management Agency for proposed revisions of a regulatory map. Submit reports as required for
the National Flood Insurance Program. Notify the federal emergency management agency of any
proposed amendments to this Chapter.
Promulgate regulations. Promulgate rules and regulations as necessary to administer and enforce
the provisions of this Chapter subject, however, to the review and approval of DWR and FEMA
for any chapter.
SECTION 8-1-5 BASE FLOOD ELEVATIONS
The protection standard of this Chapter is based on the flood insurance study (FIS) and amendments thereto
of the County dated December 1, 1982, as amended, prepared under the direction of the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA.), Federal Insurance Administration (FIA), and is hereby adopted for the
purpose of this Chapter and is on file in the office of the Zoning Administrator. The flood insurance study
TITLE 2 – FLOOD PLAINS
Page 7
includes the flood insurance rate maps (FIRM) dated June 1, 1983, as amended, which delineate the SFHA
as areas that are susceptible to the base flood, and the flood boundary and floodway maps dated June 1,
1983, as amended, which delineate the regulatory floodway. The flood insurance study data shall take
precedence over other base flood elevation data for the purpose of this Chapter.
The base flood elevation at any particular location shall be as delineated on the base flood profile
in the flood insurance study; provided, that for any proposed subdivision or new development
greater than fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres, whichever is the lesser, the applicant shall provide the
base flood elevation data for each lot or platted parcel located in an SFHA. Base flood data received
from the Federal Insurance Administration shall take precedence over data from other sources.
If a disagreement arises concerning the best available flood data, the applicant may engage a
registered professional engineer to conduct a detailed engineering study and submit it to DWR and
FEMA for their review and determination.
A development permit for a site located in a floodway (or in a riverine SFHA where no floodway
has been identified) shall not be issued unless the applicant first obtains a permit or written
documentation that a permit is not required from the Illinois Department of Transportation,
Division of Water Resources, issued pursuant to 615 ILCS 5/5 et seq. See Title 11, Fee Schedule.
Letter of map revision (LCMR). To effect a map change to the County floodway and floodplain
maps, an ICMR for a SFHA property to be protected by a proposed levee must be obtained from
FEMA subject to the following criteria:
The applicant shall submit the following to the Zoning Administrator who shall in turn
submit this information to FEMA and DWR:
a) Site plan of area proposed for levee protection and an overlay of corresponding
flood boundary lines.
b) Elevations of site and proposed levee.
c) Design plans for proposed levee, gates, and closures.
d) Detailed report listing proposed levee material to be utilized; width, length and
height above grade, internal drainage facilities, gates, and closures.
e) Proposed maintenance and inspection schedule.
The applicant shall submit to the Zoning Administrator written proof that the proposed
levee has been reviewed and approved by the applicable federal and state agencies.
No building permits shall be issued until said maps are amended by FEMA, approved by
DWR and received by the County Zoning Administrator excluding the proposed building
site from the floodway or base flood level boundaries, unless said proposal is in accordance
with all other pertinent parts of this Chapter.
If said site is excluded by official map change from the floodway boundaries but not the
base flood level boundaries, or if the official map change is not approved by either FEMA
or DWR, all other pertinent parts of this Chapter shall apply to development on the
proposed building site.
SECTION 8-1-6 OCCUPATION AND USE OF FLOOD FRINGE AREAS
Development in the flood fringe will be permitted if protection is provided against the base flood or one
hundred (100) year frequency flood by proper elevation of structures and if other provisions of this Chapter
are met. No use will be permitted which adversely affects the capacity of drainage facilities or systems.
Developments located within the flood fringe shall meet the requirements of this Section, along with the
requirements of Section 8-1-8.
Development Permit
No person, firm, corporation, or governmental body not exempted by state law shall
commence any development in the flood fringe without first obtaining a development
permit from the Zoning Administrator. See Title 11, Fee Schedule.
TITLE 2 – FLOOD PLAINS
Page 8
Application for a flood fringe development permit shall be made on a form provided by
the Zoning Administrator. The application shall be accompanied by drawings of the site,
drawn to scale, showing property line dimensions; existing grade elevations based on
NGVD; all changes in grade resulting from excavation or filling, and the location and
dimensions of all buildings and additions to buildings. For all proposed buildings, the
elevation of the lowest floor (including basement, cellar, or crawl space) and lowest
adjacent grade shall be shown on the submitted plans and the development will be subject
to the requirements of Sections 8-1-7 and/or 8-1-8 of this Chapter. See Title 11, Fee
Schedule.
Upon receipt of a development permit application, the Zoning Administrator shall compare
the elevation of the site to the base flood or one hundred (100) year frequency flood
elevation. Any development located on land that can be shown to have been higher than
the base flood elevation as of the site's first flood insurance rate map identification is not
in the SFHA and therefore, not subject to the requirements of this Chapter. The Zoning
Administrator shall maintain documentation of the existing ground elevation at the
development site and certification that this ground elevation existed prior to the date of the
site's first flood insurance rate map identification.
The Zoning Administrator shall be responsible for obtaining from the applicant, copies of
all other local, state, and federal permits, approvals, or permit-not-required letters that may
be required for this type of activity. The Zoning Administrator shall not issue a permit
unless all other applicable local, state, and federal permits have been obtained.
Preventing Increased Damages
No development or fill in the flood fringe shall create a threat to public health and safety.
Construction practices and methods shall minimize flood damages to other properties.
Fee
The fee for a floodplain fill permit is five dollars and 00/100 ($5.00), which shall be paid to Peoria
County.
SECTION 8-1-7 REGULATORY FLOODWAYS
There shall be no new construction, fill, or substantial improvements in the designated regulatory
floodway.
Nonconforming structures located in a regulatory floodway may remain in use, but shall not be
enlarged, replaced or structurally altered. A substantially damaged nonconforming structure shall
not be repaired.
SECTION 8-1-8 PERMITTING REQUIREMENTS APPLICABLE TO FLOOD FRINGE AREAS
In addition to the requirements found in Section 8-1-6, the following requirements for all new construction
and substantial improvements to structures located in an SFHA, (other than the regulatory floodway), shall
be met:
Public health standards. No developments in the flood fringe shall include locating or storing
chemicals, explosives, animal wastes, fertilizers, flammable liquids, pollutants, or other hazardous
or toxic materials below the flood protection elevation.
Protecting buildings. All buildings located within a flood fringe shall be protected from flood
damage below the flood protection elevation.
Building protection criteria apply to the following situations:
Construction or placement of a new building.
A substantial improvement to an existing building.
TITLE 2 – FLOOD PLAINS
Page 9
Installing a manufactured home on a new site or a new manufactured home on an existing
site. This building protection requirement does not apply to returning a manufactured
home to the same site it lawfully occupied before it was removed to avoid flood damage;
and
Installing a travel trailer on a site for more than one hundred eighty (180) days. Building
protection requirements shall be met by one of the following methods:
a) A residential or nonresidential building may be elevated in accordance with the
following:
(i) The building or improvements shall be elevated on stilts, piles, walls, or
other foundation that is permanently open to floodwaters and not be
subject to damage by hydrostatic pressure of the base flood or one hundred
(100) year frequency flood. Designs for meeting this requirement shall
either be certified by a registered professional engineer or a registered
professional architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria.
A minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not less than
one (1) square inch for every one (1) square foot of enclosed area subject
to flooding below the base flood elevation shall be provided. The bottom
of all openings shall be no higher than one (1) foot above grade. Openings
may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or
devices, provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters.
(ii) The foundation and supporting members shall be anchored and aligned in
relation to flood flows and adjoining structures so as to minimize exposure
to known hydrodynamic forces such as current, waves, ice, and floating
debris
(iii) All areas below the flood protection elevation shall be constructed of
materials resistant to flood damage. The lowest floor (including basement,
cellar or crawl space) and all electrical, heating, ventilating, plumbing, and
air conditioning equipment and utility meters shall be located at or above
the flood protection elevation. Water and sewer pipes, electrical and
telephone lines, submersible pumps, and other waterproofed service
facilities may be located below the flood protection elevation, provided
that plans certified by a registered professional engineer or a registered
professional architect shall stipulate that the service facilities located
below the FPE will be floodproofed. After the building has been built, a
registered professional engineer or a registered professional architect shall
certify in writing that the total floodproofing of the service facilities
located below the FPE has occurred before a certificate of occupancy can
be issued.
(iv) The areas below the flood protection elevation are usable solely for
parking of vehicles. Areas below the BFE shall not be used for the storage
of any other goods.
(v) Manufactured homes and travel trailers to be installed on a site for more
than one hundred eighty (180) days, shall be elevated to or above the flood
protection elevation; and, shall be anchored to resist floatation, collapse,
or lateral movement by being tied down in accordance with the rules and
regulations for the Illinois Mobile Home Tie-Down Act issued pursuant
to 77 III. Adm. Code 870.
b) Only a nonresidential building may be structurally dry floodproofed (in lieu of
elevation), provided that plans certified by a registered professional engineer or a
registered professional architect shall indicate that the building will be structurally
dry floodproofed below the flood protection elevation, and that the structure and
attendant utility facilities are watertight and capable of resisting the effects of the
TITLE 2 – FLOOD PLAINS
Page 10
base flood or one hundred (100) year frequency flood. The building design shall
take into account flood velocities, duration, rate of rise, hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic forces, the effects of buoyancy, and impacts from debris or ice. Dry
floodproofing measures shall be operable without human intervention and without
an outside source of electricity (levees, berms, floodwalls, and similar works are
not considered floodproofing for the purpose of this subsection). After the building
has been built, a registered professional engineer or a registered professional
architect shall certify in writing that the structure has been dry floodproofed below
the FPE before a certificate of occupancy shall be issued for the structure.
c) A nonconforming structure damaged by flood, fire, wind, or other natural or
manmade disaster may be restored unless the damage exceeds fifty (50) percent of
its market value before it was damaged, in which case it shall conform to this
Chapter.
d) Tool sheds and detached garages on an existing single-family platted lot may be
constructed with the lowest floor below the flood protection elevation in
accordance with the following
(i) All sheds and garages located below the flood protection elevation (FPE)
shall be constructed of water-damage-resistant materials up to the FPE. In
addition, all requirements of Section 8-1-6 must be met.
(ii) The structure shall be anchored to prevent floatation;
(iii) Service facilities such as electrical and heating equipment shall be
elevated or floodproofed to the flood protection elevation. A registered
professional engineer or a registered professional architect shall inspect
the applicable building permit plans and certify that the service facilities
are floodproofed;
(iv) The building shall be less than six hundred twenty-five (625) square feet
in floor size; and
(v) The building shall be used only for the storage of vehicles or tools and
may not contain other rooms, workshops, greenhouses, or similar uses.
SECTION 8-1-9 OTHER DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS
The City Council and the plat officer shall take into account flood hazards, to the extent that they are known
in all official actions related to land management, use, and development.
New subdivisions, manufactured home parks, and planned unit developments (PUDs) within the
SFHA shall be reviewed to assure that the proposed developments are consistent with Sections 8-
1-5 through 8-1-8 of this Chapter and the need to minimize flood damage. Plats, or plans for new
subdivisions, manufactured home parks and planned unit developments (PUDs) shall include a
signed statement by a registered professional engineer that the plat or plans account for changes in
the drainage or surface waters in accordance with the Plat Act (765 ILCS 205/2)
Proposals for new subdivisions, manufactured home parks, travel trailer parks, planned unit
developments (PUDs) and additions to manufactured home parks and additions to subdivisions
shall include base flood or one hundred (100) year frequency flood elevation data and floodway
delineations.
Streets, blocks, lots, parks and other public grounds shall be located and laid out in such a manner
as to preserve and utilize natural streams and channels. Wherever possible, the floodplains shall
be included within parks or other public grounds.
TITLE 2 – FLOOD PLAINS
Page 11
SECTION 8-1-10 VARIANCES
Whenever in a specified case, after an application for a permit has been made to the Zoning
Administrator and the same has been denied and an appeal is made to the Zoning Board of Appeals,
alleging that because of certain exceptional conditions peculiar to the applicant's property, the strict
application of the regulations of this Chapter would result in practical difficulties or particular
hardship in carrying out the strict letter of any regulation relating to the construction, alteration, or
location of buildings or structures in a floodplain; the Zoning Board shall have the power to
determine and vary their application in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this chapter.
A variation under this Section shall be permitted only if the Zoning Board finds that it is in harmony
with the general purpose and intent of this Chapter and the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968,
as amended, and that there are practical difficulties or particular hardships that would result from
carrying out the strict letter of the provisions of this Section.
An applicant for a variance shall be required to seek all necessary federal, state, and other permits
from applicable regulatory agencies.
Variances shall not be issued within any designated regulatory floodway if any increase in flood
levels during the base flood discharge would result.
No variance shall be granted unless the applicant demonstrates that:
The development activity cannot be located outside the SFHA;
There will be no additional threat to public health, safety, beneficial stream uses and
functions, (especially aquatic habitat), or creation of a nuisance;
There will be no additional public expense for flood protection, lost environmental stream
uses and functions, rescue or relief operations, policing, or repairs to stream bed and banks,
roads, utilities, or other public facilities;
The applicant's circumstances are unique and do not represent a general problem;
The granting of the variance will not alter the essential character of the area involved
including existing stream uses;
Special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to the land or structure
involved which are not applicable to other lands or structures under the same
circumstances;
The literal interpretation of the provisions of this Chapter would deprive the applicant of
rights commonly enjoyed by other lands or structures in the same district under the terms
of this Chapter;
The special conditions and circumstances do not result from the actions of the applicant;
The granting of the variance requested will not confer on the applicant any special privilege
that is denied by the chapter to other lands or structures under the same circumstances;
The reasons set forth in the application justify the granting of the variance and the variance
is the minimum variance that will make possible the reasonable use of the property; and
The values or character of property within the surrounding area will not be diminished or
impaired thereby, nor the nearby property adversely affected.
Public hearing and notice. The variance petition shall be given a public hearing before the Zoning
Board of Appeals as for any other petition for variance under the Zoning Ordinance.
The concurring vote of three (3) members of a zoning board consisting of five (5) members or the
concurring vote of five (5) members of a zoning board consisting of seven (7) members shall be
necessary to effect any variation in this Chapter.
The Zoning Administrator or his delegate shall be the technical consultant to the Zoning Board in
person at variance hearings. When necessary, the Zoning Administrator and/or Zoning Board of
Appeals shall seek professional advice from qualified engineers or technical experts. An additional
fee may be charged to the variance petitioner. The expert's fee shall be paid in full by the applicant
TITLE 2 – FLOOD PLAINS
Page 12
within ten (10) days after the County submits a bill to the petitioner. Failure to pay the bill shall
constitute a violation of this Chapter and shall be grounds for the issuance of a stop work order.
An expert shall not be hired by the County at the expense of the applicant until the applicant has
either consented to such hiring or been given an opportunity to be heard on the subject.
The Zoning Administrator's or his delegate's reports and recommendations shall
be included in the minutes and made a part of the record of the Zoning Board.
Findings of fact. The action of the Zoning Board in granting or denying a variation shall
contain or be accompanied by a finding of fact specifying the reason for the decision.
The chairman of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall require applicants to record all approved
variances as a supplement to their deed of record. The petitioner shall pay the recording fee.
The chairman of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall submit in writing to the Zoning Administrator
who shall subsequently forward the following to the FEMA regional natural and technological
hazards chief:
Description of variance (location, name and flood level).
The decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals and their finding of fact relevant to the case.
Upon approval of a variance, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall notify the applicant in writing over
the signature of the chairman of the Zoning Board of Appeals that:
The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood level will result in
increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as twenty-five dollars
($25.00) for one hundred dollars ($100.00) of insurance coverage.
Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property.
Such notification shall be maintained with a record of all variance actions.
Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination
that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as
a historic structure, and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character
and design of the structure.
Fees. The petitioner shall pay all required publication costs associated with his or her request. To
partially defray the expense of investigating and considering an appeal for variation or a
modification of any restrictions imposed by the Zoning Board of Appeals where a public hearing
is required, an additional fee of sixty-five dollars ($65.00) shall be charged the applicant and be
collected by the Zoning Administrator, who shall account for the same to the County. The sixtyfive
dollar ($65.00) filing fee shall be paid at the time of filing and the publication fee shall be paid
prior to any final disposition of the request. Local government units, where their jurisdictional
boundaries are located wholly within the county, are exempt from paying the filing fees.
(Ord. 2013-01)
SECTION 8-1-11 APPEALS
Any person aggrieved, or any officer, department, board or bureau of the county may appeal to the
Zoning Board of Appeals to review any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the
Zoning Administrator.
Such appeal shall be made within thirty-five (35) days from the date of the action appealed from,
by filing with the Zoning Administrator and the Zoning Board a notice of appeal specifying the
grounds thereof. The Zoning Administrator shall forthwith transmit to the Zoning Board all papers
constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken.
An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the Zoning
Administrator certifies to the Zoning Board, after the notice of appeal has been filed with him, that
by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life
or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed other than by a restraining order which
TITLE 2 – FLOOD PLAINS
Page 13
may be granted by the Zoning Board or by a court of record on application, on notice to the Zoning
Administrator and on due cause shown.
The Zoning Board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal and give due notice
thereof to the parties and decide the same within a reasonable time. Upon the hearing, any party
may appear in person, by agent or attorney. The Zoning Board may reverse or affirm, wholly or
partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision, or determination as in its opinion ought to
be made in the premises, and to that end, shall have all the powers of the Zoning Administrator.
To partially defray the expense of investigating and considering an appeal, a fee of forty-five dollars
($45.00) shall be charged the appellant and shall be collected by the enforcing officer, who shall
account for the same to the County.
Appeals shall be made in conformity with the provisions of the Administrative Review Act of the
State. The party making the appeal shall pay the costs of preparing the record on appeal. Copies
of any orders or proceedings ordered by the appellant shall be furnished to him at his own cost.
SECTION 8-1-12 DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY
The degree of flood protection required by this Chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes
and is based on available information derived from engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger
floods may occur or flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This Chapter does not
imply that development, either inside or outside of the SFHA, will be free from flooding or damage. This
Chapter does not create liability on the part of the City or County or any officer or employee thereof for
any flood damage that results from reliance on this Chapter or any administrative decision made lawfully
thereunder.
SECTION 8-1-13 NOTICE OF VIOLATION
It shall by the duty of the Zoning Administrator to enforce the provisions of this Chapter and to
notify the owner or person in control of any private property of any violation of this Chapter.
Service of such notice shall be made by means of personal service of a copy of the notice or by
certified or registered mail of a copy of the notice which is addressed to the residence or usual place
of business of the owner or person in control of the private property.
Such notice shall fairly apprise the owner or person in control of the nature of the violation, his
duty to abate the violation and the penalty for failure to abate the violation.
SECTION 8-1-14 PENALTY
Failure to comply with the requirements of a permit or conditions of a variance resolution shall be
deemed to be a violation of this Chapter. Upon due investigation, the Zoning Administrator may
determine that a violation of the minimum standards of this Chapter exist.
Such person may be enjoined from continuing such violations.
The violation of the terms of this Chapter is hereby declared to be a petty offense punishable by a
fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). Each week the violation remains uncorrected
constitutes a separate offense.
The Zoning Administrator shall inform the owner that any such violation is considered a willful
act to increase flood damages and, therefore, may cause coverage by a standard flood insurance
policy to be suspended.
Nothing herein shall prevent the County from taking such other lawful action to prevent or remedy
any violations. All costs connected therewith shall accrue to the person or persons responsible.
TITLE 2 – FLOOD PLAINS
Page 14
SECTION 8-1-15 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS
This Chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements covenants, or deed
restrictions. Where this Chapter and other ordinances, easements, covenants, or deed restrictions conflict
or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. This Chapter is intended to
repeal the original ordinance or resolution which was adopted to meet the national flood insurance program
regulations but is not intended to repeal the resolution which the County passed in order to establish initial
eligibility for the program.
SECTION 8-1-16 SEPARABILITY
The provisions and Sections of this Chapter shall be deemed separable and the invalidity of any portion of
this Chapter shall not affect the validity of the remainder.
SECTION 8-1-17 EFFECTIVE DATE
This Chapter shall be in full force and upon its adoption and publication as provided by law.
(Ord. 1994-24)
TITLE 2 – FLOOD PLAINS
Page 15
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page 1
THE CITY OF WEST PEORIA
TABLE OF CONTENTS
TITLE 9: PUBLIC INFRASTRUCTURE
CHAPTER 1 - NON-SUBDIVISION CURB CUT
TITLE 2 – PUBLIC INFRASTRUCTURE
Page 1
TITLE 9 PUBLIC INFRASTRUCTURE
CHAPTER 1 NON-SUBDIVISION CURB CUT
9-1-1 Curb Repairs
SECTION 9-1-1 CURB REPAIRS
The combination concrete curb and sidewalk width shall be 5.5 feet. The curb height above the street grade
shall be a minimum of four inches (4") to a maximum of six inches (6"). This height shall be adjusted so
that the elevation at the back of the sidewalk shall match the existing yard and so that yard drainage to the
street can be maintained. However, the curb height above the street shall never be less than four inches
(4"). The face shall have a minimum of eight inches (8") smooth face below grade. The slope of the
sidewalk and the apron shall be at two percent (2%) towards the street.
Saw cuts shall be required at the following locations:
In the street, bituminous surface eighteen inches (18") out from the existing curb face to facilitate
the removal and replacement of the combination curb and sidewalk.
The eighteen inch (18") wide strip of bituminous surface in front of the existing curb shall be
removed. The replaced bituminous surface shall meet the applicable requirements of Section 406
of the IDOT Standard Specifications. The replaced bituminous surface shall match the existing
street slope and grade. The proposed pavement should match the existing adjacent construction in
material type and thickness.
Inspection required by the Street Department Manager before the concrete is poured.
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page 1
THE CITY OF WEST PEORIA
TABLE OF CONTENTS
TITLE 10: ENERGY AGGREGATION
CHAPTER 1 - ENERGY AGGREGATION FOR SMALL BUSINESSES AND ALL RESIDENTS
TITLE 2 – ENERGY AGGREGATION
Page 1
TITLE 10 ENERGY AGGREGATION
CHAPTER 1 ENERGY AGGREGATION FOR SMALL BUSINESSES AND ALL
RESIDENTS
10-1-1 Definitions
10-1-2 Aggregation of Electrical Load
10-1-3 Opt-Out Program
10-1-4 Adoption of Plan of Operation and Governance for the Electricity Aggregation Program
10-1-5 Solicitation of Bids
SECTION 10-1-1 DEFINITIONS
For the purpose of this Chapter 1, the following terms shall have the following definitions:
Act: shall mean the Illinois Power Agency Act, 20 ILCS 3855/1-92, as may be amended from time to time.
Customer: shall mean recipients of residential and small commercial retail electric loads as provided in
the Act.
Electricity Aggregation Program: shall mean a program pursuant to the Act for the aggregation of
residential and small commercial retail electric loads located within the corporate limits of the City that
provides customers with the opportunity to opt out of participating in that program as provided in the Act.
SECTION 10-1-2 AGGREGATION OF ELECTRICAL LOAD
The Corporate Authorities of the City are authorized to operate an Electricity Aggregation Program
pursuant to the Act and for that purpose may solicit bids and enter into service agreements to
facilitate the sale and purchase of electricity and related services and equipment for those loads
aggregated pursuant to the Electricity Aggregation Program as provided in the Act.
The Corporate Authorities of the City may exercise the authority to operate the Electricity
Aggregation Program jointly with any other municipality or county and, in combination with two
or more municipalities or counties, may initiate a process to jointly authorize the Electricity
Aggregation Program by a majority vote of each particular municipality or county as required by
the Act.
SECTION 10-1-3 OPT-OUT PROGRAM
The Electricity Aggregation Program shall operate as an opt-out program whereby customers who
do not wish to participate in the Electricity Aggregation Program may opt out pursuant to the Act.
The City Administrator or his designee, on behalf of the City, shall fully inform customers in
advance, as provided in the Act, that customers have the right to opt out of the Electricity
Aggregation Program. The disclosure provided to the customers shall comply with the requirements
of the Act and shall prominently state all charges to be made and shall include full disclosure of the
cost to obtain service pursuant to Section 16-603 of the Act, how to access service, and the fact that
service under Section 16-603 of the Act is available to customers without penalty if they are
currently receiving service under Section 16-603 of the Act.
Upon notification from any customer that the customer wishes to opt out of the Electricity
Aggregation Program, that customer shall be excluded from the Electricity Aggregation Program.
Except for those customers who opt out of the Electricity Aggregation Program pursuant to this
Section 10-1-3 and the Act, the Electricity Aggregation Program shall automatically apply for each
TITLE 2 – ENERGY AGGREGATION
Page 2
person owning, occupying, controlling, or using an electrical load center proposed to be aggregated
in the corporate limits of the City.
SECTION 10-1-4 ADOPTION OF PLAN OF OPERATION AND GOVERNANCE FOR THE
ELECTRICITY AGGREGATION PROGRAM
The Corporate Authorities of the City, with the assistance from the Illinois Power Agency as
required pursuant to the Act, shall develop and approve a plan of operation and governance for the
Electricity Aggregation Program.
Before adopting the plan of operation required under Section 10-1-4A and the Act, the Corporate
Authorities shall hold at least two (2) public hearings on the proposed plan. Before the first public
hearing, the Corporate Authorities shall publish notice of the hearings once a week for two (2)
consecutive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the City. The notice shall summarize
the plan of operation and state the date, time, and location of each hearing.
The plan of operation and governance for the Electricity Aggregation Program shall:
Provide for universal access to all applicable residential customers and equitable treatment
of applicable residential customers.
Describe demand management and energy efficiency services to be provided to each class
of customers.
Meet any requirements established by law concerning aggregated service offered pursuant
to the Act.
SECTION 10-1-5 SOLICITATION OF BIDS
The process for soliciting bids for electricity and other related services and awarding proposed agreements
for the purchase of electricity and other related services for the electricity aggregation program shall be
conducted pursuant to the Act.
TITLE 11 – FEE SCHEDULE
TITLE 11: FEE SCHEDULE
CHAPTER 1 - FEE SCHEDULE
TITLE 11 – FEE SCHEDULE
Page 1
TITLE 11 FEE SCHEDULE
CHAPTER 1 FEE SCHEDULE
11-1-1 Fee Schedule
SECTION 11-1-1 FEE SCHEDULE
For the purpose of this Chapter, all persons shall apply for the types of permits shown before
undertaking the activities described and shall, at the time of application, pay the said fees.
City of West Peoria Fee Schedule
Residential Construction Permits
Single Family Dwelling:
$30 + $5 for every $1,000 above $10,000
Multi-Family Dwelling:
$30 + $5 for every $1,000 above $10,000
Accessory Structure/Additions/Alterations:
Decks, sheds, porches: $35
Garage:
Less than 200 sq ft - $35, more than 200 sq ft - $60
Fence & swimming pool – pool permit + $25 for fence
Fence – new, move or replace - $30.00
Wheelchair ramp – fee waived
Commercial Construction Permits
New building - $40 + $5 for every $1,000 above $10,000
Less than 200 sq ft - $35, more than 200 sq ft - $60
Fence – new, move or replace - $30.00
Demolition Permits
Commercial building - $100.00
Home - $100.00
Garage or accessory structure - $25.00
Swimming Pool Permit
Pool only - $25.00
Inground Pool - $100
Hard Surface Permits
New or replace (driveway, sidewalk, patio) includes demolitions if needed - $40.00
TITLE 11 – FEE SCHEDULE
Page 2
Sign Permit - $35.00
Business Permits
Application for a Liquor License - $350.00
Temporary Liquor License - $25.00
Home occupation - $75.00
Home occupation annual renewal – $25.00
Adult use - $500.00
Adult use annual renewal - $300.00
Zoning Requests
Application/zoning amendment - $350.00
Application/special use permit - $350.00
Application/appeal a ZBA decision - $25.00
Variation Requests
Principal structure - $95.00
Accessory/other structure - $70.00
Commercial/industrial/institutional structures - $120.00
Burning Permits
Construction site burn - $100.00
Bonfire - $150.00
Prescribed burn - $100.00
Motor Vehicle Race Permit
Payable in two (2) installments - $1,000.00
Miscellaneous
Stop work - $120.00
Review plans for Environmental Barriers Act - $170.00
Determining elevation within flood plan - $120.00
Flood plain development - $120.00
Block party permit - fee waived
License/fireworks vendor - $300.00
Revised 9-26-11(Ord. 2011-47,2019-01, 2019-38)
TITLE 11 – FEE SCHEDULE
Page 3
SECTION 11-2-1 FEE FOR CITY ABATEMENT COST
For the purpose of this Chapter, all City Abatement that is done as a result of an ordinance violation
conviction resulting in, but not limited to, removal of a nuisance, demolition or repair, will be
charged at the following rates:
Cleanup (minimum of $75.00)
Labor (per hour, per person)
City Workers Current Prevailing Wage Rate Plus Mileage
Contract Price Current Prevailing Wage Rate Plus Mileage
Mowing (per hour, per person) *
City Workers $75.00/hr.
Contract Price Current Rate
*Mowing includes landscape waste removal (debris removal)
Demolition
Labor (per hour, per person)
Contract Price Current Rate
Equipment Actual Cost of Rental or Usage Charge
Additional Costs
Landfill Invoice Amount Plus Mileage
Liens
Filing Fees $51.00 or Current Rate
Release Fee $51.00 or Current Rate
Revised 9-26-11 (Ord. 2011-47, 2019-01)