CODE OF ORDINANCES OF THE VILLAGE OF WILMETTE, ILLINOIS 
____________ 
Published in 2019 by Order of the President and Board of Trustees 
____________ 

> 
WILMETTE OFFICIALS 
____________ 
Robert T. Bielinski 
Village President 
____________ 
Kathy Dodd 
Joel Kurzman 
George Pearce 
Senta Plunkett 
Daniel E. Sullivan Jr. 
Julie Wolf 
Board of Trustees 
____________ 
Timothy Frenzer 
Village Manager/Village Clerk 
____________ 
Jeffrey M. Stein 
Corporation Counsel 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a republication of the Wilmette Code of Ordinances, 1993, of the Village of Wilmette, Illinois. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1993 Code, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the President and Board of Trustees. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1993 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTER CHT:1 RELATED LAWS RL:1 SPECIAL ACTS SA:1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE CHTCT:1 RELATED LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE RLCT:1 SPECIAL ACTS COMPARATIVE TABLE SACT:1 CODE CD1:1 CODE APPENDIX CDA:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE SLT:1 CHARTER INDEX CHTi:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1  
Index 
    The index has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of Amy Norton, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Mr. Jeffrey Stein for his cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the village readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the village's affairs. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the Village of Wilmette, Illinois. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the Village of Wilmette, Illinois. 
(c) Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the Village of Wilmette, Illinois. 2019. 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 1-1. - Code designation. 
    The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the "Wilmette Village Code." 
(Code 1993, § 1-1) 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
    In the interpretation and construction of this Code, the following definitions and rules of construction shall be observed, unless they are inconsistent with the manifest intent of the Board of Trustees or the context clearly requires otherwise: 
    Action. The term "action" means any judicial or quasi judicial proceedings. 
    Board. The term "Board" means the President and Board of Trustees of the Village of Wilmette, Illinois. 
    Computation of time. The time within which any act provided by law is to be done shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last, unless the last day is a Sunday or a legal holiday, and then it shall also be excluded. If the day succeeding such Sunday or holiday is also a holiday or a Sunday, then such succeeding day shall also be excluded. 
    Corporate authorities. The term "corporate authorities" means the President and Board of Trustees. 
    County. The term "county" means Cook County in the State of Illinois. 
    Court. The term "court" means any court of record. 
    Fiscal year. The term "fiscal year" means the period from January 1 of each calendar year through and including December 31 of the same calendar year. 
    Gender. Words importing the masculine gender include the feminine and neuter. 
    In the village. The term "in the village" or "within the village" includes all territory over which the village now has or shall hereafter acquire jurisdiction for the exercise of its police powers or other regulatory powers. 
    Law. The term "law" means the United States Constitution, all applicable federal law, the Constitution and statutes of the State of Illinois, the ordinances of the village, and, when appropriate, any and all rules and regulations which may be promulgated thereunder. 
    May. The term "may" is permissive. 
    Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
    Must and shall. The terms "must" and "shall" are each mandatory. 
    Number. Words importing the singular number may extend and be applied to several persons or things and words importing the plural may include the singular. 
    Oath. The term "oath" shall be deemed to include an affirmation and the term "sworn" shall be construed to include the term "affirmed." 
    Or, and. The term "or" may be read "and," and the term "and" may be read "or" if the sense requires it. 
    Ordinance violation. The term "ordinance violation" means a quasi-criminal violation of the Code whereby a jail or prison sentence is not a penalty. 
    Owner. The term "owner," as applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant, tenant by the entirety, of the whole or a part of such building or land. 
    Person. The term "person" means any individual, partnership, corporation, joint stock association or any city or state or any subdivision thereof; and includes any trustee, receiver, assignee or personal representative thereof. 
    Personal property. The term "personal property" means and includes every species of property, except real property. 
    President. The term "President" means the President of the village. 
    Property. The term "property" means and includes real and personal property. 
    Published agenda. The term "published agenda" means the agenda of each regular and special meeting of the Board of Trustees as prepared by the Village Manager, published and posted in accordance with the Illinois Open Meetings Act. 
    Real property. The term "real property" means and includes lands, tenements and hereditaments and embraces all chattels real. 
    Seal. The term "seal" means the seal of the village. 
    State. The term "state" means the State of Illinois. 
    Street. The term "street" includes all streets, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, courts, places, squares, curbs, or other public ways in this village which have been or may hereafter be dedicated and open to public use, or such other public property so designated in any law of this State. 
    Tenant and occupant. The terms "tenant" and "occupant," applied to a building or land, include any person who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone or with others. 
    Tense. Words in the present tense include the future. 
    Time. Central Standard Time shall be the official time within the village, except that in each year official time for the village shall be advanced one hour to Central Daylight Time and thereafter retarded one hour to Central Standard Time, each of the forgoing adjustments to occur on such dates and in such manner as shall be provided for in applicable federal law, more particularly Title 15, United States Code, section 260a (15 USC 260a), now or hereafter amended. All legal or official proceedings of the President and Board of Trustees of the village shall be regulated as to time in accordance with the provisions of this section. When reference is made to any time without qualification in any ordinance, resolution or order heretofore passed or which may be passed hereafter by the President and Board of Trustees of the village or in any official notice, advertisement or document of the village or in any contract to which the village is a party, it shall be understood to refer to the official time of the village as herein prescribed. When the words "Daylight Time," "Daylight Saving" or "Daylight Saving Time" are used in any official publication, document or contract, they shall be understood to have reference to the time fixed for same by applicable federal law. 
    Village. The term "village" means the Village of Wilmette, in Cook County, State of Illinois, except as otherwise provided. 
    Written, in writing. The terms "written" or "in writing" may include printing and any other mode of representing words and letters, but when the written signature of any person is required by law to any official or public writing or bond required by law, it shall be in the proper handwriting of such person, or in case he is unable to write, by his proper mark. 
    Year. The term "year" means a calendar year unless otherwise expressed. 
(Code 1993, § 1-2; Ord. No. 78-O-15, 1-2-1979; Ord. No. 94-O-67, 9-13-1994; Ord. No. 2005-O-86, 10-11-2005) 
Sec. 1-3. - Titles. 
    The headings of the several sections of this Code are intended as mere catch words to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such section, nor as any part of the section, nor unless expressly so provided shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the headings are amended or re-enacted. 
(Code 1993, § 1-3) 
Sec. 1-4. - Severability and construction; intent. 
(a)  Should any section, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase or word of this Code be declared invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining words, phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs or sections of this Code, since the same would have been enacted by the Board of Trustees without the incorporation in this Code of any such invalid or unconstitutional word, phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
(b)  All general provisions, terms, phrases and expressions contained in this Code shall be liberally construed in order that the true intent and meaning of the Board may be fully carried out. 
(Code 1993, § 1-4) 
Sec. 1-5. - Status of existing and repealing ordinances. 
    The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are substantially the same as those of the previous Codes of the village, and those of all other ordinances existing at the time of the adoption of this Code shall be construed as a continuation thereof and not as new enactments. When any ordinance repealing any former ordinance, clause or provision shall be itself repealed, such repeal shall not be construed so as to revive such former ordinance, clause or provision. Any ordinance amending this Code, adopted on or after April 1, 2019, shall be deemed to amend this Code. Where an ordinance adopted on or after April 1, 2019 amended any portion of this Code, which was renumbered or relocated so as to be retained and included as a successor provision of this Code, said ordinance shall be deemed to have amended the successor provision of this Code, wherever located. 
(Code 1993, § 1-5) 
Sec. 1-6. - Jurisdiction. 
    All the territory embraced within the corporate limits of the village and so much of the water and bed of Lake Michigan as lie within 11/2 miles of the west shore thereof, and adjoining and being east of the territory described in section 1-7, are hereby declared to be subject to the jurisdiction and ordinances of the village. 
(Code 1993, § 1-6) 
Sec. 1-7. - Corporate limits. 
    The corporate limits of the village are defined, established and bounded as follows: 
(1)  All those parts of sections 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32 and 33, Township 42 North, Range 13 East of the Third Principal Meridian, and that part of section 25, Township 42 North, Range 12 East of the Third Principal Meridian, and that part of Ouilmette Reservation in Township 42 North, Range 13 East of the Third Principal Meridian, bounded and described as follows: 
    Beginning at a point on the north and south center line of section 27 aforesaid at its intersection with the west shore of Lake Michigan; thence south along the north and south center line to the center of section 27; thence west along the east and west center line to the west line of such section; thence south along the west line of section 27 to the south line of Block 29 in Oxford addition to Kenilworth; thence west on the south line and south line extended of said Block 29 to the north line of the south 25 acres of the northeast quarter of the southeast quarter of section 28; thence west along the north line of the south 25 acres to the northwest corner thereof; thence south along the west line of the south 25 acres to the north line of the south half of the southeast quarter of section 28; thence west along the north line to the center line of Ridge Road; thence northwesterly along the center line of Ridge Road to the north line of the south 245 45/100 feet of part west of road, of north fifteen chains of south half of northwest quarter of section 28; thence west along the north line to the east line of lot 36 of Indian Hill Subdivision number 4 in section 28; thence north along the east line of lot 36 22 8/10 feet to the northeast corner of such lot; thence westerly and northwesterly along the northerly lines of lots 36 and 37, Indian Hill Subdivision number 4, to the northerly corner of lot 37; thence southwesterly 282 feet along the line between Indian Hill Consolidation in sections 28 and 29 and lot 37, Indian Hill Subdivision number 4, to the north line of the west ten acres of the south 19 34/100 acres of the north 60 acres of the south half of the northwest quarter of section 28: thence west along such lot line 1,248 23/100 feet to the west line of section 28; thence along the west line of section 28 to the north line of lot 7, Marie Alles Subdivision in section 29; thence west along the north line to the east line of the southwest quarter of the northeast quarter of section 29; thence south along the east line to the north line extended east of Kenilworth First Addition in section 29; thence west along the north line to the north and south center line of section 29; thence south along the north and south center line to the center line of Illinois Road (also known as Avoca Road); thence westerly along the center line of Illinois Road (also known as Avoca Road) to the east line of Marchiafava's Subdivision; thence north along said east line 277 feet; thence west along the north line of Marchiafava's Subdivision 100 feet; thence north along the north and south center line of section 30 to the south line of the north 257 feet of lot 20 in Henry Smith's Subdivision in section 30; thence east along such south line to the east line of the west half of lot 20; thence north along such east line to the east and west center line of section 30; thence west along such center line to a point 600 feet east of the northwest corner of the east half of the southwest quarter of section 30; thence southwesterly toward a point 300 feet south of and 250 feet east of the northwest corner of said east half, a distance of 11 28/100 feet; thence south parallel with the east line of said southwest quarter to the center line of Illinois Road (also known as Avoca Road); thence westerly along the center line of Illinois Road (also known as Avoca Road) to the center line of Happ Road; thence northerly along the center line of Happ Road to the east and west center line of section 30; thence west along the east and west center line of section 30 to the west line of section 30 (being the line between New Trier and Northfield Townships); thence north along the west line to the east and west center line of section 25, Township 42 North, Range 12 East of the Third Principal Meridian; thence west along the east and west center line to the center line of the North Branch of the Chicago River; thence southerly following the thread of the stream of such river to the south line of section 25; thence east along the south line to the southeast corner of section 25; thence south along the west line of section 30, Township 42 North, Range 13 East of the Third Principal Meridian (being the line between New Trier and Northfield Townships) to the southwest corner of section 30; thence east along the south line of section 30 to the Easterly right-of-way line of the Commonwealth Edison Company; thence south easterly along such right-of-way line to the east and west center line of section 31; thence east along the east and west center line to the line between lots 5 and 6 and between lots 11 to 21, both inclusive, and lots 22 to 32, both inclusive, in Block 2 and between lots 1 to 11, both inclusive, and lots 22 to 32, both inclusive, and between lots 16 and 17, in Block 8, and such line extended, in United Realty Company, Glenayre Gardens Subdivision in section 31; thence south along such line in Blocks 2 and 8 in the United Realty Company, Glenayre Gardens Subdivision, to a line parallel with and 50 feet north of the center of Glenview Road; thence southwesterly to the point of intersection of a line parallel with and 50 feet south of the center line of Glenview Road with the west line of King's Court Subdivision in the southeast quarter of section 31; thence south along the west line of King's Court Subdivision and such line extended to the south line of section 31, Township 42 North, Range 13 East of the Third Principal Meridian; thence east along such south line and the south line of section 32 to the southeast corner of section 32; thence north along the east line of section 32 to the center line of (Old) Glenview Road; thence northeasterly along the center line of (Old) Glenview Road to the west line extended north of lot 37 in County Clerk's Division in section 33, Township 42 North, Range 13 east of the Third Principal Meridian; thence south along the west line of lot 37 to the southwest corner of lot 37; thence east along the south line of lots 37 and 38 in County Clerk's Division and along the south line of lots 3 to 7, both inclusive, in owner's division of lot 39 of the County Clerk's Division, and such line extended, to the north and south center line of section 33; thence north along the north and south center line of section 33 to the center line of Isabella Street; thence east along the center line of Isabella Street to the east line of lot 30 of Baxter's Subdivision in Ouilmette Reservation; thence north along the east line to the southwest corner of lot 33 of Baxter's Subdivision; thence east along the south line of lot 33 to the center line of Sheridan Road; thence north along the center line to the north line of Baxter's Subdivision; thence east on the north line to the shore line of Lake Michigan; thence northwesterly along the shore line to the place of beginning. 
(2)  Also the following described territory: 
    That part of the North 20 acres of lot 1 of the Southwest quarter of section 30, Township 42 North, Range 13, East of the Third Principal Meridian, described as follows: Beginning at a point on the West line of the East 1/2 of the Southwest one-quarter of said section 30, 300 feet South of the Northwest corner of said East 1/2 of said Southwest one-quarter of said section 30; thence South on the West line of the East 1/2 of the Southwest one-quarter of said section 30, 359.68 feet to the Southwest corner of said North 20 acres of lot 1 of the East 1/2 of the Southwest one-quarter of said section 30; thence East of the South line of said North 20 acres 588.89 feet; thence North on a line parallel with the West line of the East 1/2 of the Southwest one-quarter of said section 30, 651.10 feet; thence Southwest on a line intersecting the North line of the East 1/2 of said Southwest one-quarter of said section 30 at a point 600 feet East of the Northwest corner of said section 30; at an angle of 50 degrees 13 minutes (along the Southeast border of the Cook County Forest Preserve) 455.44 feet to a point 300 feet South of the North line of said Southwest one-quarter of said section 30; thence West on a line parallel with the North line of the Southwest one-quarter of said section 30, 250 feet to the place of beginning. 
(3)  Also the following described territory: 
    The South 243.4 feet of the West 200 feet of lot 20 (except the West 100 feet of lot 20) in Henry Smith's Subdivision of the Northeast one-quarter of the Southeast one-quarter of section 30, Township 42 North, Range 13 East of the Third Principal Meridian in Cook County, Illinois, and commonly known as 3434 Illinois Road. 
(4)  Also the following described territory: 
    That part of the West 14 acres of the North 64 acres of the West 1/2 of the Southwest one-quarter of section 29, Township 42 North, Range 13, East of the Third Principal Meridian, lying North of Avoca Road, in Cook County, Illinois, and commonly known as 1200 Hibbard Road. 
(Code 1993, § 1-7; Ord. No. 79-O-65, 12-18-1979; Ord. No. 89-O-11, 3-7-1989) 
Sec. 1-8. - Corporate seal. 
    The corporate seal of the village shall be as follows: The seal hitherto established and used by the village, the impression made by which is circular in form, with the words and figures "Village of Wilmette, Incorporated Sept. 19, 1872," on its outer circle, and in the interior of the circle the figure of an Indian on the shore of a body of water, with a sailing vessel and the rising sun in the distance. 
(Code 1993, § 1-8) 
Sec. 1-9. - Village datum. 
(a)  A horizontal plane of reference hereby is established in the village, to which all grades hereafter fixed or provided for by the Board in ordinances for public improvements, or otherwise, shall refer. 
(b)  The plane of reference shall be known as the village datum and shall be defined as a brass cap set in a six-inch concrete post, located on the Easterly side of the Wilmette Village Hall, 23.0 feet North of the "T" in an engraved brick labeled "CTA," 101.4 feet South of the center line of Central Avenue, and 30.9 feet Northwest of the center of the North flagpole; elevation 35.80 feet. 
(Code 1993, § 1-9) 
Sec. 1-10. - Village records. 
    All village records shall be kept in the village hall, or other facility within the village designated by the Village Manager. 
(Code 1993, § 1-10; Ord. No. 2010-O-13, 2-9-2010) 
Sec. 1-11. - Amendments and reference to Code. 
    Any addition or amendments to this Code, when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the Board of Trustees to make the same a part of this Code, shall be deemed to be incorporated in this Code so that a reference to the "Wilmette Village Code" shall be understood to include them. 
(Code 1993, § 1-11) 
Sec. 1-12. - Interpretation of language. 
    All words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in the law shall be construed and understood according to such peculiar and appropriate meaning. 
Sec. 1-13. - Construction 
    The provisions of the ordinances of the village and all proceedings under them are to be construed with a view to effect their objects and to promote justice. 
Secs. 1-14-1-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - GENERAL PENALTY 

Sec. 1-31. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
(a)  Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the village any act is prohibited or is declared to be unlawful or an offense, or whenever in this Code or any ordinance the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, any person upon the violation of any ordinance shall be punished by a fine not less than $50.00 and not exceeding $750.00 for each such offense. Each day that any violation of any provision of this Code or any ordinance shall continue, shall constitute a separate offense. In the construction and interpretation of this section, the revocation of a license or permit shall not be considered as a recovery or penalty so as to bar any other penalty being enforced. 
(b)  In addition to any other fine or penalty provided for by this section or any other section of this Code, the court may also impose as a sentence any one or all of the following: 
(1)  An amount of restitution to any person or entity suffering personal injury or property damage as the result of the prohibited conduct; 
(2)  A period of public or community service; 
(3)  Mandatory attendance at remedial counseling, treatment, or education. 
(Code 1993, § 1-12.1; Ord. No. 94-O-65, 9-13-1994; Ord. No. 2018-O-26, § 2, 5-22-2018) 
Sec. 1-32. - Penalties upon amendment. 
    In case of the amendment of any section of this Code containing provisions for the violation of which a penalty is provided in another section, the penalty so provided in such other section shall be held to relate to the section so amended or the amending section, whether re-enacted in the amendatory ordinance or not, unless such penalty is specifically repealed therein. All fines and penalties provided for in section 2-1305 shall be deemed the specific fine amount for such violation. Any fine provided for in another section of this Code that contradicts or conflicts with section 2-1305 shall not apply. The fines and penalties provided for in section 2-1305 shall be controlling in all matters before the Village's Administrative Adjudication system or before another court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Code 1993, § 1-12.2) 
Sec. 1-33. - Prepayment of penalties; increase in fine for late payment. 
(a)  Wherever in section 2-1305 there is a provision for a fine or money penalty and prepayment of such penalty is expressly permitted, prepayment shall be allowed prior to the hearing date provided or the expiration period for which a hearing date may be requested. If no prepayment is provided prior to such a hearing date or a hearing requested as the case may be, there shall be is also an increase in the fine for late payment. Late penalties may be waived by the Corporation Counsel and the Village's Hearing Officer or a judge of the Circuit Court at the request of the violator and only upon a showing of good cause by the violator. In the event that the late payment is not made, collection of said ordinance violation penalties shall be referred to a private collection agency by contract. All prepayment options shall be provided solely for in section 2-1305 and any contradictory provision provided for in another section of this Code shall not apply. 
(b)  In the case of transfer of citations to a private collection agency, the following fine schedule shall apply: 
(1)  For a citation where the prepayment fine is less than $50.00, the minimum fine shall increase to $50.00 when transferred to a collection agency. 
(2)  For a citation where the prepayment fine is $50.00 or greater, but less than $100.00, the minimum fine shall increase to $100.00 when transferred to a collection agency. 
(3)  For a citation where the prepayment fine is $100.00 or greater, the minimum fine shall increase to $200.00 when transferred to a collection agency. 
(4)  The collection agency's fees shall be added to the unpaid amounts and shall be collected by the collection agency. 
(Code 1993, § 1-12.3; Ord. No. 92-O-97, 12-1-1992) 
Sec. 1-34. - Fine for returned checks. 
    Whenever payment is made to the village for any fee, fine, bill, service, penalty or tax, by way of personal or business check, and said check is returned for any reason, including, but not limited to, non-sufficient funds, stop payment or account closed, the maker of said check shall be charged a transaction fee of $25.00 or ten percent of the amount of the returned check, whichever is greater, for each check so returned. 
(Code 1993, § 1-12.4; Ord. No. 2002-O-100, 12-10-2002; Ord. No. 2007-O-87, 11-27-2007) 
Sec. 1-35. - Payment of unpaid debt. 
    No licenses, certificates, and/or permits, or renewal of the same, required by the laws and ordinances of the village shall be issued to any person or entity who is indebted to the village for any village water service or other village services or utilities, fees, fines, judgments, levies or any other debts due and owing to the village from such person, entity, or otherwise interested party to such requested license, certificate and/or permit, until the indebtedness is paid in full. 
(Code 1993, § 1-12.5; Ord. No. 2017-O-60, 10-10-2017) 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 2-1-2-36. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CORPORATE AUTHORITY; VILLAGE PRESIDENT 

Sec. 2-37. - Election; term; limitation; title of Mayor. 
    The President of the village is elected for a term of four years. No person shall be elected to the office of President for more than two full four-year terms. No person who has been elected and served for more than 25 months of an unexpired term shall be elected to the office of President for more than one full four-year term. Any person who has been appointed to or acted as President for less than 25 months may be elected to two full four-year terms. The President may also use the title of Mayor, as provided by statute. 
(Code 1993, § 2-1.1; Ord. No. 79-O-11, 4-3-1979) 
Sec. 2-38. - Oath; compensation; residence. 
    The President shall take the oath of office prescribed by statute. He shall receive such compensation as is fixed, from time to time, by the Board. During his term of office, the President shall be a resident of the village. 
(Code 1993, § 2-1.2) 
Sec. 2-39. - Duties. 
    The President shall be the official head of the village for the purpose of serving civil process, and the President shall perform all duties required of him by statute or ordinance. The President, or the President's designee, shall be the village's representative in regards to maintaining effective communication and cooperation on matters of common interest with other elected governmental boards and officials. 
(Code 1993, § 2-1.3; Ord. No. 70-O-2, 2-17-1970) 
Sec. 2-40. - Temporary absence or disability. 
    If a temporary absence or disability of the President incapacitates him from the performance of his duties but does not create a vacancy in the office, the Trustees of the village shall elect one of their number to act as President pro tempore who, during such absence or disability, shall possess all the rights and powers of the President. In the absence of the President, the Trustees of the village may elect a Trustee to act as temporary Chairperson. He shall have only the power of a presiding officer and a right to vote in his capacity as Trustee on any ordinance, resolution or motion. 
(Code 1993, § 2-1.4.1) 
Sec. 2-41. - Resignation; death in office. 
    In the event of resignation, death or permanent disability of the President, the vacancy created shall be filled for the remainder of the term at the general village election next scheduled under the general election law. During the period from the time the vacancy occurs until a President is elected, as provided in this section, and is qualified, the vacancy may be filled by the election of an acting President by the Board of Trustees, who shall possess all the rights and powers of the President. 
(Code 1993, § 2-1.4.2) 
Secs. 2-42-2-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CORPORATE AUTHORITY; BOARD OF TRUSTEES 

Sec. 2-71. - Election; term; limitation. 
    The Board of Trustees consists of the President and six Trustees. The Trustees are elected to office for a term of four years and no more than three shall be elected to full terms at any one election. No person shall be elected to the office of Trustee for more than two full four-year terms. No person who has been elected and served for more than 25 months of an unexpired term shall be elected to the office of Trustee for more than one full four-year term. Any person who has been appointed to or acted as Trustee for less than 25 months may be elected to two full four-year terms. 
(Code 1993, § 2-2.1; Ord. No. 79-O-11, 4-3-1979) 
Sec. 2-72. - Duties; compensation; oath; residence. 
    The Board of Trustees is the legislative department of the village government, and shall perform the duties and have the powers as are delegated to it by statute and ordinance. Each Trustee shall take the oath prescribed by statute and shall receive such compensation as is fixed by ordinance. During his term of office, each Trustee shall be a resident of the village. 
(Code 1993, § 2-2.2) 
Sec. 2-73. - Permanent disability. 
    The permanent disability of the President or any Trustee shall be determined by a two-thirds vote of the elected Trustees upon a finding that the President or a Trustee has been unable to function in his elected capacity for a period of three consecutive months. 
(Code 1993, § 2-2.4) 
Secs. 2-74-2-104. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - CORPORATE AUTHORITY; PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE OF THE BOARD OF TRUSTEES 

Sec. 2-105. - Meetings; quorum; minutes; public notice. 
(a)  The regular meetings of the Board of Trustees shall be held without notice on the second and fourth Tuesday of each month of the year at 7:30 p.m. in the council chamber in the Wilmette Village Hall, unless otherwise ordered by the Board. A member of the Board of Trustees must be physically present at the place of any regular, special, committee-of-the-whole, standing committee, ad hoc committee, or special committee meeting, any board or commission meeting, or any other public meeting provided for by law or in this Code, in order to be considered present for the purposes of constituting a quorum, in order to vote, or in order to participate in the discussion of any matter of business at said meeting. Special meetings of the Board may be called by the President or by any three Trustees, upon at least 48 hours' notice to all Trustees of the village and the President. 
(b)  A majority of the President and Board of Trustees shall constitute a quorum to do business. Minutes shall be kept of all meetings of the Board, both regular and special. 
(c)  Public notice of all meetings, whether open or closed to the public, shall be given as follows: 
(1)  The Board of Trustees shall give public notice of the schedule of regular meetings at the beginning of each calendar or fiscal year and shall state the regular dates, times, and places of such meetings. Public notice of any special meeting, except a meeting held in the event of a bona fide emergency, or of any rescheduled regular meeting, or of any reconvened meeting, shall be given at least 48 hours before such meeting, which notice shall also include the agenda for the special, rescheduled, or reconvened meeting. The validity of any action taken by the Board of Trustees which is germane to a subject on the agenda shall not be affected by other errors or omissions in the agenda. However, this requirement of public notice of reconvened meetings does not apply to any case where the meeting was open to the public and it is to be reconvened within 24 hours, or an announcement of the time and place of the reconvened meeting was made at the original meeting and there is no change in the agenda. Notice of an emergency meeting shall be given as soon as practicable, but in any event prior to the holding of such meeting, to any news medium which has filed an annual request for notice as set forth below. 
(2)  Public notice shall be given by posting a copy of the notice at the village hall. The Board of Trustees shall supply copies of the notice of its regular meetings, and of the notice of any special, emergency, rescheduled or reconvened meeting, to any news medium that has filed an annual request for such notice. Any such news medium shall also be given the same notice of all special, emergency, rescheduled or reconvened meetings in the same manner as is given to members of the Board of Trustees provided such news medium has given the Board of Trustees an address or telephone number within the territorial jurisdiction of the Board of Trustees at which such notice may be given. (ILCS ch. 5, act 120, § 2.02) 
(Code 1993, § 2-2.5.1; Ord. No. 92-O-110, 12-15-1992; Ord. No. 94-O-116, 1-10-1995; Ord. No. 96-O-112, 1-14-1997; Ord. No. 2001-O-88, 12-11-2001) 
Sec. 2-106. - Rules of Order. 
    The following shall be the rules of order for the conduct of the meetings of the Board of Trustees: 
(1)  Rule 1. The order of business of all regular meetings of the Board shall be as follows: 
a.  The roll of members shall be called. 
b.  Public comment. 
c.  Consent agenda. The consent agenda shall include all matters of routine business, which shall include, but not be limited to, adoption of ordinances, introduction of ordinances, land use cases with positive recommendations from a public body, minutes, reports, appointments, and contracts. 
d.  Reports of officers. 
e.  Report of Liquor Control Commissioner. 
f.  Standing Committee Reports. 
g.  New business. 
h.  Matters referred to standing committees. 
i.  Adjournment. 
At the beginning of the meeting, the President may advance any item of business because of the presence of interested members of the public, the relative importance of the item or other similar considerations provided that a majority of the Trustees present may require that the matter remain in the order stated on the agenda. A motion to maintain the regular order of business shall be non-debatable. 
(2)  Rule 2. The President shall decide all questions of order, and in all cases where these rules are not applicable, the Board shall be governed by parliamentary law as set forth in Robert's Rules of Order, as revised. 
(3)  Rule 3. Members of the public body discussing a question shall address the Chair, and no member of the public body has the floor until recognized by the Chair. 
(4)  Rule 4. At any time a person desires to address the Village Board, its Committees or Commissions, at any point during a public meeting shall comply with the following Rules of Order as they relate to Public Comment. 
a.  The Village Board, its Committees, and Commissions shall allow for an agenda item titled "Public Comment" on its meeting agendas for every public meeting. During the Public Comment portion of a meeting, any persons who wish to address the public body on any matter of public business that is not a specific agenda item, on that meeting's agenda, may request recognition prior to the meeting or during the portion of the public meeting dedicated to Public Comment. Any persons who wish to address a public body on any matter of public business that is a specific agenda item may do so during the discussion of that agenda item. 
b.  During Public Comment or during the specific agenda item being discussed, each person who wishes to address the public body shall have no more than three minutes to do so after they have been recognized by the Chair. No person shall be entitled to speak more than one time during a meeting. The Chair or a majority of the public body members present may extend the limitation of time or grant additional time to individual speakers. The Chair's denial of or limitation on any request for an extension of time may be overruled by a majority of those public body members present. The Chair may also recognize and extend the time limit to speak during a specific agenda item to any directly interested party (or agent of) of that specific agenda item. 
c.  Public Comment portion of the meeting shall last no more than 30 minutes at each meeting. The Chair or a majority of the public body members present may extend Public Comment beyond 30 minutes and may allow any such additional time to be heard during New Business. 
d.  These Rules of Order do not apply to those persons wishing to address a board or commission as part of a required public hearing. 
e.  Any failure to adhere to the provisions of this section, and any such restriction or limitation upon any speaker, shall not impair or affect any ordinance, resolution, motion, or other action of the Village Board. 
(5)  Rule 5. Matters not appearing on the regular published agenda shall not be subject to any final action by the Board. A matter of new business or old business shall not be considered to be on the agenda unless it is specifically listed under the appropriate caption. Except for matters raised by residents in accordance with Rule 4, a matter which does not involve the introduction of or a motion to adopt an ordinance or resolution shall not be voted upon or subject to any final action by the Board unless a memorandum has been submitted to the Trustees in advance of the meeting summarizing the matter and the scope of the proposed discussion. 
(6)  Rule 6. A roll call vote shall be taken upon the passage of all ordinances, and upon all propositions to create any liability against the village, or for the expenditure or appropriation of its money, and in all other cases at the request of any Trustee, which shall be entered on the journal of proceedings. 
(7)  Rule 7. All resolutions and amendments shall be reduced to writing upon request of the President or any Trustee, and shall be handed to the Clerk and read by the Clerk. 
(8)  Rule 8. Standing and special committees, to whom references are made, shall in all cases report in writing the state of facts with their opinion thereon. 
(9)  Rule 9. These rules, with the exception of Rule 5 and Rule 14, may be suspended when no objection is made or when a majority of the President and Trustees vote to suspend them. 
(10)  Rule 10. Any vote of the Board may be reconsidered at the next regular meeting on motion of any Trustee not present at the time the order was adopted or on motion of any Trustee voting in favor of the order, but no order shall be rescinded by any less than the number of votes which was required to pass the order sought to be reconsidered. 
(11)  Rule 11. Every Trustee who is present when a question is stated by the chair shall vote thereon, unless excused by the Board, or unless directly interested in the question, in which case, the Trustee shall not vote. The President may vote on all questions coming before the Board, but shall not cast a vote on a matter in which the President is directly interested in the question. "Directly interested" shall be mean a prohibited interest in contracts as provided for in the Public Officer Prohibited Activities Act, 50 ILCS 105/3 and the Illinois Municipal Code, 65 ILCS 5/3.1-55-10. 
(12)  Rule 12. 
a.  The following motions are privileged and have precedence in the order set forth in this Rule. When a question is before the Board, no motion shall be in order but the following: 
1.  To lay on the table; 
2.  The previous question; 
3.  To postpone indefinitely; 
4.  To postpone to a certain time; 
5.  To amend; and 
6.  A motion to continue the meeting as provided in Rule 17. 
b.  The following motions shall be decided without debate: 
1.  To lay on the table; 
2.  For the previous question; 
3.  To continue the debate; and 
4.  To continue the meeting. 
(13)  Rule 13. A motion to adjourn, which shall be decided without debate, is always in order except: 
a.  When the President or a Trustee is in possession of the floor for some other purpose; 
b.  When the roll of the members is called; 
c.  When the President and Trustees are voting; 
d.  When adjournment was the prior motion and the new motion to adjourn is made by the same Trustee that made such a motion or by a Trustee who voted in favor of the prior motion to adjourn; 
e.  When a motion for the previous question has passed and the previous question is still pending. 
(14)  Rule 14. No vote of the Board shall be reconsidered or rescinded at a special meeting unless at that special meeting there is present as large a number of Trustees as were present when the vote was taken. 
(15)  Rule 15. The President may designate matters on the regular published agenda which, in his opinion, are routine to be taken up for approval without discussion in a single motion following the presentation of Public Comment. If any Trustee requests that a matter not be considered in this manner, it will be taken up for discussion and action in the ordinary course of business. 
(16)  Rule 16. The President may designate the maximum amount of time which may be devoted to the debate on any matter of business appearing on the regular or supplemental published agenda. Such designation may be made at any time prior to a vote on the particular subject is taken. If discussion exceeds the allotted time, the President may continue the designated time without additional motion. A majority of Trustees present may vote, without debate, to extend allotted time. Such allotment of time shall not be a bar to the President or Trustees calling the question and ending debate. 
(17)  Rule 17. All regular meetings of the Board shall adjourn by 11:30 p.m. unless a majority of the Trustees present first agree to continue the meeting for a specific additional amount of time. A motion to continue the meeting shall be non-debatable except as to the amount of time. Any matter not disposed of prior to adjournment of a meeting that is on that meeting's agenda shall be placed on the agenda for the next regular meeting. 
Secs. 2-107-2-125. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - CORPORATE AUTHORITY; COMMITTEES 

Sec. 2-126. - Standing committees. 
    The standing committees of the Board and the Chairperson of each such committee are appointed by the President with the approval of at least three members of the Board. The committees shall consist of three members and shall be named as listed below with such duties and responsibilities as are set forth. 
(1)  Administration. This committee shall consider matters relating to personnel policy, transportation, health, and such other matters as may be designated by the President. 
(2)  Finance. This committee shall consider matters of finance, fiscal policy, appropriations, tax levies and bond issues. 
(3)  Judiciary. This committee shall review periodically this Code; study and recommend new ordinances and new procedures for ordinance enforcement not within areas assigned to another standing committee or special committee; and serve as liaison between the court system and the village. 
(4)  Land use. This committee shall consider all matters relating to appearance review, planning, zoning, building and housing, and receive reports from the various other boards and commissions concerned with these subjects. 
(5)  Municipal services. This committee shall consider all matters relating to streets and public ways; refuse disposal; water, sewers, and other utilities. 
(6)  Public safety. This committee shall consider all matters relating to the Fire and Police Departments and Fire and Police Commission. 
(Code 1993, § 2-2.5.2.1; Ord. No. 85-O-29, 7-2-1985) 
Sec. 2-127. - Special committees. 
    All special committees of the Board and their Chairpersons are appointed in the same manner as standing committees, unless otherwise ordered by the Board, as provided in section 2-126. 
(Code 1993, § 2-2.5.2.2) 
Sec. 2-128. - President ex officio member. 
    The President shall be given notice of and may attend any meeting of each standing committee, special committee, board and commission, regardless of whether the meeting is an open or closed session. The President shall be an ex officio member of all standing committees and special committees. The President shall provide notice to the Committee's Chairperson and the Village Clerk of the President's attendance at such a committee meeting so an Agenda of a Special Village Board meeting may be properly published pursuant to the Illinois Open Meetings Act. 
(Code 1993, § 2-2.5.2.3; Ord. No. 82-O-60, 11-2-1982) 
Sec. 2-129. - Committee of the whole meetings. 
    Meetings of the committee of the whole shall be called in the same manner as special meetings of the Board, and shall be conducted in the manner provided in the Board of Trustees Rules of Order. 
(Code 1993, § 2-2.5.2.4) 
Sec. 2-130. - Attendance by non-member trustees. 
    Trustees shall be given notice of and may attend any meeting of each standing committee, special committee, board and commission, regardless of whether the meeting is an open or closed session, and regardless of whether the Trustee is a member of the standing committee, special committee, board or commission. A Trustee who attends a meeting of a standing committee, special committee, board or commission of which the Trustee is not a member may observe the proceedings but may participate therein only as permitted by the Chairperson. The non-member Trustee may participate therein only as permitted by the Chairperson and upon the publication of an Agenda of a Special Village Board Meeting pursuant to the Illinois Open Meetings Act. 
(Code 1993, § 2-2.5.2.5; Ord. No. 82-O-60, 11-2-1982) 
Sec. 2-131. - Ordinance adoption and reconsideration procedure. 
    The preparation, introduction and adoption of all ordinances shall be governed by the following rules of procedure: 
(1)  Ordinances are to be prepared by the Corporation Counsel at the request of a majority of the Board, a majority of a committee of the Board, President, or Village Manager. 
(2)  The Corporation Counsel may refer the ordinance for introduction to the standing committee which has jurisdiction of the subject matter of the ordinance or the Corporation Counsel may introduce an ordinance directly to the Board. 
(3)  Each ordinance to be introduced shall be placed on the published agenda for the meeting at which the introduction is to be made. An ordinance shall not be introduced at any meeting of the Board unless: 
a.  It has appeared on the published agenda for such meeting; or 
b.  This rule shall have been waived with respect to the introduction of such ordinance at such meeting by a majority vote of the Trustees present at such meeting. 
(4)  No ordinance shall be adopted by the Board at the same meeting at which it was introduced unless: 
a.  This rule is suspended by a majority vote of the Corporate Authorities present; or 
b.  The ordinance is drawn pursuant to a resolution adopted at a previous meeting of the Board; or 
c.  The ordinance adopts a recommendation of the Zoning Board of Appeals or Plan Commission to grant a variation or special use, when such recommendation has been approved by the Board as submitted by the Zoning Board of Appeals or Plan Commission; or 
d.  The ordinance adopts a recommendation of the Final Plan of a Planned Unit Development, when the Zoning Administrator recommends approval of the Final Plan. 
(5)  Subject to subsection (4) of this section, an ordinance shall be placed on the agenda for passage at the next regular meeting following its introduction, unless the Board shall otherwise indicate. 
(6)  In the event substantial changes or amendments are made to the ordinance between readings, then an amended ordinance with the same number shall be introduced by the sponsoring committee at the second reading. This becomes the "introduction" of the amended proposed ordinance. 
(7)  If the changes or amendments are not of a substantial nature, the Board may proceed to vote on the ordinance "as amended" at the second reading. 
(8)  The President of the Board shall be the sole judge of whether the changes are substantial enough to refer the proposed ordinance back to the originating committee. 
(Code 1993, § 2-2.5.4; Ord. No. 78-O-51, 1-2-1979; Ord. No. 82-O-38, 0-7-1982; Ord. No. 2018-O-07, § 2, 2-13-2018) 
Sec. 2-132. - Review of pending matters. 
    Any matter referred to any standing or special committee of the Board shall be reported on to the Board. 
(Code 1993, § 2-2.5.5) 
Sec. 2-133. - Approval of appointments. 
(a)  In all cases where the appointment of a member of a board or commission is required to be made jointly with the Board of Trustees, the President shall present to the Board the name of the President's recommended appointee, together with relevant biographical data in support of such appointment, no later than the meeting preceding the date of the appointment. Said appointee shall appear in person before the Board prior to the date of appointment. Said appearance need not be at a regular Board meeting, but may be at any time or place selected by the Board, provided, however, that said appearance may be dispensed with upon affirmative vote of a majority of the Trustees. 
(b)  Forty-five days prior to the expiration of the term of any appointed office, the Board shall be notified of such expiration by the President, who shall receive recommendations for any such appointment by the Board, the Village Manager or other persons. 
(Code 1993, § 2-2.5.6; Ord. No. 95-O-34, 5-9-1995) 
Sec. 2-134. - Annual audit. 
    The Board, at the end of each fiscal year, shall appoint a certified public accountant to audit the village corporate books and accounts and the special assessments in the manner required by statute. Copies of said audit shall be furnished to the President, each Trustee of the village, Village Clerk, Treasurer, Corporation Counsel, and Village Manager and to such others as the Board shall direct. 
(Code 1993, § 2-2.5.7; Ord. No. 70-O-2, 2-17-1970) 
Secs. 2-135-2-153. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - VILLAGE CLERK 

Sec. 2-154. - Appointment; term. 
    There is hereby created the office of Village Clerk. The Village Manager shall serve simultaneously as the Village Clerk. The residency of the Village Clerk shall be the same as that of the Village Manager set forth in article VII of this chapter. In the event of a vacancy in the position of Village Manager, the duly appointed Assistant Village Manager shall serve simultaneously as the acting Village Clerk until such time as the position of Village Manager is filled. 
(Code 1993, § 2-3.1; Ord. No. 72-O-32, 12-5-1972; Ord. No. 2013-O-50, 10-8-2013) 
Sec. 2-155. - Office; seal. 
    The Village Clerk shall keep his office at the village hall for the transaction of village business, affix the corporate seal to all papers requiring the corporate seal and execute such orders as he may from time to time receive from the Board. 
(Code 1993, § 2-3.2.1) 
Sec. 2-156. - Records; publication. 
    The Village Clerk shall keep a record of ordinances and such other records as are required to be kept by statute or by ordinance. He shall record, before the next regular meeting after their passage, all ordinances and resolutions passed by the Board and if any ordinance requires publication, he shall cause the same to be duly published and shall note on the record of each ordinance a memorandum of the date of its passage, the date of its approval, if approved by the President, and, if published, the date of publication thereof, and shall procure and file in his office all certificates of publication of ordinances which are published in a newspaper in the village. 
(Code 1993, § 2-3.2.2) 
Sec. 2-157. - Licenses and records. 
    The Village Clerk, except where otherwise provided by ordinance, shall issue and attest under corporate seal of the village all licenses under the terms of this Code which require a bond or surety. The Village Clerk shall keep a record of such licenses and proof of the bond or surety. 
(Code 1993, § 2-3.2.3) 
Sec. 2-158. - Filing tax levy. 
    The Village Clerk shall, within the time required by statute, in each year file, or cause to be filed, with the County Clerk a certified copy of the ordinance in which the total amount of appropriations for all corporate purposes of the village, legally made, are levied and assessed. 
(Code 1993, § 2-3.2.4) 
Sec. 2-159. - Custodian of records. 
    The Village Clerk is the custodian and keeper of all the books, bonds, records, ordinances and papers of the village, except as otherwise provided by statute. 
(Code 1993, § 2-3.2.5) 
Sec. 2-160. - Attend board meetings; minutes. 
    The Village Clerk, or his duly appointed deputy, shall attend all regular and special meetings of the Board of Trustees and keep the minutes thereof and shall keep a record of these minutes. 
(Code 1993, § 2-3.2.6) 
Sec. 2-161. - Amendments to Code. 
    The Village Clerk shall keep at least two copies of this Code, current with the insertion of amended loose-leaf pages reflecting the amendments the Board may, from time to time, enact. The Clerk shall furnish such amending supplements to the President and Board of Trustees and to other purchasers of copies of the Code for such cost as the Board may determine. 
(Code 1993, § 2-3.2.7) 
Sec. 2-162. - Elections. 
    The Village Clerk shall perform such duties relating to registration of voters and other matters relating to elections as are specified in the state statutes and local ordinances. 
(Code 1993, § 2-3.2.8) 
Sec. 2-163. - Vacancy in office. 
    In the case of the death, removal from the village, resignation, incapacity or inability of the Village Clerk, the vacancy thus or otherwise created shall be filled for the remainder of the term by the President and Board of Trustees voting jointly. 
(Code 1993, § 2-3.3; Ord. No. 72-O-32, 12-5-1972) 
Sec. 2-164. - Deputy Village Clerk. 
    The Village Clerk may appoint one or more Deputy Village Clerks who shall be assigned those powers and duties of the Village Clerk. 
Secs. 2-165-2-181. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - VILLAGE MANAGER 

Sec. 2-182. - Office created; appointment; term. 
    There is hereby created the office of Village Manager, the chief administrative officer of the municipal government. The Village Manager shall be appointed by the Board of Trustees for an indefinite term as provided by statute. He shall be appointed without regard to his political beliefs. The Board of Trustees shall choose the Village Manager solely on the basis of his executive and administrative qualifications with special reference to his actual experience in or his knowledge of accepted practice in respect to the duties of his office as set forth in this Code. He shall establish residence within a 20-mile radius of the village hall within six months after the date of his appointment. 
(Code 1993, § 2-4.1; Ord. No. 2009-O-49, 7-14-2009) 
Sec. 2-183. - Office; devotion to duty. 
    The Village Manager shall maintain an office in the village hall and shall spend his full time in the performance of his duties as may be required by the Board of Trustees. 
(Code 1993, § 2-4.2) 
Sec. 2-184. - Absence. 
    In the event that the Village Manager is to be absent from the village for 30 calendar-days or less, the Assistant Village Manager shall be the acting Village Manager. If the Assistant Village Manager is absent or otherwise unable to perform the duties of Village Manager, the Village Manager shall appoint an acting Village Manager to perform the duties of the Village Manager during such absence. In the case of the disability of the Village Manager or if he is to be absent from the village for more than 30 calendar-days, the Assistant Village Manager shall be the acting Village Manager. If the Assistant Village Manager is absent or otherwise unable to perform the duties of Village Manager, the Board of Trustees shall designate a qualified administrative officer of the municipality to perform the duties of the Village Manager during such disability or absence. 
(Code 1993, § 2-4.3) 
Sec. 2-185. - Powers and duties generally. 
    Powers and duties of the Manager shall be: 
(1)  To enforce the laws and ordinances within the village. 
(2)  To appoint and remove all directors of departments and the Budget Officer. No appointment shall be made upon any basis other than that of merit and fitness. 
(3)  To exercise control of all departments and divisions thereof that may be created by the Board of Trustees, and to assign functions to each such department where specific functions have not been assigned to a department by the Board of Trustees. 
(4)  To have all the powers and exercise all the duties granted by the Illinois Municipal Code to municipal clerks and comptrollers with respect to the preparation of a report of estimated funds necessary to defray the expenses of the village for the fiscal year, for the consideration of the Board of Trustees prior to the preparation of the annual appropriation ordinance. 
(5)  Attend all meetings of the Board of Trustees with the right to take part in the discussions, but with no right to vote. 
(6)  To recommend to the Board of Trustees for adoption such measures as he may deem necessary or expedient. 
(7)  To declare village personal property that is no longer necessary and useful to the village and that has a scrap value or nominal value (less than $500.00) as surplus; and scrap, recycle, donate or dispose of any such personal property. 
(8)  To perform such other duties as may be prescribed by statute or may be required of him by ordinance or resolution of the Board of Trustees. 
(Code 1993, § 2-4.4; Ord. No. 2014-O-64, 11-11-2014; Ord. No. 2015-O-30, 7-28-2015; Ord. No. 2017-O-45, 9-26-2017) 
Sec. 2-186. - Authority over employees. 
    The Village Manager shall have the power to hire all employees, except police officers and firefighter/paramedics subject to applicable provisions of state law, at such compensation as is authorized by the Board of Trustees. All employees shall perform their duties under the direction of the Village Manager, or under the direction of the supervisor to whom such employee is assigned. Subject to the provisions of state law, the Village Manager shall have the power to discharge any employee. 
(Code 1993, § 2-4.5) 
Sec. 2-187. - Duties in connection with contracts. 
    The Village Manager shall sign on behalf of the village any contract authorized by the Board of Trustees, except where the Board or statute directs that some other officer shall do so. It shall be the duty of the Village Manager to see that all terms of any contract to which the village is a party are fully performed by all parties thereto. 
(Code 1993, § 2-4.6) 
Sec. 2-188. - Annual budget. 
    On or before the date of the first regular meeting of the Board of Trustees in October of each year, the Village Manager shall submit to the Board of Trustees a proposed budget for the ensuing fiscal year, an accompanying budget message, and a five-year capital improvements program. The Village Manager shall supervise the Budget Officer in the preparation of the budget, and the budget shall be prepared as generally set forth in section 6-23. The Village Manager shall also cause to be prepared, for consideration and enactment by the Board of Trustees in the manner required by law, a tax levy ordinance, and any related ordinances or resolutions required by law. 
(Code 1993, § 2-4.7; Ord. No. 96-O-7, 2-13-1996; Ord. No. 2014-O-64, 11-11-2014) 
Sec. 2-189. - Records. 
(a)  The Village Manager shall prepare, have custody of, and have access to all municipal records kept by the village or any village officer. Where the law makes it the duty of a specific officer to keep or maintain records, the Village Manager shall make available to such officer all necessary clerical assistance for the preparation of such records, and shall make available a place for the custody of such records. 
(b)  The Village Manager shall make available to the Village Clerk stenographic or clerical assistance necessary for the preparation of the journal of Board of Trustees proceedings and the record of ordinances and all other documents, which, by law, the Village Clerk is required to keep. The Village Manager shall make available to the Village Treasurer stenographic or clerical assistance necessary in the maintenance of bond registers and all other records or documents, which, by law, the Village Treasurer is required to keep or prepare. 
(c)  Where the law requires or provides for certification of any records or documents by any officer of the village, the Village Manager shall cause such records or documents to be prepared and presented to such officer for his signature. 
(Code 1993, § 2-4.8) 
Sec. 2-190. - Vacancy in office. 
    In case of the death, removal from the village, resignation, incapacity or inability of the incumbent of the office of Village Manager, the vacancy thus or otherwise created shall be filled by the President and Board of Trustees, voting jointly. 
(Code 1993, § 2-4.9; Ord. No. 70-O-2, 2-17-1970) 
Secs. 2-191-2-218. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - ASSISTANT VILLAGE MANAGER 

Sec. 2-219. - Office created; appointment; term. 
    There is hereby created the office of the Assistant Village Manager. The Assistant Village Manager shall be appointed by the Village Manager for an indefinite term. The Assistant Village Manager shall be appointed without regard to any political beliefs. 
Sec. 2-220. - Office; devotion to duty. 
    The Assistant Village Manager shall maintain an office in the village hall and shall spend his full time in the performance of his duties as may be required by the Village Manager and the Board of Trustee 
Sec. 2-221. - Duties and powers. 
    The Assistant Village Manager shall be the chief assistant administrative officer of the village. The Assistant Village Administrator may head one or more departments as directed by the Village Manager and shall be responsible to the Village Manager and the Board of Trustees for the proper administration of all affairs of the village assigned to be performed by the Assistant Village Manager. 
Secs. 2-222-2-250. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - CORPORATION COUNSEL 

Sec. 2-251. - Appointment; term; qualifications. 
    There is hereby created the office of Corporation Counsel. The Corporation Counsel shall be appointed by the Village Manager for an indefinite term. He and such assistant counsel as may be determined shall be duly licensed members of the Bar of the Supreme Court of Illinois and be of good standing therein and otherwise qualified by law to serve as legal officers of the village. 
(Code 1993, § 2-5.1; Ord. No. 70-O-2, 2-17-1970) 
Sec. 2-252. - Meetings. 
    The Corporation Counsel shall attend all regular and special meetings of the Board of Trustees and of other village boards, commissions and committees as may be required. 
(Code 1993, § 2-5.2.1) 
Sec. 2-253. - Legal opinions. 
    The Corporation Counsel is the legal adviser of the village, and shall render written opinions upon all legal questions affecting the village whenever requested to do so by a majority of the Board, a majority of a committee of the Board, the President, or the Village Manager. 
(Code 1993, § 2-5.2.2) 
Sec. 2-254. - Drafting ordinances; documents. 
    The Corporation Counsel shall draft or supervise the preparation of any contracts, leases or other documents or instruments to which the village is a party; and upon request by the President or the Board, shall draft ordinances or resolutions covering any subjects within the powers of the village. 
(Code 1993, § 2-5.2.3) 
Sec. 2-255. - Prosecution, defense. 
    The Corporation Counsel shall prosecute or defend any suits or actions at law or in equity to which the village may be a party or in which it is interested, or which are brought against or by any officer of the village on behalf of the village or in the capacity of that person as an officer of the village, whenever directed to do so by the President or the Board. 
(Code 1993, § 2-5.2.4) 
Sec. 2-256. - Enforcement of judgments. 
    It is the duty of the Corporation Counsel to see to the enforcement of all judgments, decrees or interlocutory orders rendered or entered in favor of the village. 
(Code 1993, § 2-5.2.5) 
Sec. 2-257. - Vacancy in office. 
    In case of the death, removal from the village, resignation, incapacity or inability of the incumbent of the office of Corporation Counsel, the vacancy thus or otherwise created shall be filled by the Village Manager. 
(Code 1993, § 2-5.3; Ord. No. 70-O-2, 2-17-1970) 
Secs. 2-258-2-277. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - VILLAGE TREASURER 

Sec. 2-278. - Office created; appointment; elimination of office of Village Collector. 
(a)  There is hereby created the office of Village Treasurer. The Finance Director, as provided in article XIII of this chapter, shall ex officio hold the office of Village Treasurer, and shall exercise and perform all duties and be subject to all the requirements and obligations pertaining to such office. 
(b)  The office of Village Collector is hereby eliminated, and the Village Treasurer shall exercise and perform all duties and be subject to all the requirements and obligations pertaining to the office of collector as may otherwise be provided by law or ordinance. 
(Code 1993, § 2-7.1; Ord. No. 2006-O-5, 1-24-2006) 
Sec. 2-279. - General. 
    The Village Treasurer shall keep a true and accurate account of all monies paid into the treasury, by whom and on what account received, and pay out all sums of money as may be ordered by the Board, but only on warrants therefor signed by the Village Manager and countersigned by the President. In all such cases the warrants must state upon what particular fund they are drawn. Any bond or interest coupon issued by the village and payable shall be considered as a warrant duly authorized for payment by the Treasurer. He shall have custody of all securities held by any fund. 
(Code 1993, § 2-7.2.1; Ord. No. 2006-O-5, 1-24-2006; Ord. No. 2013-O-2, 2-12-2013) 
Sec. 2-280. - Deposit of funds and records. 
    The Village Treasurer shall deposit funds of the village in such depositories designated by ordinance passed by the Village Board. He shall keep records showing the exact condition of all funds under his control. Such records shall show the source of all monies received and the fund into which received. All disbursements will be made from vouchers drawn by the Finance Department, showing the purpose for which the voucher is paid and the fund from which paid. 
(Code 1993, § 2-7.2.2; Ord. No. 2006-O-5, 1-24-2006) 
Sec. 2-281. - Account of special assessments. 
    The Village Treasurer shall keep an account with each special assessment under its general description and number. All monies received on any special assessment shall be held by the Treasurer as a special fund to be applied to the payment of the improvement for which the assessment was made, and that money shall be used for no other purpose than that provided in the ordinance for the improvement, or as otherwise provided by statute or ordinance. 
(Code 1993, § 2-7.2.3; Ord. No. 2006-O-5, 1-24-2006) 
Sec. 2-282. - Monthly accounts; statement to Board of Trustees. 
    The books of account provided to be kept by the Village Treasurer shall be properly balanced at least once in each month to show the true status and condition of each and every account therein shown. The Village Treasurer at the end of each and every month shall render an account to the Village Board, showing the state of the treasury at the time of the account. Such statement shall show the balance in each fund at the beginning of the month, the receipts and the disbursements for the month and the balance in each fund at the end of the month. He will prepare an annual statement of receipts and disbursements and state of the treasury, delivering same to the Village Clerk for publication as prescribed by state statute. 
(Code 1993, § 2-7.2.4; Ord. No. 2006-O-5, 1-24-2006) 
Sec. 2-283. - Books of account and papers; inspection. 
    The Village Treasurer shall keep such books of account as the Board directs. He shall keep all books, papers, vouchers, warrants, documents and all other instruments in writing, appertaining to his office, in a fireproof vault or safe, which books, papers, vouchers, warrants, documents and other instruments in writing shall at all times be open to inspection by the President, any Trustee, the Village Clerk and the Corporation Counsel. When required by the President, Village Clerk or any Trustee, he shall have the aforementioned books, papers, vouchers, warrants, documents and other instruments in writing at the village hall for such reasonable time as is necessary for the proper auditing thereof. 
(Code 1993, § 2-7.2.5; Ord. No. 2006-O-5, 1-24-2006) 
Sec. 2-284. - Duties concerning collection. 
    The Village Treasurer shall perform such functions as may by law or ordinance be performed by a municipal collector, including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Accept all income from taxes, licenses, fines and other sources and keep a record of such income and transfers, and further shall make a monthly financial statement to the Village Manager and Board of Trustees of such income and transfers. 
(2)  Execute all warrants for special assessments and other warrants which by statute or ordinance may be directed to the Village Treasurer. 
(3)  Originate all correspondence in connection with the collection of bills for services rendered by the various departments of the village, including, but not limited to, licenses and permits, and after a reasonable time, refer uncollected bills to the Law Department for such action as may be required. 
(Code 1993, § 2-7.2.6; Ord. No. 2006-O-5, 1-24-2006) 
Sec. 2-285. - Signatures on warrants. 
    All warrants drawn upon the village treasury shall be signed by the Village Manager and countersigned by the President, state the particular fund or appropriation to which the same is chargeable and the person to whom payable; however, no more than two of three such signatures shall be facsimile signatures. No money shall be otherwise paid than upon warrants so drawn, except that, after a warrant is drawn for the semi-monthly payroll, such warrant may be deposited in a payroll account and checks may be drawn against the payroll account for the salary due each employee and officer and may be signed by either the President, Village Treasurer or Village Manager, only one signature being required. In the absence of the Village Manager, the Village Manager may appoint an Acting Village Manager, who shall have authority during the period of absence of the Village Manager to sign warrants in the manner provided in this section. 
(Code 1993, § 2-7.2.7; Ord. No. 2005-O-45, 4-26-2005; Ord. No. 2006-O-5, 1-24-2006; Ord. No. 2008-O-95, 12-9-2008) 
Sec. 2-286. - Vacancy in office. 
    In case of the death, removal from the village, resignation, incapacity or inability of the incumbent of the office of Village Treasurer, the vacancy thus or otherwise created shall be filled by the President and Board of Trustees, voting jointly. 
(Code 1993, § 2-7.2.8) 
Secs. 2-287-2-305. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - DIRECTOR OF ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICES 

Sec. 2-306. - Office created; appointment. 
    There is hereby created the office of Director of Administrative Services. The Director of Administrative Services shall be appointed by the Village Manager for an indefinite term. 
(Code 1993, § 2-8.1; Ord. No. 70-O-2, 2-17-1970; Ord. No. 2002-O-24, 8-27-2002; Ord. No. 2015-O-30, 7-28-2015) 
Sec. 2-307. - Duties. 
    The Director of Administrative Services shall supervise and direct the Department of Administrative Services. The Director of Administrative Services shall perform such functions as may be directed by the Village Manager, including, but not limited to, the direction and supervision of the village information management, data processing, and telecommunications systems. 
(Code 1993, § 2-8.2; Ord. No. 2002-O-24, 8-27-2002; Ord. No. 2015-O-30, 7-28-2015) 
Sec. 2-308. - Vacancy in office. 
    In the case of the death, resignation, incapacity or inability of the incumbent of the office of Director of Administrative Services, the vacancy thus or otherwise created shall be filled by the Village Manager. 
(Code 1993, § 2-8.3; Ord. No. 2002-O-24, 8-27-2002; Ord. No. 2015-O-30, 7-28-2015) 
Secs. 2-309-2-334. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - DIRECTOR OF ENGINEERING AND PUBLIC WORKS 

Sec. 2-335. - Office created; appointment. 
    There is hereby created the office of Director of Engineering and Public Works. The Director of Engineering and Public Works shall be appointed by the Village Manager for an indefinite term. No person shall be appointed to the office of Director of Engineering and Public Works unless such person is licensed under the Illinois Professional Engineering and Public Works Practice Act. 
(Code 1993, § 2-9.1.1; Ord. No. 2015-O-30, 7-28-2015) 
Sec. 2-336. - Duties. 
    The Director of Engineering and Public Works shall: 
(1)  Have charge of the streets, which shall include: 
a.  Maintenance of all public streets, alleys and sidewalks in the village; 
b.  Maintenance of parkway trees and shrubbery in the village; 
c.  Maintenance of all motor vehicle equipment owned by the village other than Fire Department vehicles; 
d.  Collection and disposal of refuse, recycling materials, and yard waste by the village; 
e.  Be responsible for the design and supervision of all public improvements and facilities in the village, and shall perform such duties as are prescribed for municipal engineers by statute or ordinance, including the duties of the Traffic Engineer. 
(2)  Have charge of facilities, which shall include: 
a.  Supervision and maintenance of the water distribution system for efficient operation; 
b.  Supervision and maintenance of the sanitary and storm sewer systems of the village; 
c.  Supervision and maintenance of the lighting of the public streets and alleys; 
d.  Supervision of the custodial care of all public buildings and all the property of the village that is not assigned by the Code to the care of any other office or employee. 
(Code 1993, § 2-9.1.2; Ord. No. 98-O-38, 5-26-1998; Ord. No. 2015-O-30, 7-28-2015) 
Sec. 2-337. - Vacancy in office. 
    In the case of the death, removal from the village, resignation, incapacity or inability of the Director of Engineering and Public Works, the vacancy thus or otherwise created shall be filled by the Village Manager. 
(Code 1993, § 2-9.1.3; Ord. No. 93-O-5, 2-23-1993; Ord. No. 2015-O-30, 7-28-2015) 
Secs. 2-338-2-362. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIII. - DIRECTOR OF WATER MANAGEMENT 

Sec. 2-363. - Office created; appointment. 
    There is hereby created the office of Director of Water Management. The Director of Water Management shall be appointed by the Village Manager for an indefinite term. No person shall be appointed to the office of Director of Water Management unless such person possesses such qualifications necessary for the operation of a municipal water treatment and pumping facility, as determined by the Village Manager. 
(Code 1993, § 2-9.2.1; Ord. No. 2015-O-30, 7-28-2015) 
Sec. 2-364. - Duties. 
    The Director of Water Management shall have charge of the water plant and stormwater facilities, which shall include the supervision of the operation and maintenance of the water pumping and treatment plant, including the treatment of water to meet municipal, state and federal standards of purification, and shall be responsible for the efficient administration of the water production plant, the storm sewer pumping station and the West Park Sanitary Sewer Tank. 
(Code 1993, § 2-9.2.2; Ord. No. 98-O-38, 5-26-1998; Ord. No. 2015-O-30, 7-28-2015) 
Sec. 2-365. - Vacancy in office. 
    In case of the death, removal from the village, resignation, incapacity or inability of the Director of Water Management, the vacancy thus or otherwise created shall be filled by the Village Manager. 
(Code 1993, § 2-9.2.3; Ord. No. 2015-O-30, 7-28-2015) 
Secs. 2-366-2-388. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIV. - DIRECTOR OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT 

Sec. 2-389. - Office created; appointment. 
    There is hereby created the office of Director of Community Development. The Director of Community Development shall be appointed by the Village Manager for an indefinite term. 
(Code 1993, § 2-10.1) 
Sec. 2-390. - Duties. 
    The Director of Community Development shall: 
(1)  Perform such duties as are prescribed by the building code; zoning ordinance; ordinances relating to planning and housing, electrical and plumbing codes, and signs and subdivisions; and any other ordinances of the village. 
(2)  Conduct research and make recommendations in connection with community development. 
(3)  Be responsible for liaison with various community agencies. 
(4)  Make studies and recommendations in connection with zoning and such other work as may be assigned by the Board of Trustees to the Plan Commission, Zoning Board of Appeals, and such other committees as may be established. 
(5)  Be the Secretary of the Plan Commission and have custody of all records of the Plan Commission. 
(6)  Be the Secretary of the Zoning Board of Appeals and have custody of all records of the Zoning Board of Appeals. 
(7)  Be the Secretary of the Appearance Review Commission and have custody of all records of the Appearance Review Commission. 
(8)  Be the Secretary of the Housing Commission and have custody of all records of the Housing Commission. 
(9)  Be the Secretary of the Historic Preservation Commission and have custody of all records of the Historic Preservation Commission. 
(10)  Be the Zoning Administrator of the Village and have such powers and duties as provided for in Appendix A to this Code. 
(Code 1993, § 2-10.2) 
Sec. 2-391. - Vacancy in office. 
    In the case of the death, removal from the village, resignation, incapacity or inability of the Director of Community Development, the vacancy thus or otherwise created shall be filled by the Village Manager. 
(Code 1993, § 2-10.3; Ord. No. 72-O-2, 1-18-1972) 
Secs. 2-392-2-410. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XV. - DIRECTOR OF FINANCE 

Sec. 2-411. - Office created; appointment. 
    There is hereby created the office of Director of Finance. The Director of Finance shall be appointed by the Village Manager for an indefinite term. 
(Code 1993, § 2-11.1; Ord. No. 2006-O-5, 1-24-2006) 
Sec. 2-412. - Duties. 
    The Director of Finance shall perform such functions as may be directed by the Village Manager. These duties shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Function as the ex officio Village Treasurer. 
(2)  Shall perform such functions as may by law or ordinance be performed by a municipal collector. 
(3)  Have charge over and administer the Finance Department. 
(4)  Supervise the preparation of all necessary financial statistics pertaining to the village. 
(5)  Assist the Village Manager and the Board of Trustees in the preparation of the annual appropriation ordinance. 
(6)  Be the authorized agent of the village with respect to the Illinois Municipal Retirement Fund. 
(7)  Issue all vehicle licenses, animal licenses, business licenses and permits except those which require a surety or bond to be posted with the Village Clerk. 
(8)  Accept all income from taxes, licenses, fines and other sources and maintain a record of such income and transfers. 
(9)  Execute all warrants for special assessments and other warrants which by ordinance may be directed to him. 
(10)  Coordinate the payment of bills for services rendered by the various departments of the village; and after a reasonable time refer uncollected bills to the Law Department for such action as may be required. 
(Code 1993, § 2-11.2; Ord. No. 2006-O-5, 1-24-2006) 
Sec. 2-413. - Vacancy in office. 
    In case of the death, removal from the village, resignation, incapacity or inability of the Director of Finance, the vacancy thus or otherwise created shall be filled by the Village Manager. 
(Code 1993, § 2-11.3; Ord. No. 2006-O-5, 1-24-2006) 
Secs. 2-414-2-439. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XVI. - FIRE CHIEF 

Sec. 2-440. - Office created; appointment. 
    There is hereby created the office of Fire Chief. The Fire Chief shall be appointed by the Village Manager for an indefinite period. The Fire Chief need not be appointed from the members of the Fire Department, and if appointed from among the members of the Fire Department, the appointment need not be from the rank next below the Fire Chief, but may be from among the members of the Fire Department regardless of rank. 
(Code 1993, § 2-12.1; Ord. No. 70-O-2, 2-17-1970) 
Sec. 2-441. - Duties. 
    The Fire Chief shall be the chief executive officer of the Fire Department and shall have the authority and responsibility for the management, fiscal management, direction, and control of the operations and administration of the Fire Department and such other authority as provided by the ordinances of the village and the laws of the State. 
(Code 1993, § 2-12.2; Ord. No. 86-O-51, 9-16-1986) 
Sec. 2-442. - Vacancy in office. 
    In case of the death, removal from the village, resignation, incapacity or inability of the Fire Chief, the vacancy thus or otherwise created shall be filled by the Village Manager. If there is a vacancy in the office of Fire Chief, the Village Manager may designate a member of the Fire Department as Acting Fire Chief until a Fire Chief is appointed. The Fire Chief may be discharged at any time by the Village Manager. 
(Code 1993, § 2-12.3; Ord. No. 70-O-2, 2-17-1970) 
Secs. 2-443-2-467. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XVII. - POLICE CHIEF 

Sec. 2-468. - Office created; appointment. 
    There is hereby created the office of Chief of Police. The Chief of Police shall be appointed by the Village Manager for an indefinite period. The Chief of Police need not be appointed from the members of the Police Department and if appointed from among the members of the Police Department, the appointment need not be from the rank next below the Chief of Police, but may be appointed from among the members of the Police Department regardless of rank. 
(Code 1993, § 2-13.1; Ord. No. 70-O-2, 2-17-1970) 
Sec. 2-469. - Duties. 
    The Chief of Police shall be the chief executive officer of the Police Department and shall have the authority and responsibility for the management, fiscal management, direction, and control of the operations and administration of the Police Department and such other authority as provided by the ordinances of the village and the laws of the State. 
(Code 1993, § 2-13.2; Ord. No. 86-O-52, 9-22-1986) 
Sec. 2-470. - Vacancy in office. 
    In case of the death, removal from the village, resignation, incapacity or inability of the Chief of Police, the vacancy thus or otherwise created shall be filled by the Village Manager. If there is a vacancy in the office of the Police Chief, the Village Manager may designate a member of the Police Department as Acting Police Chief until a Police Chief is appointed. The Police Chief may be discharged at any time by the Village Manager. 
(Code 1993, § 2-13.3; Ord. No. 70-O-2, 2-17-1970) 
Secs. 2-471-2-493. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XVIII. - DEPARTMENTS; LAW DEPARTMENT 

Sec. 2-494. - Creation; composition. 
    There is hereby created a Law Department which shall consist of a Corporation Counsel and such assistants or other employees as the President and Board of Trustees may, from time to time, determine. 
(Code 1993, § 2-15.1.1) 
Sec. 2-495. - Functions. 
    The functions of the Law Department shall include the preparation of legal opinions, ordinances, contracts and other documents to which the village is a party; the prosecution or defense of any action at law or in equity to which the village may be a party; and enforcement of judgments, decrees and other orders of court. 
(Code 1993, § 2-15.1.2) 
Sec. 2-496. - Special counsel. 
    The Board may appoint counsel to assist the Corporation Counsel on special matters. Such special counsel shall receive such compensation as is directed by the Board. 
(Code 1993, § 2-15.1.3) 
Secs. 2-497-2-515. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIX. - DEPARTMENTS; POLICE DEPARTMENT 

Sec. 2-516. - Creation; composition. 
    There is hereby created a Police Department which shall consist of the following personnel: 
(1)  Exempt ranks. Exempt ranks shall be composed of the following: 
a.  The Police Chief; and 
b.  Such number of Deputy Chiefs of Police and Commanders who shall be provided for by the Village President and Board of Trustees in the annual appropriation ordinance. 
(2)  Nonexempt ranks. Nonexempt ranks shall be composed of such number of sergeants and police officers as shall be determined by the President and Board of Trustees by resolution from time to time. 
(3)  The position of lieutenant in the Police Department is eliminated effective at such time as the incumbents, as of June 22, 1993, no longer hold said position. 
(Code 1993, § 2-15.2.1; Ord. No. 93-O-38, 6-22-1993; Ord. No. 2010-O-89, 12-14-2010) 
Sec. 2-517. - Appointment of members. 
(a)  Appointment of nonexempt rank members. All members of the Police Department provided for in section 2-499 and defined as being of nonexempt rank as defined in section 2-499(2) are officers of the village and shall be appointed by the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners of the village. 
(b)  Appointment of exempt rank members. Exempt ranks shall be appointed as follows: 
(1)  The Police Chief shall be appointed by and shall serve in such rank at the sole discretion of the Village Manager. 
(2)  Deputy Chiefs of Police and Commanders shall be appointed by the Police Chief with the prior advice and consent of the Village Manager. 
(Code 1993, § 2-15.2.2; Ord. No. 93-O-38, 6-22-1993) 
Sec. 2-518. - Oath. 
    Before entering upon the duties of office, every member of the Police Department provided for in section 2-499 shall take the following oath of office: 
"I, __________________, do solemnly swear (affirm) that I will faithfully discharge the duties of a Wilmette Police Officer to the best of my ability, and I do hereby dedicate myself to protecting the rights, lives and property of the persons whom I serve. I pledge to be completely honest in word and deed; to provide equal protection under the law to all persons; to be fair and impartial in my treatment of all persons; to adhere to the Law Enforcement Code of Ethics; and to direct my daily efforts toward achieving the mission, values, goals and objectives of the department. I will at all times support the Constitutions and laws of the United States of America and of the State of Illinois, and the Ordinances of the Village of Wilmette." 
(Code 1993, § 2-15.2.3; Ord. No. 98-O-102, 12-8-1998) 
Sec. 2-519. - Term of office of members; probationary period. 
(a)  All appointments of newly hired police officers, as well as police officers re-hired after loss of seniority, shall be for a probationary period of 18 months of work as a police officer. Said probationary period may be extended, in the sole discretion of the Chief of Police, for an additional six months if the Chief of Police shall determine that such additional time is needed to evaluate said police officer. If, at the expiration of said probationary period or extension thereof, the police officer, in the opinion of the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners, proves to be fit for the position, said police officer shall be permanently certified to said position by that Board. If, in the judgment of the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners, the police officer shall prove unsatisfactory at the expiration of said probationary period or extension thereof, said police officer shall be dropped from the service and his name removed from the payroll. 
(b)  All promotions and appointments to the rank of sergeant shall be for a probationary period of 12 months, provided that the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners may extend said probationary period in the event that extended injury, illness, leaves of absence or other unforeseen or unusual circumstance prevents the police officer so promoted from working full and active duty throughout the probationary period. If, at the expiration of that time, the applicant, in the opinion of the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners, proves to be fit for the position, said police officer shall be permanently certified to the position by that Board. If in the judgment of the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners said police officer shall prove unsatisfactory in the higher rank, said police officer shall revert to the lower rank. 
(Code 1993, § 2-15.2.4; Ord. No. 86-O-33, 7-15-1986; Ord. No. 99-O-6, 2-9-1999; Ord. No. 2001-O-6, 2-27-2001) 
Sec. 2-520. - Removal of members. 
(a)  Nonexempt ranks. 
(1)  All members of the Police Department provided for in section 2-499 and defined as being of nonexempt rank as provided in section 2-499(2), excluding members of the Police Department who are bargaining unit members covered by an applicable collective bargaining agreement with the village, shall be subject to suspension without pay or discharged from the service for any of the causes enumerated and in the manner provided in any ordinance of the village, provision of this Code, rules and regulations of the Police Department, or rules and regulations of the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners of the village providing, in whole or in part, for the operation of the Police Department, or providing, in whole or in part, a course of conduct and the duties of members of the Police Department, or pertaining in any manner to the Police Department. Such nonexempt rank members of the Police Department may be suspended without pay or discharged from the service only by the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners of the village, according to the provisions of state statute, the rules of the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners and the rules and regulations of the department, or may be suspended by the Police Chief in the circumstances and manner permitted under state law. 
(2)  All members of the Police Department provided for in section 2-499 and defined as being of nonexempt rank as provided in section 2-499(2), who are also bargaining unit members covered by an applicable collective bargaining agreement with the village, shall be subject to suspension without pay or discharged from the service for cause and as otherwise provided for in the applicable collective bargaining agreement. For such employees, the contractual grievance and arbitration procedure, as provided for in the collective bargaining agreement, shall be the sole recourse for appealing disciplinary action involving discharge or time off with loss of pay, and shall be in lieu of both the provisions of the Illinois Municipal Code governing discipline and discharge (ILCS ch. 65, act 5, § 10-2.1-17) and disciplinary proceedings before the village Board of Fire and Police Commissioners. An arbitrator's award made pursuant to said contractual grievance and arbitration procedure shall be final and binding, as provided in said collective bargaining agreement, and any request for judicial review shall be exclusively under and in accordance with the Uniform Arbitration Act (ILCS ch. 710, act 5, § 1 et seq.) and section 8 of the Illinois Public Labor Relations Act (ILCS ch. 5, act 315, § 8). 
(b)  Exempt ranks. 
(1)  Chief of Police. The Village Manager may discharge the Chief of Police from that rank at any time and in the Village Manager's sole discretion. 
(2)  Other exempt ranks. All other officers of exempt rank may be discharged from said rank by the Chief of Police, with the prior advice and consent of the Village Manager, for failure to, in the judgment of the Chief of Police, satisfactorily perform the duties of the exempt rank office, or for any of the reasons for which a nonexempt rank officer would be subject to suspension or removal from office set forth in subsection (a) of this section. 
(3)  Effect of discharge of exempt rank personnel. In the event that a person of exempt rank is discharged from that rank, the officer shall revert to the officer's permanent rank, if any, in the Police Department as established under the Fire and Police Commission Act, held prior to promotion to exempt rank. Discharge of any officer from exempt rank shall not preclude further proceedings being brought before the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners in conformance with subsection (a) of this section, even though such proceedings may arise from the same event or transaction which caused the officer's discharge from exempt rank. 
(Code 1993, § 2-15.2.5; Ord. No. 93-O-38, 6-22-1993; Ord. No. 2001-O-40, 6-12-2001) 
Sec. 2-521. - Duties. 
    All members of the Police Department shall perform such duties as are now or hereafter may be required of them by the provisions of this Code, other ordinances of the village, or any rules and regulations of the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners now or hereafter in force, pertaining in any manner to the Police Department. 
(Code 1993, § 2-15.2.6) 
Secs. 2-522-2-550. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XX. - DEPARTMENTS; FIRE DEPARTMENT 

Sec. 2-551. - Creation; composition. 
    There is hereby created a Fire Department which shall consist of the following personnel: 
(1)  Exempt ranks. Exempt ranks shall be composed of the following: 
a.  The Fire Chief; and 
b.  Such number of Deputy Fire Chiefs and Battalion Chiefs as shall be determined by the Village President and Board of Trustees in the annual appropriation ordinance. 
(2)  Nonexempt ranks. Nonexempt ranks shall be composed of such number of lieutenants and firefighter/paramedics as shall be determined by the President and Board of Trustees by resolution from time to time. 
(3)  The position of Captain in the Fire Department is eliminated effective at such time as the incumbents, as of June 22, 1993, no longer hold the position. 
(Code 1993, § 2-15.3.1; Ord. No. 93-O-37, 6-22-1993; Ord. No. 2010-O-89, 12-14-2010) 
Sec. 2-552. - Appointment of members. 
(a)  Appointment of nonexempt rank members. All members of the Fire Department provided for in this section, and defined as being of nonexempt rank as defined in subsection (b) of this section are officers of the village and shall be appointed by the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners of the village. 
(b)  Appointment of exempt rank members. Exempt ranks shall be appointed as follows: 
(1)  The Fire Chief shall be appointed by and shall serve in such rank at the sole discretion of the Village Manager. 
(2)  Deputy Fire Chiefs and Battalion Chiefs shall be appointed by the Fire Chief subject to the prior advice and consent of the Village Manager. 
(Code 1993, § 2-15.3.2; Ord. No. 93-O-37, 6-22-1993) 
Sec. 2-553. - Election of Foreign Fire Insurance Fund Officers. 
(a)  The Foreign Fire Insurance Fund created by the village pursuant to division 4 of article X of chapter 6, shall be administered by a Foreign Fire Insurance Board in the manner provided in section 11-10-2 of the Illinois Municipal Code (ILCS ch. 65, act 5, § 11-10-2), now or hereafter amended. 
(b)  The active-duty members of the Fire Department shall elect six active-duty members of the Fire Department to serve as the Foreign Fire Insurance Board each April when elections to the Firefighters' Pension Fund are held, in accordance with by-laws which may be adopted by the members of the Fire Department. The Fire Chief shall be appointed as the seventh trustee. The seven members shall choose among themselves a chairperson, vice chairperson, and secretary-treasurer, and shall administer the Foreign Fire Insurance Fund in accordance said by-laws adopted by members of the Fire Department. 
(Code 1993, § 2-15.3.3; Ord. No. 91-O-12, 3-5-1991; Ord. No. 2006-O-29, 4-11-2006; Ord. No. 2010-O-12, 2-9-2010) 
Sec. 2-554. - Term of office of members; probationary period. 
(a)  All appointments of Firefighters shall be for a probationary period of 24 months, during which time the appointee shall obtain licensing from the Illinois Department of Public Health as an Emergency Medical Technician - Paramedic, provided that the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners may extend said probationary period when the required schooling to obtain the Emergency Medical Technician - Paramedic licensing is not offered during the 24 month probationary period. If, at the expiration of that time, the applicant, in the opinion of the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners, proves to be fit for the position, he shall be permanently appointed to the position by that board. If, in the judgment of the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners, he shall prove unsatisfactory at the end of the probation, he shall be dropped from the service and his name removed from the payroll. 
(b)  Applicants for examination must be citizens of the United States. 
(c)  All promotions and appointments to the rank of lieutenant shall be for a probationary period of 12 months, provided that the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners may extend such probationary period in the event that extended injury, illness, leaves of absence or other unforeseen or unusual circumstances prevents the employee promoted from working full and active duty throughout the probationary period. If, at the expiration of that time, the applicant, in the opinion of the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners, proves to be fit for the position, the officer shall be permanently certified to the position by that Board. If in the judgment of the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners the officer shall prove unsatisfactory in the higher rank, the officer shall revert to the lower rank. 
(Code 1993, § 2-15.3.4; Ord. No. 88-O-50, 12-6-1988; Ord. No. 94-O-36, 6-15-1994; Ord. No. 95-O-112, 1-9-1996; Ord. No. 99-O-6, 2-9-1999) 
Sec. 2-555. - Removal of members. 
(a)  Nonexempt ranks. All members of the Fire Department provided for in section 2-533 and defined as being of nonexempt rank as defined in section 2-533(b) shall be subject to suspension without pay or discharged from the service for any of the causes enumerated and in the manner provided in any ordinance of the village, provision of this Code, or rules and regulations of the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners of the village providing, in whole or in part, for the operation of the Fire Department of the village, or providing, in whole or in part, a course of conduct and the duties of members of the Fire Department or pertaining in any manner to the Fire Department. Nonexempt rank members of the Fire Department may be suspended without pay or discharged from the service only by the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners of the village, according to the provisions of state statute, the rules of the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners and the department, or may be suspended by the Fire Chief in the circumstances and manner permitted under state law. 
(b)  Exempt ranks. 
(1)  Fire Chief. The Village Manager may discharge the Fire Chief from that rank at any time and in the Village Manager's sole discretion. 
(2)  Other exempt ranks. All other officers of exempt rank may be discharged from said rank by the Fire Chief, with the prior advice and consent of the Village Manager, for failure to, in the judgment of the Fire Chief, satisfactorily perform the duties of the exempt rank office, or for any of the reasons for which a nonexempt rank officer would be subject to suspension or removal from office set forth in subsection (a) of this section. 
(3)  Effect of discharge of exempt rank personnel. In the event that a person of exempt rank is discharged from that rank, said officer shall revert to the officer's permanent rank, if any, in the Fire Department as established under the Fire and Police Commission Act, held prior to promotion to exempt rank. Discharge of any officer from exempt rank shall not preclude further proceedings being brought before the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners in conformance with subsection (a) of this section, even though such proceedings may arise from the same event or transaction which caused the officer's discharge from exempt rank. 
(Code 1993, § 2-15.3.5; Ord. No. 93-O-37, 6-22-1993) 
Sec. 2-556. - Duties. 
    All members of the Fire Department shall perform such duties as are now or hereafter may be required of them by the provisions of this Code or other ordinances of the village or any rules and regulations of the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners, now or hereafter in force, pertaining in any manner to the Fire Department. 
(Code 1993, § 2-15.3.6) 
Sec. 2-557. - Police powers of members. 
    All members of the Fire Department have the power and authority to arrest any person for any interference with the Fire Department in the performance of its duties, or for the violation of any provision of this Code or law in connection with a fire. 
(Code 1993, § 2-15.3.7) 
Secs. 2-558-2-577. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XXI. - DEPARTMENTS; FINANCE DEPARTMENT 

Sec. 2-578. - Creation; composition. 
    There is hereby created a Department of Finance which shall consist of the Director of Finance and such other employees as may be determined. 
(Code 1993, § 2-15.4.1; Ord. No. 2006-O-5, 1-24-2006) 
Sec. 2-579. - Functions. 
    The functions of the Finance Department shall be: 
(1)  The custody and maintenance of the financial and accounting records of the village. 
(2)  The custody, preparation and maintenance of all necessary financial statistics pertaining to the village. 
(3)  The preparation of the necessary reports and studies as may be required for the operation of the village and in the preparation of the annual appropriation ordinance. 
(4)  Assisting the Finance Director in performing the duties and functions of that office, and of the office of Village Treasurer. 
(Code 1993, § 2-15.4.2; Ord. No. 2006-O-5, 1-24-2006) 
Secs. 2-580-2-606. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XXII. - DEPARTMENTS; DEPARTMENT Of ENGINEERING AND PUBLIC WORKS 

Sec. 2-607. - Creation; composition. 
    There is hereby created a Department of Engineering and Public Works which shall consist of the Director of Engineering and Public Works and such other employees as may be determined. 
(Code 1993, § 2-15.5.1; Ord. No. 2015-O-30, 7-28-2015) 
Sec. 2-608. - Functions. 
    The functions of the Department of Engineering and Public Works shall include but not be limited to: 
(1)  Maintenance of all public streets, alleys and sidewalks in the village; 
(2)  Maintenance of parkway trees and shrubbery in the village; 
(3)  Maintenance of all motor vehicle equipment owned by the village other than the Fire Department vehicles; 
(4)  Collection and disposal of refuse, recycling materials, and yard waste by the village; 
(5)  Maintenance of the water distribution system of the village; 
(6)  Maintenance of the sanitary and storm sewer systems of the village; 
(7)  Maintenance of the lighting of the public streets and alleys. 
(Code 1993, § 2-15.5.2; Ord. No. 98-O-38, 5-26-1998; Ord. No. 2015-O-30, 7-28-2015) 
Secs. 2-609-2-634. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XXIII. - DEPARTMENTS; COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT 

Sec. 2-635. - Creation; composition. 
    There is hereby created a Department of Community Development which shall consist of the Community Development Director and such other employees as may be determined. 
(Code 1993, § 2-15.6.1) 
Sec. 2-636. - Functions. 
    The functions of the Department of Community Development shall include: 
(1)  Preparation of studies and recommendations in connection with zoning, planning, appearance review and community development; 
(2)  Review of all applications for rezoning, zoning variations, special use permits, and proposed subdivision submitted to the village; 
(3)  Completion of work necessary for the village's part in the implementation of the Comprehensive Plan; 
(4)  Inspection and approval of all construction in the village; 
(5)  Enforcement of all applicable building, electrical, plumbing and fire prevention codes and the zoning and sign ordinances; 
(6)  Inspection for and enforcement of the housing code; 
(7)  Enforcement of any other code requirements concerning building and housing, including the moving of buildings; 
(8)  The inspection and approval of all food dispensing establishments in the village; and 
(9)  The enforcement of the applicable state and local rules and regulations relating to health and sanitation, for all matters not directly addressed by the state or county. 
(Code 1993, § 2-15.6.2) 
Secs. 2-637-2-660. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XXIV. - DEPARTMENTS; DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICES 

Sec. 2-661. - Creation; composition. 
    There is hereby created a Department of Administrative Services which shall consist of a Director of Administrative Services and such other employees as may be determined by the Board of Trustees. 
(Code 1993, § 2-15.7.1; Ord. No. 2002-O-24, 8-27-2002; Ord. No. 2015-O-30, 7-28-2015) 
Sec. 2-662. - Functions. 
    The functions of the Department of Administrative Services shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  The maintenance, direction and supervision of the village's information management, data processing, and telecommunications systems. 
(2)  Such further or different duties as may be directed by the Village Manager. 
(Code 1993, § 2-15.7.2; Ord. No. 2002-O-24, 8-27-2002; Ord. No. 2015-O-30, 7-28-2015) 
Secs. 2-663-2-682. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XXV. - DEPARTMENTS; RESERVED 

Secs. 2-683-2-719. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XXVI. - DEPARTMENTS; DEPARTMENT OF WATER MANAGEMENT 

Sec. 2-720. - Creation; composition. 
    There is hereby created a Department of Water Management which shall consist of a Director of Water Management and such other employees as may be determined by the Board of Trustees. 
(Code 1993, § 2-15.9.1; Ord. No. 2015-O-30, 7-28-2015) 
Sec. 2-721. - Functions. 
    The functions of the Department of Water Management shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  The operation and maintenance of the water pumping and treatment plant, including the treatment of water to meet municipal, state and federal standards of purification; 
(2)  The maintenance and operation of the stormwater pumping station, West Park Sanitary Sewer Tank and all other stormwater facilities. 
(Code 1993, § 2-15.9.2; Ord. No. 2015-O-30, 7-28-2015) 
Secs. 2-722-2-740. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XXVII. - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS 

Sec. 2-741. - Generally applicable provisions. 
    The following rules, regulations, and procedures shall be applicable to all of the village's boards, committees, and commissions created pursuant to this Code except the Village Board of Trustees and the Village Board's Standing Committees (collectively referred to in this section, as a "Board" "Commission" or "Commissions"), unless expressly and specifically provided otherwise in the specific regulations of this Code governing each individual Commission or as otherwise regulated by state statute: 
(1)  Appointment of members. 
a.  The Village President shall appoint, jointly with the Board of Trustees, all members of all Boards and Commissions. 
b.  The appointment process shall be as provided for in section 2-133. 
c.  The term of a member of a Commission shall not terminate or expire until that member's successor has been duly appointed, confirmed, and qualified. 
d.  All voting members of all Commissions shall, at the time of appointment and throughout the members' term of service, be a resident of the Village, unless expressly stated otherwise in the Code. The provisions of this section shall not apply to ex-officio members appointed to Commissions pursuant to this Code. 
(2)  Compensation. All members of all Boards and Commissions shall serve without compensation. 
(3)  Removal of member. Except as provided for in state statute or otherwise expressly stated in this Code, the Village President shall have the power to remove any member of a Commission with or without cause. The removal shall be effective upon delivery of written notice from the Village President to the member. If the member of a Commission is removed by the Village President without cause, that member may petition the Village Board within five (5) days of the removal notice being provided by the Village President to the member, by sending a signed and notarized statement to the Village Clerk requesting the Village Board to disapprove of the removal. The member may be heard at the next available Village Board meeting. A two-thirds vote of the Village Board is required to disapprove of the removal and reinstate the member. If the member is reinstated, the Village President may not remove the member for the same or similar reason arising out of the same set of facts used for the original removal. 
(4)  Meetings. 
a.  All meetings of all Commissions shall be held in compliance with the Illinois Open Meetings Act. 
b.  Except as modified by any bylaws or other rules approved by the Commission, Robert's Rules of Order, Revised, shall govern the proceedings of all the meetings of each Commission. 
c.  Each Commission shall, prior to December 1 of each year, submit to the Village Manager for publication, a written schedule of the date, time, and location of its regular meetings for the following calendar year. If no schedule is submitted, the Commission shall meet a necessity requires and convenience allows. 
d.  Each Commission shall have on its meeting agenda an item for Public Comment. Public Comment shall comply with the Rules of Order of the Village Board. 
(5)  Mandatory Training Session. Each voting member of each Commission must, prior to attending a meeting of the Commission, receive the appropriate Open Meetings Act training as provided by the Illinois Attorney General and as required by the Illinois Open Meetings Act. 
Secs. 2-742-2-765. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XXVIII. - PLAN COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-766. - Membership, appointment, tenure and compensation. 
(a)  The Plan Commission shall consist of seven members, and as ex officio member, the Director of Community Development. All such members shall be appointed by the President of the village by and with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees. To be qualified for appointment, an appointee shall be a resident of and an elector in the village. 
(b)  All members shall be appointed for a term of four years. All subsequent appointments shall be for a term of four years. No member shall serve for more than two consecutive terms. 
(c)  The appointment of a member to fill a vacancy shall be made for the remainder of the unexpired term. 
(d)  When a member of the Plan Commission has been unable or has failed to attend four consecutive meetings of the commission for health, business or other reasons, such absence shall be construed as resignation from the commission and the member shall be so notified in writing. A vacancy thus created shall be filled as any other vacancy. 
(Code 1993, § 2-16.1.1; Ord. No. 72-O-39, 1-18-1972; Ord. No. 74-O-36, 9-10-1974) 
Sec. 2-767. - Organization, by-laws, and procedures. 
(a)  The Chair of the Plan Commission shall be designated by the President of the Board of Trustees, and the Director of Community Development of the village shall act as Secretary of the Plan Commission and shall have custody of all records of the Plan Commission. 
(b)  From time to time the Plan Commission shall elect such other officers as it deems necessary and adopt or amend the by-laws governing its procedure as it deems proper and necessary. Adoption and amendment of by-laws shall be by majority votes, provided ten days prior written notice of proposed changes shall be given to all members. 
(c)  The Plan Commission shall be scheduled to meet on the first Tuesday of every month. 
(Code 1993, § 2-16.1.2; Ord. No. 72-O-39, 1-18-1972) 
Sec. 2-768. - Powers and duties. 
(a)  The Plan Commission shall have such powers and duties as are authorized by the statutes of the State and delegated to it by the Board of Trustees. 
(b)  The Plan Commission shall prepare and recommend for consideration and adoption by the Board of Trustees: 
(1)  A statement of goals and objectives to guide new development and maintain improved standards in the village; 
(2)  An Official Map of the village; 
(3)  An Official Plan for the present and future development of the village. Such plan shall include conservation of existing areas, promotion of urban aesthetics, recommendations for rezoning classifications and for long-range community facilities; 
(4)  Such amendments to the aforesaid statement of goals and objectives, Official Map and Official Plan, as the commission deems necessary or desirable from time to time to meet the changing requirements of the village. 
No such map, plan, or amendments thereto, shall be adopted until notice and opportunity for public hearing has first been afforded in the manner provided by the Illinois Statutes relating to plan commissions. 
(c)  The Plan Commission shall make recommendations on subdivisions in undeveloped areas in accordance with the ordinances of the village thereunto pertaining. 
(d)  The Plan Commission shall consult and cooperate with the Community Development Department and may call upon village officials for aid and advice on matters within its jurisdiction, and shall give assistance to the operating officials of the village. 
(e)  The Plan Commission shall coordinate planning with other governmental agencies and be required to consult with representatives of other governmental boards affecting the village, when the interests of such agencies or boards are involved in problems under consideration. 
(f)  The Plan Commission shall submit to the Board of Trustees an annual request for appropriations for anticipated expenditures. 
(g)  The Plan Commission may secure technical assistance in the performance of its powers and duties upon authority from, and within the appropriations made by, the Board of Trustees. 
(Code 1993, § 2-16.1.3) 
Secs. 2-769-2-789. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XXIX. - FIRE AND POLICE COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-790. - Creation; composition. 
    There is created a Board of Fire and Police Commissioners consisting of three members as provided by statute. 
(Code 1993, § 2-16.2.1) 
Sec. 2-791. - Appointment; terms. 
    The Board of Fire and Police Commissioners shall be appointed by the President of the village, by and with the consent of the Board of Trustees. The terms of office of the members of the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners shall be three years and until their respective successors shall be appointed and qualified, provided that no such appointments shall be made by any President within 30 days before the expiration of his term of office; and provided further, no member shall serve more than three consecutive terms. 
(Code 1993, § 2-16.2.2; Ord. No. 91-O-18, 3-19-1991; Ord. No. 92-O-68, 9-1-1992) 
Sec. 2-792. - Qualifications. 
    The members of the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners shall have such qualifications as are now, or may hereafter be, required of them by law. 
(Code 1993, § 2-16.2.3) 
Sec. 2-793. - Powers and duties. 
    The Board of Fire and Police Commissioners shall have such powers and duties as are now or as may hereafter be given to it by law. 
(Code 1993, § 2-16.2.4) 
Secs. 2-794-2-824. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XXX. - HUMAN RELATIONS COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-825. - Creation. 
    There is hereby established a Human Relations Commission which shall consist of nine members. Except in the case of a member who is also an employee of a school district in the village, members shall be citizens and residents of the village. 
(Code 1993, § 2-16.3.1; Ord. No. 2011-O-19, 3-22-2011; Ord. No. 2012-O-50, 9-11-2012) 
Sec. 2-826. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the Human Relations Commission is: 
(1)  To promote the well-being of all members of the community; 
(2)  To support all segments of the population including youth, seniors, persons with disabilities, minorities, and low income groups; 
(3)  To support, address and make recommendations concerning emerging community needs; 
(4)  To serve as an advocate, educator, communicator, and a point of contact for all segments of the population in the community; 
(5)  To promote justice and equality; 
(6)  To encourage and facilitate solutions to social issues; 
(7)  To promote the arts and multi-cultural events; 
(8)  To plan or support community events and programs that bring together and support diverse members of the community; and 
(9)  To provide recommendations to the Village Board on matters pertaining to community welfare. 
(Code 1993, § 2-16.3.2; Ord. No. 2011-O-19, 3-22-2011) 
Sec. 2-827. - Duties and functions. 
    The Human Relations Commission shall have the authority to adopt a meeting schedule consistent with its allocated staff time under section 2-809, adopt rules of procedure for the conduct of its business which are consistent with the Village Code, make recommendations to the Village President and Board of Trustees for the adoption of ordinances or resolutions, and to perform such other duties or functions as assigned to it by the Village President and Board of Trustees. The Human Relations Commission may make recommendations for the expenditure of funds but shall have no authority to enter into contracts or to expend funds. 
(Code 1993, § 2-16.3.3; Ord. No. 2011-O-19, 3-22-2011) 
Sec. 2-828. - Appointment, term of office; composition. 
(a)  The nine members shall be appointed by the Village President with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees for a term of three years. So that terms shall be staggered, upon the initial appointment of members after formation of this commission, the Village President shall appoint five members for an initial term of three years; three members for an initial term of two years; and one member for an initial term of one year. Subsequent appointments shall be for three-year terms. However, the term of a member appointed to fill a vacancy shall include the remainder of the unexpired term of his predecessor plus the next full term following such initial appointment. 
(b)  No member so appointed shall serve more than two consecutive terms. All appointees shall hold office until their successors are appointed and qualified. 
(c)  The Village President shall designate one of the members as Chairperson of the Commission. 
(d)  Any member may be removed by the Village President from the commission for any reason at any time. 
(e)  If a vacancy occurs on the commission, then a successor member shall be appointed by the Village President with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees, to serve the unexpired term of the vacated member. 
(f)  In making appointments to the commission, the Village President may give preference to candidates based on the following factors: 
(1)  Training or expertise in public health or be a medical professional; 
(2)  A person with a disability or an immediate family member of a person with a disability; 
(3)  Training or expertise in the creation or promotion of the arts; 
(4)  Training or expertise in the promotion of diversity and cultural understanding; or 
(5)  Training or expertise in fostering a comprehensive program of youth oriented services. 
(Code 1993, § 2-16.3.4; Ord. No. 2011-O-19, 3-22-2011; Ord. No. 2012-O-40, 7-24-2012) 
Sec. 2-829. - Quorum. 
    Five members of the commission shall constitute a quorum, and any action or recommendation shall require the affirmative vote of at least five members. 
(Code 1993, § 2-16.3.5; Ord. No. 2011-O-19, 3-22-2011) 
Sec. 2-830. - Goals and performance measurement. 
(a)  The Human Relations Commission shall submit to the Village Board Administration Committee, on or before June 30 of each year, its goals for the following fiscal year. Whenever possible, such goals shall be measurable and defined quantitatively. 
(b)  The Human Relations Commission shall submit a report to the Village Board Administration Committee, on or before March 1 of each year, detailing the past year's activities and accomplishments, including performance measures and an analysis of the prior year's goals and their completion. 
(Code 1993, § 2-16.3.9; Ord. No. 2011-O-19, 3-22-2011) 
Secs. 2-831-2-853. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XXXI. - ELECTRICAL COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-854. - Composition; term. 
    The Electrical Commission shall consist of five voting members and, as an ex officio member, the Electrical Inspector. One of the five voting members shall be a registered professional engineer; one, an electrical contractor; one, a journeyman electrician; one, a representative of an inspection bureau maintained by the fire underwriters if such a representative resides in the village, and if no such representative resides in the village, then the Fire Chief; and one, a representative of an electricity supply company. These members shall be appointed for four years by the President of the village by and with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees. The chair of the Electrical Commission shall be designated by the President of the Board of Trustees. 
(Code 1993, § 2-16.4.1; Ord. No. 2000-O-76, 11-14-2000) 
Sec. 2-855. - Functions. 
    The Electrical Commission shall recommend: 
(1)  Safe and practical standards and specifications for the installation, alteration and use of electrical equipment designed to meet the necessities and conditions that prevail in the village; 
(2)  Reasonable rules and regulations governing the issuance of permits, as provided for in section 2-833, by the Community Development Department; and 
(3)  Reasonable fees to be paid for the inspection of all electrical equipment installed or altered within the village. 
(Code 1993, § 2-16.4.2) 
Sec. 2-856. - Permits. 
    Upon the adoption by ordinance of standards and specifications, rules, regulations and fees, as provided for in the preceding section, they shall become operative at once, and thereafter no electrical equipment shall be installed or altered except upon a permit first issued by the Community Development Department. 
(Code 1993, § 2-16.4.3) 
Sec. 2-857. - Regulations, effective date. 
    The standards, specifications, rules, regulations and fees recommended by the Electrical Commission, as provided in section 2-832, shall become effective only after adoption by ordinance of the Board. 
(Code 1993, § 2-16.4.4) 
Secs. 2-858-2-877. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XXXII. - HOUSING COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-878. - Creation. 
    There is hereby established a Housing Commission which shall consist of five members, who shall be citizens and residents of the village. 
(Code 1993, § 2-16.5.1; Ord. No. 2009-O-31, 4-28-2009; Ord. No. 2011-O-11, 2-8-2011) 
Sec. 2-879. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the Housing Commission is to present to the President and Board of Trustees recommendations for the alleviation of the shortage of decent, safe and reasonably affordable housing for the elderly and low and moderate income persons, including, but not limited to, the study and development of housing alternatives and housing requirements in the village. Thereafter, the commission shall periodically review and update its recommendations with respect to any recommendations made to the President and Board of Trustees. 
(Code 1993, § 2-16.5.2; Ord. No. 2009-O-31, 4-28-2009) 
Sec. 2-880. - Duties and functions. 
    The Housing Commission shall perform the duties assigned to it by this section and shall have the power to carry out such other duties or functions as assigned to it by the Village President or Board of Trustees. 
(Code 1993, § 2-16.5.3; Ord. No. 2009-O-31, 4-28-2009) 
Sec. 2-881. - Appointment; term of office; composition. 
(a)  The five members shall be appointed by the Village President with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees for a term of three years. 
(b)  No member so appointed shall serve more than two consecutive terms. All appointees shall hold office until their successors are appointed, except those commissioners appointed to unexpired terms may serve for two full terms following such initial appointments. 
(c)  The Village President shall designate one of the members as Chairperson of the Commission. 
(d)  If a vacancy occurs on the commission, then a successor member shall be appointed by the Village President on the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees, to serve the unexpired term of the vacated member. 
(Code 1993, § 2-16.5.4; Ord. No. 2009-O-31, 4-28-2009; Ord. No. 2011-O-11, 2-8-2011) 
Sec. 2-882. - Quorum; rules; qualifications. 
(a)  Any member may be removed by the Village President for failure to attend three consecutive meetings of the commission. 
(b)  Three regular members of the commission shall constitute a quorum, and any action or recommendation shall require the affirmative vote of at least three members. 
(c)  The commission may adopt rules of order and procedures for the conduct of business. 
(Code 1993, § 2-16.5.5; Ord. No. 2009-O-31, 4-28-2009; Ord. No. 2011-O-11, 2-8-2011) 
Sec. 2-883. - Technical assistance. 
    The Housing Commission may obtain technical assistance in the performance of its powers and duties upon authority from, and within the appropriations made by, the Board of Trustees. 
(Code 1993, § 2-16.5.9; Ord. No. 2009-O-31, 4-28-2009) 
Secs. 2-884-2-914. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XXXIII. - TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-915. - Creation; composition; term; meetings. 
(a)  There is hereby established a Transportation Commission which shall consist of seven members, who shall be citizens and residents of the village. The seven members shall be appointed by the Village President with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees for a term of four years. 
(b)  At the expiration of the term of each member or of each succeeding member, or in the event of a vacancy, the President, with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees, shall appoint a member to hold office for the unexpired term, or in the case of expiration, for a term of four years, or until his successor shall have been appointed and qualified. No member may serve for more than eight consecutive years. 
(c)  The President shall designate one of the members as Chairperson of the Commission. 
(d)  A member may be removed from office by the Village President for failure to attend four consecutive meetings. A vacancy so created shall be filled for the remaining portion of the member's unexpired term in the same manner as other vacancies. 
(e)  The Transportation Commission shall meet as necessity requires and convenience allows. 
(Code 1993, § 2-16.6.1; Ord. No. 92-O-67, 8-4-1992; Ord. No. 97-O-80, 10-14-1997; Ord. No. 2008-O-41, 7-22-2008) 
Sec. 2-916. - Functions. 
    The Transportation Commission shall perform the following duties: 
(1)  Designate areas to be posted "no parking 2:00 a.m. to 5:00 a.m." and conduct the hearing procedure therefor in section 14-299. 
(2)  Designate residential permit parking areas in accordance with the survey and hearing procedure specified in article XIV of chapter 14. 
(3)  Conduct such studies as the Village Board may request of it from time to time and make such recommendations as are appropriate. 
(4)  Designate locations in the village where it is necessary to place school crossing guards; such designations shall be pursuant to and in accordance with the school crossing guard guidelines adopted by the Village Board on June 16, 1992. 
(5)  Monitor transportation issues within the village and recommend to the Village Board ways to coordinate village, other public, and private transportation actions to increase efficiency, effectiveness, and safety. 
(6)  Act as liaison with PACE, CTA, RTA, METRA, and other public and private entities which provide transportation services affecting the village. 
(Code 1993, § 2-16.6.2; Ord. No. 88-O-6, 2-2-1988; Ord. No. 92-O-67, 8-4-1992; Ord. No. 2011-O-19, 3-22-2011) 
Sec. 2-917. - Appeals. 
    Any party who has applied to the commission for relief with respect to the designation of areas to be posted "no parking," residential permit parking areas, or school crossing guard locations may appeal the commission's decision to the Village Board within 30 days following the date of the decision. 
(Code 1993, § 2-16.6.3; Ord. No. 92-O-67, 8-4-1992) 
Secs. 2-918-2-937. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XXXIV. - APPEARANCE REVIEW COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-938. - Creation. 
    There is hereby created an Appearance Review Commission which shall have those powers set forth in appendix A of this Code. 
(Code 1993, § 2-16.8.1; Ord. No. 2015-O-12, 4-14-2015) 
Sec. 2-939. - Members and officers. 
(a)  All members of the Appearance Review Commission shall be residents of the village. 
(b)  The Appearance Review Commission shall consist of seven members appointed by the President and confirmed by the Board of Trustees. In making these appointments, the President should, to the maximum extent possible, appoint persons with relevant education and/or experience in the fields of architecture, landscape architecture, graphic design, interior design, urban planning, real estate development and transactions, construction, and engineering, so that the membership of the commission includes, to the greatest extent practicable, persons of diverse professional background. Each member so appointed shall serve a term of five years. Initial terms shall be staggered. No member shall serve for more than two consecutive full terms. 
(c)  One of the members so appointed shall be named as Chairperson of the Appearance Review Commission by the President and confirmed by the Board of Trustees. 
(d)  The President and the Board of Trustees shall have the power, after a public hearing, to remove any member of the Appearance Review Commission for good cause shown. 
(e)  Vacancies on the Appearance Review Commission shall be filled for the unexpired term of the member whose place has become vacant in the manner herein provided for the appointment of such member. When a member of the Appearance Review Commission has been unable or has failed to attend three consecutive meetings of the Appearance Review Commission, such absence shall be construed as resignation from the Appearance Review Commission, and the member shall be so notified in writing by the President. A vacancy thus created shall be filled in the same manner as any other vacancy. 
(Code 1993, § 2-16.8.2; Ord. No. 2015-O-12, 4-14-2015) 
Secs. 2-940-2-966. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XXXV. - ENVIRONMENTAL AND ENERGY COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-967. - Creation. 
    There is hereby established an Environmental and Energy Commission which shall consist of nine members, who shall be citizens and residents of the village. 
(Code 1993, § 2-16.12.1; Ord. No. 2009-O-31, 4-28-2009; Ord. No. 2011-O-19, 3-22-2011) 
Sec. 2-968. - Purpose. 
    The Environmental and Energy Commission shall be an advisory body to the Village Board and its Boards and Commissions, and its purpose shall be to provide advice and education on environmental issues, environmental health, bicycle and other green modes of transportation and energy-related issues. 
(Code 1993, § 2-16.12.2; Ord. No. 2009-O-31, 4-28-2009; Ord. No. 2011-O-19, 3-22-2011) 
Sec. 2-969. - Duties and functions. 
    The Environmental and Energy Commission shall have the authority to adopt a meeting schedule consistent with its allocated staff time under section 2-944, adopt rules of procedure for the conduct of its business which are consistent with the Village Code, make recommendations to the Village President and Board of Trustees for the adoption of ordinances or resolutions, and to perform such other duties or functions as assigned to it by the Village President and Board of Trustees. The Environmental and Energy Commission may make recommendations for the expenditure of funds but shall have no authority to enter into contracts or to expend funds. 
(Code 1993, § 2-16.12.3; Ord. No. 2009-O-31, 4-28-2009; Ord. No. 2011-O-19, 3-22-2011) 
Sec. 2-970. - Appointment, term of office; composition. 
(a)  The nine members shall be appointed by the Village President with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees for a term of three years. However, the term of a member appointed to fill a vacancy shall include the remainder of the unexpired term of his predecessor plus the next full term following such initial appointment. 
(b)  No member so appointed shall serve more than two consecutive terms. All appointees shall hold office until their successors are appointed and qualified. 
(c)  The Village President shall designate one of the members as Chairperson of the Commission. 
(d)  Any member may be removed by the Village President from the commission for any reason at any time. 
(e)  If a vacancy occurs on the commission, then a successor member shall be appointed by the Village President on the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees, to serve the unexpired term of the vacated member. 
(f)  Each of the Environmental and Energy Commission members appointed shall have training or experience in areas such as environmental matters, energy conservation, education, transportation, pollution control, engineering, science and public health. At all times possible one member of the Environmental and Energy Commission shall have training or expertise in environmental health, or in the alternative, training and expertise in the health and medical field. At all times possible one member of the Environmental and Energy Commission have training or expertise in cycling as a green mode of transportation. 
(Code 1993, § 2-16.12.4; Ord. No. 2009-O-31, 4-28-2009; Ord. No. 2011-O-19, 3-22-2011) 
Sec. 2-971. - Quorum, rules; qualifications. 
(a)  Any member may be removed by the Village President for failure to attend three consecutive meetings of the commission. 
(b)  Five regular members of the commission shall constitute a quorum, and any action or recommendation shall require the affirmative vote of at least five members. 
(c)  The commission may adopt rules of order and procedures for the conduct of business. 
(d)  Each of the Environmental and Energy Commission members appointed shall have training or experience in areas such as environmental matters, energy conservation, education, pollution control, engineering, science and public health. 
(Code 1993, § 2-16.12.5; Ord. No. 2009-O-31, 4-28-2009; Ord. No. 2011-O-19, 3-22-2011) 
Sec. 2-972. - Goals and performance measurement. 
(a)  The Environmental and Energy Commission shall submit to the Village Board Administration Committee, on or before June 30 of each year, its goals for the following fiscal year. Whenever possible, such goals shall be measurable and defined quantitatively. 
(b)  The Environmental and Energy Commission shall submit a report to the Village Board Administration Committee, on or before March 1 of each year, detailing the past year's activities and accomplishments, including performance measures and an analysis of the prior year's goals and their completion. 
(Code 1993, § 2-16.12.9; Ord. No. 2011-O-19, 3-22-2011; Ord. No. 2013-O-17, 4-23-2013) 
Secs. 2-973-2-1002. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XXXVI. - HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-1003. - Creation. 
    There is hereby established a Historic Preservation Commission which shall consist of nine members, who shall be citizens and residents of the village. 
(Code 1993, § 2-16.13.1; Ord. No. 2009-O-31, 4-28-2009) 
Sec. 2-1004. - Appointments, term of office; composition. 
(a)  The nine members shall be appointed by the Village President with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees for a term of four years. 
(b)  No member so appointed shall serve more than two consecutive terms. All appointees shall hold office until their successors are appointed, except those commissioners appointed to unexpired terms may serve for two full terms following such initial appointments. 
(c)  The Village President shall designate one of the members as Chairperson of the Commission. 
(d)  If a vacancy occurs on the commission, then a successor member shall be appointed by the Village President on the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees, to serve the unexpired term of the vacated member. 
(Code 1993, § 2-16.13.2; Ord. No. 2009-O-31, 4-28-2009) 
Sec. 2-1005. - Quorum; rules; qualifications. 
(a)  Any member may be removed by the Village President for failure to attend three consecutive meetings of the commission. 
(b)  Five regular members of the commission shall constitute a quorum, and any action or recommendation shall require the affirmative vote of at least five members. 
(c)  The commission may adopt rules of order and procedures for the conduct of business. 
(Code 1993, § 2-16.13.3; Ord. No. 2009-O-31, 4-28-2009) 
Sec. 2-1006. - Meetings. 
    The Historic Preservation Commission shall have an initial budget to meet six times per year. Such meetings shall be open to the public and public notice shall be given for such meetings as provided by law. Additional meetings may be budgeted pursuant to section 2-970(b). 
(Code 1993, § 2-16.13.4; Ord. No. 2009-O-31, 4-28-2009) 
Sec. 2-1007. - Funding. 
(a)  The Historic Preservation Commission shall submit to the Board of Trustees an annual request for appropriations for anticipated expenditures. Expenditures in excess of the amount appropriated are subject to prior approval by the Board of Trustees. 
(b)  The Historic Preservation Commission shall also submit to the Board of Trustees an annual request for the allocation, in hours, of the anticipated amount of village staff time required for the functioning of the Historic Preservation Commission. Use of staff time in excess of the amount allocated is subject to prior approval by the Village Manager or the Board of Trustees. 
(Code 1993, § 2-16.13.5; Ord. No. 2009-O-31, 4-28-2009) 
Sec. 2-1008. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the Wilmette Historic Preservation Commission is to preserve the character of community life by recognizing, preserving and acknowledging the significance of those structures, sites, geographic features, and trees which exemplify or reflect the cultural, social, economic, political or architectural history of the village in accordance with the provisions of this division. 
(Code 1993, § 2-16.13.7; Ord. No. 2009-O-31, 4-28-2009) 
Sec. 2-1009. - Duties and functions. 
    The Historic Preservation Commission shall perform the duties assigned to it by section 2-972 and article XIX of chapter 8 and shall have the power to carry out such other duties or functions as assigned to it by the Village President or Board of Trustees. 
(Code 1993, § 2-16.13.8; Ord. No. 2009-O-31, 4-28-2009) 
Sec. 2-1010. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alteration means a change in the exterior appearance of a Wilmette Landmark that requires a permit or as specified in the designation ordinance. 
    Certificate of appropriateness means a certificate recommended by the commission indicating review and authorization of plans for alteration, construction, demolition or relocation of a Wilmette Landmark, or property, structure or site within a Wilmette Historic District. 
    Certificate of Economic Hardship means a certificate issued by the Village Board after a determination by the commission that the previous denial of a certificate of appropriateness has resulted in a denial of all reasonable use or return from the property. 
    Contributing means a classification, by the commission, applied to an area, property, structure or site within a Wilmette Historic District signifying that it contributes generally to the qualities that give the Wilmette Historic District historic, cultural, architectural or archaeological significance as embodied in the criteria for designating a Wilmette Historic District. The classification also includes a property, structure or site designated significant or contributing in the Wilmette Historical and Architectural Surveys. 
    Demolition means as used in this section, shall mean the destruction or removal of a Wilmette Landmark that requires a permit. 
    Exterior architectural appearance means the architectural character and general composition of the exterior of a property or structure visible from a public street, including, but not limited to, the kind and textures of the building material and the type, design and character of all architectural details and elements, including, but not limited to, windows, doors, light fixtures, trim and signs. 
    Geographic feature means a land formation, whether naturally occurring or manmade. 
    Non-contributing means any property, structure or site which has not been classified as contributing or significant by the commission. 
    Place of worship means a church, synagogue, mosque, temple, or other building, structure, or place used primarily for religious worship and includes the grounds of a place of worship and accessory structures located thereon. 
    Relocation means any reposition of a structure on its site or to another site. 
    Rules and procedures means the rules and procedures of the Wilmette Historic Preservation Commission. 
    Site means any geographic location associated with an event, person or structure. 
    Structure means any improvement to real property. 
    Wilmette Historic District means an identifiable area with definable boundaries designated as a "Wilmette Historic District" by the Village Board of Trustees and in which a significant number of the properties, structures or sites have a high degree of historic, cultural, architectural, or archaeological significance and integrity. Many of the properties, structures or sites included in the Wilmette Historic District may qualify as Wilmette Landmarks or be contributing and may or may not be contiguous. For the purposes of this chapter and unless otherwise expressly provided by the Village Board of Trustees in the ordinance for designation, all designations shall presumptively include the lots of record associated with structures located in the district. 
    Wilmette Landmark means an artifact, structure, site, geographic feature or tree that has been designated, by village ordinance, as being a paragon for the cultural, social, economic, political or architectural values of the nation, state or village. 
(Code 1993, § 2-16.13.9; Ord. No. 2009-O-31, 4-28-2009) 
Sec. 2-1011. - Actions affecting a Wilmette Landmark or within a Wilmette Historic District. 
(a)  No designated Wilmette Landmark or contributing structure within a Wilmette Historic District shall be altered or demolished and no new construction on a vacant lot in a Wilmette Historic District may be undertaken, except in accordance with the provisions of section 2-970. 
(b)  The requirements of section 2-970, and all its further subsections, shall not be applicable to, and no certificate of appropriateness shall be required for, the alteration, demolition or construction of a place of worship or the property on which a place of worship is, or will be, situated. 
(c)  Owners of places of worship may, on a voluntary basis, request to meet with and consult with the Historic Preservation Commission prior to the alteration, demolition, or construction of a place of worship, so that Historic Preservation Commission may provide the owners of the place of worship with the benefit of its expertise and advice regarding the project under consideration. 
(Code 1993, § 2-16.13.10; Ord. No. 2009-O-31, 4-28-2009) 
Sec. 2-1012. - Application; required contents. 
    Any person or entity proposing the alteration or demolition of a designated Wilmette Landmark, a contributing structure within a Wilmette Historic District or new construction on a vacant lot in a Wilmette Historic District, shall submit a written application for a certificate of appropriateness to the Historic Preservation Commission, through the Department of Community Development. The application shall include detailed plans showing the proposed appearance of the Wilmette Landmark visible from a public right-of-way or plans regarding the proposed action within a Wilmette Historic District. 
(Code 1993, § 2-16.13.11; Ord. No. 2009-O-31, 4-28-2009) 
Sec. 2-1013. - Public hearing; report. 
(a)  Upon receipt of the application, the Historic Commission shall hold a public hearing on the application and allow the applicant and other interested parties to present testimony. Such hearings shall be held in accordance with the rules and procedures adopted by the commission. 
(b)  Following the conclusion of the hearing, the commission shall submit a report to the Village Board of Trustees either recommending that the application be granted in its original form or as amended, or that the application be denied. 
(Code 1993, § 2-16.13.12; Ord. No. 2009-O-31, 4-28-2009) 
Sec. 2-1014. - Criteria for review of certificates of appropriateness. 
(a)  Criteria for the approval of a certificate of appropriateness shall give due consideration to the rights of property owners, the Secretary of the Interior's Standards and the standards of review adopted by the commission and shall require that: 
(1)  The alteration does not materially impair the historical significance of the Wilmette Landmark. 
(2)  The alteration does not materially impair the architectural integrity of the Wilmette Landmark or Wilmette Historic District. 
(3)  The alteration is carried out in a manner consistent with the historical/architectural character of the Wilmette Landmark. 
(4)  It is not economically practical to preserve the Wilmette Landmark or contributing structure within a Wilmette Historic District without alteration or demolition. 
(b)  Any new construction shall be visually compatible with the historical/architectural character of the Wilmette Historic District. 
(c)  If the proposal does not meet any of the above-stated criteria, the Historic Commission shall recommend that the application be denied. 
(Code 1993, § 2-16.13.13; Ord. No. 2009-O-31, 4-28-2009) 
Sec. 2-1015. - Appeal of denials. 
    Any applicant, following a final negative recommendation of the commission for a certificate of appropriateness, may, within 30 days of the negative recommendation, make application for a Certificate of Economic Hardship. 
(Code 1993, § 2-16.13.14; Ord. No. 2009-O-31, 4-28-2009) 
Sec. 2-1016. - Criteria for a Certificate of Economic Hardship. 
    The commission shall only recommend an application for a Certificate of Economic Hardship upon a determination that the negative recommendation of the certificate of appropriateness has resulted in the denial of all reasonable use or return from the property, in accordance with the commission's rules and procedures. 
(Code 1993, § 2-16.13.15; Ord. No. 2009-O-31, 4-28-2009) 
Sec. 2-1017. - Consideration by the Village Board of Trustees. 
(a)  Upon receipt of the Historic Preservation Commission's recommendation for designation of a Wilmette Landmark or action on an application for a certificate of appropriateness, the Village Board of Trustees shall approve or disapprove the recommendation by majority vote. Upon the receipt of the commission's recommendation for designation of a Wilmette Historic District and which designation is accompanied by the written consent of 75 percent or more of the owners of record of those properties within the proposed district, the Village Board of Trustees shall approve or disapprove the proposed Wilmette Historic District by a majority vote. If alteration or demolition is approved, the village shall issue, upon proper application and satisfaction of all other requirements of the Village Code, the appropriate Building Permit or Demolition Permit. 
(b)  Notice of the Village Board of Trustee's approval of the designation shall be provided by regular mail to the nominator and all property owners of record of the landmark or properties within the district. 
(c)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, no place of worship or property on which a place of worship is located shall be designated as a Wilmette Landmark without the written consent of the religious entity that is the owner of such place of worship. 
(Code 1993, § 2-16.13.16; Ord. No. 2009-O-31, 4-28-2009) 
Secs. 2-1018-2-1047. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XXXVII. - ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS 

Sec. 2-1048. - Creation. 
    There is hereby created a Zoning Board of Appeals which shall have those powers set forth in appendix A of this Code. 
(Code 1993, § 2-16.7.1; Ord. No. 2015-O-12, 4-14-2015) 
Sec. 2-1049. - Members. 
(a)  All members of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be residents of the village. 
(b)  The Zoning Board of Appeals shall consist of seven members appointed by the President and confirmed by the Board of Trustees. Each member so appointed shall serve for a term of five years. No member shall serve for more than two consecutive full terms. 
(c)  One of the members so appointed shall be named as the Chairperson of the Zoning Board of Appeals by the President and confirmed by the Board of Trustees. 
(d)  The President and the Board of Trustees shall have the power, after a public hearing, to remove any member of the Zoning Board of Appeals for good cause shown. 
(e)  Vacancies on the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be filled for the unexpired term of the member whose place has become vacant in the manner herein provided for the appointment of such member. When a member of the Zoning Board of Appeals has been unable or has failed to attend three consecutive meetings of the Zoning Board of Appeals, such absence shall be construed as resignation from the Zoning Board of Appeals and the member shall be so notified in writing by the President. A vacancy thus created shall be filled in the same manner as any other vacancy. 
(Code 1993, § 2-16.7.2; Ord. No. 2015-O-12, 4-14-2015) 
Secs. 2-1050-2-1066. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XXXVIII. - POLICE AND FIREFIGHTERS' PENSION FUNDS 

Sec. 2-1067. - Board of Trustees of the Police Pension Fund; creation; composition; term. 
(a)  Pursuant to article 3, section 3-128 of the Illinois Pension Code (ILCS ch. 40, act 5, § 3-128), there is hereby established a Board of Trustees of the Police Pension Fund. 
(b)  The Board of Trustees of the Police Pension Fund shall be composed of five members. Two members of said Board shall be appointed by the President of the village for two-year terms of office. Three members of said Board shall be elected by active and retired members of the Police Department in the manner provided in article 3, section 3-128 of the Illinois Pension Code (ILCS ch. 40, act 5, § 3-128), now or hereafter amended. 
(Code. 1993, § 2.16.11.1; Ord. No. 91-O-18, 3-19-1991; Ord. No. 2006-O-29, 4-11-2006) 
Sec. 2-1068. - Board of Trustees of the Firefighters' Pension Fund; creation; composition; term. 
(a)  Pursuant to article 4, section 4-121 of the Illinois Pension Code (ILCS ch. 40, act 5, § 4-121), there is hereby established a Board of Trustees of the Firefighters' Pension Fund. 
(b)  The Board of Trustees of the Firefighters' Pension Fund shall be composed of five members. Two members of said Board shall be appointed by the President of the village for three-year terms of office. Three members of said Board shall be elected by active and retired members of the Fire Department in the manner provided in article 4, section 4-121 of the Illinois Pension Code (40 ILCS ch. 40, act 5, § 4-121), now or hereafter amended. 
(Code 1993, § 2-16.11.2; Ord. No. 2006-O-29, 4-11-2006) 
Secs. 2-1069-2-1089. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XXXIX. - EMERGENCY TELEPHONE SYSTEM BOARD 

Sec. 2-1090. - Creation; composition; terms of office. 
(a)  There is hereby created an Emergency Telephone System Board. 
(b)  The Emergency Telephone System Board shall consist of seven members, who shall be the Police Chief, Fire Chief, Village Manager, Village President, and the three Trustees who are members of the standing committee on Public Safety as provided in section 2-92. The members of the Emergency Telephone System Board shall hold their offices for an indefinite term even with that of their offices as Police Chief, Fire Chief, Village Manager, Village President and Trustee, respectively. 
(c)  The Village President shall be the Chairperson on the Emergency Telephone System Board. 
(d)  A majority of the members of the Emergency Telephone System Board shall constitute a quorum to do business. 
(Code 1993, § 2-16.17.1; Ord. No. 2002-O-101, 12-10-2002) 
Sec. 2-1091. - Powers and duties. 
    The Emergency Telephone System Board shall have such duties and powers as may be provided for or required under ILCS ch. 50, act 750, § 0.01 et seq., as amended, including, but not limited to, the power to: 
(1)  Plan the village's 911 emergency telephone system. 
(2)  Coordinate and supervise the implementation, improvement, upgrading, or maintenance of the 911 emergency telephone system, including the establishment of equipment specifications and coding systems. 
(3)  Authorize all disbursements from the 911 Emergency Telephone System Surcharge Fund, as provided for in article XX of this chapter. 
(Code 1993, § 2-16.17.2; Ord. No. 2002-O-101, 12-10-2002) 
Secs. 2-1092-2-1120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XL. - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT; DISASTERS AND EMERGENCY AUTHORITY 

Sec. 2-1121. - Authority and intent. 
    This article is enacted pursuant to the authority granted to the village as a home rule unit of government under the provisions of article VII, section 7, of the 1970 Constitution of the State, and additionally, pursuant to the authority provided in the Illinois Emergency Management Agency Act (ILCS ch. 20, act 3305, § 1 et seq.). It is the intent of this article to provide the necessary organization, powers and authority to enable the timely and effective use of all village resources to prepare for, respond to and recover from disasters and emergencies, natural or manmade, likely to affect the health, security, safety or property of the village and its residents, whether such events occur within or without the corporate limits of the village. 
(Code 1993, § 2-17.1.1; Ord. No. 2004-O-56, 6-8-2004) 
Sec. 2-1122. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Disaster means an occurrence or threat of widespread or severe damage, injury or loss of life or property resulting from any natural or technological cause, including, but not limited to, fire, flood, earthquake, wind, storm, explosion, building or structural collapse, hazardous material spill or release or other environmental contamination, including that caused by biological or radiological spill, release or exposure requiring emergency action to avert danger or damage, epidemic, pandemic disease, air contamination, blight, extended periods of severe and inclement weather, drought, infestation, critical shortages of essential fuels and energy, explosion, riot, hostile military or paramilitary action, mass transportation accidents, utility emergencies, public health emergencies, or acts of terrorism or sabotage. 
    Public health emergency means an occurrence or imminent threat of an illness or health condition that: 
(1)  Is believed to be caused by any of the following: 
a.  Bioterrorism; 
b.  The appearance of a novel or previously controlled or eradicated infectious agent or biological toxin; 
c.  A natural disaster; 
d.  A chemical attack or accidental release; 
e.  A nuclear attack or accident; and 
(2)  Poses a high probability of any of the following harms: 
a.  A large number of deaths in the affected population; 
b.  A large number of serious or long-term disabilities in the affected population; or 
c.  Widespread exposure to an infectious or toxic agent that poses a significant risk of substantial future harm to a large number of people in the affected population. 
    Utility emergency means and includes, but not be limited to, conditions which endanger or threaten to endanger the safety, potability, availability, transmission, distribution, treatment or storage of water, natural gas, electricity, telecommunications, garbage or sewage. 
(Code 1993, § 2-17.1.2; Ord. No. 2004-O-56, 6-8-2004) 
Sec. 2-1123. - Declaration of local disaster; filing. 
(a)  The Village President is authorized, if the Village President reasonably finds that the village, or any part thereof, is suffering or is in imminent danger of suffering a disaster, to declare a local disaster. 
(b)  A declaration of a local disaster issued by the Village President shall be in writing, shall promptly be submitted to the Trustees, the Village Manager, the Village Clerk and the EMA Coordinator provided for in section 2-1156, and the public shall be notified through general publicity of said declaration. 
(Code 1993, § 2-17.1.3; Ord. No. 2004-O-56, 6-8-2004) 
Sec. 2-1124. - Effective term of declaration. 
    The declaration of a local disaster shall be in effect for a period of up to seven days, as may be specified in the declaration by the Village President. This period may be extended only upon approval of the Village Board, unless it is impracticable for the Village Board to meet before the expiration of seven days, in which case the declaration shall continue in effect until the Village Board is first able to meet. 
(Code 1993, § 2-17.1.4; Ord. No. 2004-O-56, 6-8-2004) 
Sec. 2-1125. - Unavailability of Village President; succession of authority. 
    In the event that the Village President is unavailable, as defined in section 2-1150 hereof, during an emergency, the succession of authority shall be as provided in said section 2-1150. 
(Code 1993, § 2-17.1.5; Ord. No. 2004-O-56, 6-8-2004) 
Sec. 2-1126. - Disaster authority and powers. 
    In the event that the Village President declares a local disaster, during the effective period of the disaster declaration, the Village President, in coordination with the EMA Coordinator established in section 2-1156, is authorized and empowered to issue orders to: 
(1)  Temporarily suspend, limit, cancel, convene, reschedule, postpone, continue or relocate all meetings of the Village Board of Trustees, and any subsidiary village committee, commission, board, authority or other public body of the village, as deemed appropriate by the Village President. 
(2)  Suspend or limit the sale, distribution, dispensing or transportation of alcoholic beverages, firearms, explosives and combustible products, and require the closing of those businesses or parts of businesses insofar as the sale, distribution, dispensing or transportation of these items is concerned. 
(3)  Establish a curfew during such hours of the days or nights and affecting such categories of persons as may be designated. 
(4)  Require closing of business establishments. 
(5)  Prohibit the sale or distribution within the village of any products which could be employed in a manner that would constitute a danger to public safety. 
(6)  Temporarily close any and all streets, alleys, sidewalks, bike paths, public parks or public ways. 
(7)  Temporarily suspend or modify, for the effective period of the disaster declaration, any regulation or ordinance of the village, including, but not limited to, those regarding health, safety and zoning. This period may be extended upon approval of the Village Board. 
(8)  Suspend or limit the use of the village's water resources or other infrastructure. 
(9)  Control, restrict, allocate or regulate the use, sale, production or distribution of food, water, fuel, clothing and/or other commodities, materials, goods, services and resources. 
(10)  Suspend or limit burning of any items or property within the village. 
(11)  Require emergency services of any village officer or employee. If regular village forces are determined to be inadequate, then to acquire the services of such other personnel as the Village President can obtain that are available, including citizen volunteers. All duly authorized persons rendering emergency services shall be entitled to the privileges and immunities as are provided pursuant to the Illinois Emergency Management Agency Act (ILCS ch. 20, act 3305, § 1 et seq.). 
(12)  Direct and compel the evacuation of all or part of the population from any stricken or threatened areas within the village, if the Village President deems this action is necessary for the preservation of life, property, or other disaster or emergency mitigation, response or recovery, and to prescribe routes, modes of transportation and destination in connection with an evacuation. 
(13)  In coordination with the EMA Coordinator, expend funds, execute contracts, authorize the obtaining and acquisition of property, equipment, services, supplies and materials, hire and contract for construction, engineering, architectural, building, electrical, plumbing and/or other services essential to public health, welfare and safety during the period of the emergency, without the advertisement of bids or strict compliance with procurement ordinances or procedures, and to authorize other village officials to do the same. 
(14)  Make application for local, state or federal assistance. 
(15)  Establish and control routes of evacuation, transportation, ingress or egress. 
(16)  Control ingress and egress from any designated disaster area or homes, buildings or structures located therein. 
(17)  Utilize private property as necessary to cope with disaster conditions, subject to any requirements established by law for compensation. 
(18)  Accept services, gifts, grants, loans, equipment, supplies and/or materials whether from private, nonprofit or governmental sources. 
(19)  Terminate or suspend any process, operation, machine, device or event that is or may negatively impact the health, safety and welfare of persons or property within the village. 
(20)  Delegate the authority provided herein to the EMA Coordinator or such village officials as the Village President determines reasonably necessary, convenient or expedient. 
(21)  Require the continuation, termination, disconnection or suspension of natural gas, electrical power, water, sewer, telecommunication or other public utilities or infrastructure. 
(22)  Close or cancel the use of any municipally owned or operated building or other public facility or public property. 
(23)  Disinfect, abate, demolish, remove or clean up any building, structure, site, wreckage or debris. 
(24)  Declare, issue, enforce, modify and terminate orders for quarantine and isolation of persons or animals posing a threat to public health. 
(25)  Issue any and all such other orders or undertake such other functions and activities as the Village President reasonably believes is required to protect the health, safety, and welfare of persons or property within the village, or otherwise preserve the public peace or abate, clean up or mitigate the effects of any disaster. 
(Code 1993, § 2-17.1.6; Ord. No. 2004-O-56, 6-8-2004) 
Sec. 2-1127. - Prohibited conduct during local disaster. 
    During the period when a local disaster has been declared, no person shall: 
(1)  Enter or remain upon the premises of any establishment not open for business to the general public, unless such person is the owner, or authorized employee or agent of the establishment. 
(2)  Violate any of the orders duly issued by the Village President, the EMA Coordinator or authorized personnel. 
(3)  Willfully obstruct, hinder or delay any duly authorized peace officer in the enforcement of the provisions of this article, or any order or regulation issued under authority provided for in this article. 
(Code 1993, § 2-17.1.7; Ord. No. 2004-O-56, 6-8-2004) 
Sec. 2-1128. - Location of public meetings and departments. 
(a)  Whenever a local disaster makes it imprudent, unsafe or impracticable to conduct the affairs of the village at its regular locations, the Village Board, and subsidiary public bodies of the village, may meet at any place, inside or outside the village limits, in conformance with the requirements of the Illinois Open Meetings Act (ILCS ch. 5, act 120, § 1 et seq.). Any temporary disaster meeting location for the Village Board shall continue until a new location is established, until the disaster is declared ended or until the Village Board, or such subsidiary public body as the case may be, is able to return to its normal location. 
(b)  Whenever a local disaster makes it imprudent, unsafe or impracticable to conduct the affairs of any department of the village at its regular location, such department may conduct its business at any place, inside or outside the village limits, and may remain at the temporary location until the disaster is declared ended or until the department is able to return to its normal location. 
(c)  Any official act or meeting required to be performed at any regular location of the governing body or of its departments shall be valid when performed at any temporary location established under this section. 
(Code 1993, § 2-17.1.8; Ord. No. 2004-O-56, 6-8-2004) 
Sec. 2-1129. - Emergency intergovernmental agreements and mutual aid. 
    During a local disaster, the Village President may, on behalf of the village, enter into such reciprocal aid, mutual aid, joint powers agreements, intergovernmental assistance agreements, or other compacts, plans or agreements with other governmental entities for the protection of life and property in the village. Such agreements may include the furnishing or exchange of supplies, equipment, facilities, personnel or services. 
(Code 1993, § 2-17.1.9; Ord. No. 2004-O-56, 6-8-2004) 
Sec. 2-1130. - Authority to enter property. 
    During the period of a local disaster, a village employee or authorized agent may enter onto or upon private property, if the employee or authorized agent has reasonable grounds to believe that there is a true emergency or disaster and an immediate need for assistance for the protection of life or property, and that entering onto the private property will allow the employee or authorized agent to take reasonable actions to alleviate or minimize the emergency or to prevent or minimize risk to lives or property arising from the declared emergency. 
(Code 1993, § 2-17.1.10; Ord. No. 2004-O-56, 6-8-2004) 
Sec. 2-1131. - Authority for enforcement. 
    The members of the Police Department, and other law enforcement agencies having jurisdiction or as otherwise authorized by the Village President, Fire Department, Community Development Department, Engineering and Public Works Department, or such other departments or persons as authorized by the Village President, are hereby authorized and directed to enforce the orders and regulations made or issued pursuant to this article. 
(Code 1993, § 2-17.1.11; Ord. No. 2004-O-56, 6-8-2004) 
Secs. 2-1132-2-1155. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XLI. - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT; MUNICIPAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY 

Sec. 2-1156. - Establishment. 
(a)  There hereby is created a Municipal Emergency Management Agency to prevent, minimize and alleviate injury or damage resulting from an occurrence or threat of widespread or severe damage, injury or loss of life or property resulting from any disaster as defined in section 2-1108, as authorized by the Illinois Emergency Management Agency Act (ILCS ch. 20, act 3305, § 1 et seq.). 
(b)  The name of said agency shall be the Wilmette Emergency Management Agency (EMA), and shall consist of the EMA Coordinator, village department heads, and others as selected by the EMA Coordinator and Village Manager, to render services in connection with the performance of the functions of the EMA. 
(Code 1993, § 2-17.2.1; Ord. No. 2004-O-56, 6-8-2004) 
Sec. 2-1157. - Coordinator. 
(a)  The Chief of Police shall serve as the EMA Coordinator and shall exercise and perform all duties and be subject to all the requirements and obligations pertaining to such office, as provided in the Illinois Emergency Management Agency Act. 
(b)  The EMA Coordinator shall have direct responsibility for the organization, administration, training, and operation of the EMA, as provided by law, subject to the direction and control of the Village Manager. 
(c)  All other members shall be appointed, or designated, by the EMA Coordinator and shall serve at the pleasure of the EMA Coordinator. 
(Code 1993, § 2-17.2.2; Ord. No. 2004-O-56, 6-8-2004) 
Sec. 2-1158. - Functions. 
(a)  The EMA Coordinator shall be chair of the EMA. The EMA shall meet at the call of the EMA Coordinator, and shall advise the EMA Coordinator on all matters pertaining to emergency services. The EMA shall, from time to time, recommend such action by the Village President and Board of Trustees as it may deem necessary and advisable in order to carry out the purposes of this article and of the Illinois Emergency Management Agency Act. 
(b)  The EMA shall perform such emergency relief functions within the corporate limits of the village as shall be prescribed in and by the State EMA plan and program prepared by the Governor, and such orders, rules and regulations as may be promulgated by the Governor. In addition, the EMA shall perform such duties outside the corporate limits as may be required pursuant to any mutual aid agreement with any other political subdivision, municipality or quasi-municipality, as provided by the Illinois Emergency Management Agency Act. 
(c)  A comprehensive village Emergency Management Plan shall be adopted and maintained by resolution of the Board of Trustees upon the recommendations of the Village Manager. This plan shall be submitted for approval to the Illinois Emergency Management Agency (IEMA). In the preparation of this plan as it pertains to village organization, it is the intent that the services, equipment, facilities and personnel of all existing departments and agencies shall be utilized to the fullest extent. When approved, it shall be the duty of all municipal departments to perform the functions assigned by the plan and to maintain their portion of the plan in a current state of readiness at all times. The basic plan shall be considered supplementary to this ordinance and have the effect of law whenever a disaster has been proclaimed. 
(Code 1993, § 2-17.2.3; Ord. No. 2004-O-56, 6-8-2004) 
Sec. 2-1159. - Service as a mobile support team. 
(a)  Members of the EMA may be designated as members of a mobile support team created by the Director of IEMA, as provided by law. The leader of such mobile support team shall be designated by the EMA Coordinator. 
(b)  Any member of a mobile support team who is a municipal employee or officer while serving on call to duty by the Governor, or the Director of IEMA, shall receive the compensation and have the powers, duties and immunities incident to such employment or office. Any such member who is not a paid officer or employee for the village, while so serving, shall receive from the State reasonable compensation as provided by law. 
(Code 1993, § 2-17.2.4; Ord. No. 2004-O-56, 6-8-2004) 
Sec. 2-1160. - Agreements with other political subdivisions. 
    The EMA Coordinator may negotiate mutual aid agreements with other municipal corporations or political subdivisions of the State for reciprocal aid and assistance, pursuant to law, but no such agreement shall be effective until it has been approved by the President and Board of Trustees of the village and by the Director of IEMA. 
(Code 1993, § 2-17.2.5; Ord. No. 2004-O-56, 6-8-2004) 
Sec. 2-1161. - Emergency action. 
    If the Governor declares that an emergency exists, in the event of actual enemy attack upon the United States, or the occurrence within the State of major disaster resulting from accident or from natural disaster, it shall be the duty of the EMA to cooperate fully with the IEMA and with the Governor in the exercise of emergency powers as provided by law. 
(Code 1993, § 2-17.2.6; Ord. No. 2004-O-56, 6-8-2004) 
Sec. 2-1162. - Compensation. 
(a)  The EMA Coordinator and members of the EMA shall receive no compensation by the village for their services in the EMA, but this provision shall not affect their compensation for other services to the village, nor shall it affect their compensation for EMA activities otherwise provided by law. 
(b)  Members of the EMA who are paid employees or officers of the village, if called for training by the IEMA Director, shall receive for the time spent in such training the same rate of pay as is attached to the position held; members who are neither such municipal employees nor officers of the village may receive for such training time such compensation as may be established by the Village President and Board of Trustees, as provided by law. 
(Code 1993, § 2-17.2.7; Ord. No. 2004-O-56, 6-8-2004) 
Sec. 2-1163. - Emergency interim executive succession. 
    As authorized by the Emergency Interim Executive Succession Act (ILCS ch. 5, act 275, § 1 et seq.), provision is made for designation of a succession of executive authority, in the event of an emergency or disaster and the activation of the Emergency Management Plan as provided in this ordinance. In the event the Village President is unavailable (as defined in section 3 of the Emergency Interim Executive Succession Act (ILCS ch. 5, act 275, § 3)) in the course of an emergency, then the succession shall be: Village Manager, EMA Coordinator and Fire Chief. At the end of the emergency or disaster, all successors will revert to their normal positions. 
(Code 1993, § 2-17.2.8; Ord. No. 2004-O-56, 6-8-2004) 
Sec. 2-1164. - Reimbursement by state. 
    The Village Treasurer may receive and allocate to the appropriate fund any reimbursement by the State to the village for expenses incident to training members of the Wilmette EMA, as prescribed by the IEMA, compensation for services and expenses of members of a mobile support team while serving outside the municipality in response to a call by the Governor or IEMA Director, and any activities, as provided by law. 
(Code 1993, § 2-17.2.9; Ord. No. 2004-O-56, 6-8-2004) 
Sec. 2-1165. - Purchases and expenditures. 
(a)  The Village President and Board of Trustees may, on recommendation of the EMA Coordinator, authorize any purchase or contract necessary to place the village in a position to combat effectively any disaster, and to protect the public health and safety, protect property, and provide emergency assistance to victims in the case of such disaster. 
(b)  In the event of a disaster, the EMA Coordinator is authorized, on behalf of the village, to procure such services, supplies, equipment or material as may be necessary for emergency purposes, in view of the exigency, without regard to the procedures or formalities normally prescribed by law pertaining to municipal public works contracts or obligations, as authorized by the Illinois Emergency Management Agency Act, until the Village President and Board of Trustees are able to act effectively, whereupon the EMA Coordinator shall then act in accordance with their directions, pursuant to law. 
(Code 1993, § 2-17.2.10; Ord. No. 2004-O-56, 6-8-2004) 
Sec. 2-1166. - Oath. 
    Every member of the EMA, and every person who is appointed to serve in any capacity in connection therewith, shall subscribe and file with the Director of IEMA, the following oath, to be administered and attested to by an officer authorized to take oaths in this State: 
"I, ___________, do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support and defend and bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of the State, and the territory, institutions and facilities thereof, both public and private, against all enemies, foreign and domestic; that I take this obligation freely, without any mental reservation or purpose of evasion; and that I will well and faithfully discharge the duties upon which I am about to enter. And I do further swear (or affirm) that I do not advocate, nor am I, nor have I been a member of any political party or organization that advocates the overthrow of the government of the United States or of this State by force or violence; and that during such time as I am affiliated with the Wilmette EMA Organization, I will not advocate nor become a member of any political party or organization that advocates the overthrow of the Government of the United States or of this State by force or violence." 
(Code 1993, § 2-17.2.11; Ord. No. 2004-O-56, 6-8-2004) 
Sec. 2-1167. - Office. 
    The Village Manager is authorized to designate space in the village hall, or such other location as may be provided by the village for the office of the Wilmette EMA. 
(Code 1993, § 2-17.2.12; Ord. No. 92-O-41, 6-16-1992; Ord. No. 2004-O-56, 6-8-2004) 
Secs. 2-1168-2-1197. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XLII. - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT; EMERGENCY ENERGY PLANS 

Sec. 2-1198. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Control area means an electrical system bounded by interconnection (tie-line) metering and telemetry. It controls generation directly to maintain its interchange schedule with other control areas and contributes to frequency regulation of the interconnection. 
    Control area emergency means that control area is at risk of having to shed firm load, having taken or committed to take all feasible mitigating action short of shedding firm load and firm sales. 
    Controlled rotating interruptions of electrical service means the implementation of a plan to curtail electric service to firm load customers for a short period of time and rotating this curtailment of electric service through different areas within the electric utility's service territory in a situation where the demand has exceeded or is at significant risk of exceeding the supply of electricity available to the electric utility. The action of an electric utility to interrupt or curtail service to a customer participating in or taking service under an interruptible or curtailable rate is not included in this definition. 
    Emergency Energy Plan means the portions of the emergency load conservation procedures, which immediately precede and include the controlled rotating interruption of electrical service to firm load customers within the village. The Emergency Energy Plan shall include the following steps: 
(1)  A request for emergency help from neighboring utilities; 
(2)  A declaration of a control area emergency; 
(3)  A public appeal for voluntary curtailment of electrical use; and 
(4)  Implementation of the plan for controlled rotating interruptions of electrical service. 
    Emergency load conservation procedures means a planned course of action developed by an electric utility company to be implemented in emergency situations when the demand for electricity exceeds, or is at significant risk of exceeding, the supply of electricity available to the electric utility. 
    Electric utility company or electric utility means any person or entity engaged in the business of distributing, transmitting, or otherwise delivering electricity, regardless of its source, for use or consumption within the village. The term "electric utility company" shall not include any person or entity that delivers electricity to fewer than 50 customers within the village. 
(Code 1993, § 2-18.1; Ord. No. 99-O-22, 3-23-1999) 
Sec. 2-1199. - Submittal of Emergency Energy Plan. 
(a)  Every electric utility company must have adopted an Emergency Energy Plan no later than 30 days after the effective date of the ordinance from which this division is derived, or within 30 days after becoming an electric utility company, whichever is later. Every such electric utility company shall submit to the Village Manager an Emergency Energy Plan adopted by the company no later than 30 days after the effective date of this chapter, or within 24 hours of the time the plan is adopted, whichever is later. The electric utility company shall be required to examine and update as needed its Emergency Energy Plan at least annually. The electric utility company shall notify the Village Manager in writing of any material revisions to its plan and the rationale for said revisions within five business days of the time said revisions are made. 
(b)  The Emergency Energy Plan shall include, at a minimum, information detailing: 
(1)  Circumstances that would require the implementation of the Emergency Energy Plan; 
(2)  Stages of the Emergency Energy Plan; 
(3)  The approximate geographical limits of each outage area provided for in the Emergency Energy Plan; 
(4)  The approximate number of customers within each outage area provided for in the emergency plan; 
(5)  The police facilities, fire stations, hospitals, nursing homes, schools, day care centers, senior citizen centers, community health centers, correctional facilities, stormwater and wastewater treatment or pumping facilities, and water-pumping stations that have been identified by the village and persons on life-support systems that are known to the company, and that could be affected by controlling rotating interruptions of electric service under the Emergency Energy Plan; and 
(6)  The anticipated sequence and duration of intentional interruptions of electric service to each outage area under the Emergency Energy Plan. 
(Code 1993, § 2-18.2; Ord. No. 99-O-22, 3-23-1999) 
Sec. 2-1200. - Review of Plan. 
(a)  Upon submittal of the Emergency Energy Plan to the village, the village shall review the Emergency Energy Plan in order to determine if the Emergency Energy Plan is complete and to assure appropriate coordination with public health and safety agencies. The village may reject the Emergency Energy Plan if it does not contain all the information required under section 2-1173(b), in which case the village shall notify the electric utility company in writing of said rejection therefor. The electric utility company shall thereafter submit a complete Emergency Energy Plan to the village no later than 30 days after such notice is sent by the village. 
(b)  The village and the electric utility shall work cooperatively to: 
(1)  Identify customers and facilities for which a controlled rotating interruption of electric service would require heightened response by village public health and safety agencies; 
(2)  Mitigate the potential impact of the plan on public health and safety; and 
(3)  Mitigate the potential impact of the plan on the duties of the village's public health and safety agencies. 
(Code 1993, § 2-18.3; Ord. No. 99-O-22, 3-23-1999) 
Sec. 2-1201. - Implementation of Emergency Energy Plan. 
(a)  Whenever an electric utility company determines that it may be necessary to implement a controlled rotating interruption of electrical service due to the demand for electricity exceeding, or being at significant risk of exceeding, the supply of electricity available to the electric utility company, the electric utility company shall do the following: 
(1)  Take appropriate action in preparation for implementing a controlled rotating interruption of electric service and notify the appropriate electric utility company personnel; and 
(2)  Notify the Village Manager that the electric utility company will be implementing its Emergency Energy Plan. The notification shall be made pursuant to a notification procedure approved by the Village Manager after consultation with the Village Manager. The Village Manager may waive the notice requirement to accommodate exigent circumstances. 
(b)  Subsequent to providing the notice as required above, an electric utility company shall reasonably and separately advise the designated village officials when it implements each of the steps of the Emergency Energy Plan. Such steps shall include the following: 
(1)  A request for emergency help from neighboring utilities; 
(2)  A declaration of a control area emergency; 
(3)  A public appeal for voluntary curtailment of electricity use. 
(c)  The electric utility company shall give a separate notice to the Village Manager, immediately upon the determination that there will be a controlled rotating interruption of electric service pursuant to the Emergency Energy Plan. The notification shall include the areas to be interrupted; the sequence and estimated duration of the service outage for each area; and the affected feeders and number of affected customers in each area. Whenever practical, the notification shall be made at least two hours prior to the time of the outages, and in no case shall the notification be made less than 30 minutes prior to the outages, if the company is aware that controlled rotating interruptions may be required. 
(d)  Notification required by this section shall be in addition to any notification requirements set forth in any applicable franchise agreement or franchise ordinance, or as may be required by applicable federal of state law or regulation. 
(Code 1993, § 2-18.4; Ord. No. 99-O-22, 3-23-1999) 
Sec. 2-1202. - Violations; enforcement. 
(a)  Any electric utility company that knowingly violates this chapter or any rules promulgated thereunder shall be subject to a fine of not less than $2,500.00 and not more than $10,000.00 for each offense. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. 
(b)  The village may apply to any court of competent jurisdiction for an injunction or order to compel the other party to comply with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1993, § 2-18.5; Ord. No. 99-O-22, 3-23-1999) 
Sec. 2-1203. - Construction. 
    Nothing in this section shall be construed to preclude or interfere with the implementation by an electric utility company of measures necessary to assure the provision of adequate, efficient, reliable and environmentally safe service, as required by the Illinois Public Utilities Act (220 ILCS 5/1-101 et seq.). Nothing set forth in this section shall be deemed to modify the terms of any existing franchise agreement or franchise ordinance otherwise applicable to any electric utility company, or to excuse any performance required such agreement or ordinance, or to limit any authority that may be exercised pursuant to such agreement or ordinance, or to limit any remedy that may be available under such agreement or ordinance. 
(Code 1993, § 2-18.6; Ord. No. 99-O-22, 3-23-1999) 
Secs. 2-1204-2-1224. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XLIII. - ETHICS 

Sec. 2-1225. - Purpose. 
    The purpose and intent of this article, and subsections thereof, is to comply with article 70, and the provisions of section 5-15 (ILCS , ch. 5, act 430, § 5-15) and article 10 (ILCS ch. 5, act 430, §§ 10-10-10-40), and section 5-65 (ILCS, ch. 5, act 430, § 5-65) of the State Officials and Employees Ethics Act (ILCS ch. 5, act 430, § 1-1 et seq.). 
(Code 1993, § 2-19.1; Ord. No. 99-O-51, 6-22-1999; Ord. No. 2004-O-49, 5-11-2004) 
Sec. 2-1226. - Incorporation of state officials and employees ethics act restrictions. 
(a)  The provisions of section 5-15 (ILCS ch. 5, act 430, § 5-15), article 10 (ILCS ch. 5, act 430, §§ 10-10-10-40), and section 5-65 (ILCS, Ch. 5, Act 430, § 5-65) of the State Officials and Employees Ethics Act (ILCS ch. 5, act 430, § 1-1 et seq.) (hereinafter referred to as the "Act" in this article) are hereby adopted by reference, and made applicable to the officers and employees of the village to the extent required by ILCS ch. 5, act 430, § 70-5. 
(b)  The solicitation or acceptance of gifts, which are prohibited to be solicited or accepted under the Act, by any officer or any employee of the village, is hereby prohibited. 
(c)  The offering or making of gifts, which are prohibited to be offered or made to an officer or employee of the village under the Act, is hereby prohibited. 
(d)  The participation in political activities prohibited under the Act, by any officer or employee of the village, is hereby prohibited. 
(e)  The commission of sexual harassment is hereby prohibited. 
(f)  For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning: 
    Employee means full-time, part-time or contractual employee of the village. 
    Officer means an elected or appointed official of the village, regardless of whether the official is compensated. 
(g)  The penalties for violations of this article shall be the same as those penalties set forth in ILCS ch. 5, act 430, § 50-5 for similar violations of the Act. 
(h)  This article does not repeal or otherwise amend or modify any existing ordinances or policies which regulate the conduct of village officers and employees. To the extent that any such existing ordinances or policies are less restrictive than this section, however, the provisions of this section shall prevail in accordance with the provisions of ILCS ch. 5, act 430, § 70-5(a). 
(Code 1993, § 2-19.2; Ord. No. 2004-O-49, 5-11-2004; Ord. No. 2017-O-95, 1-9-2018) 
Sec. 2-1227. - Ethics adviser. 
    The Corporation Counsel shall serve as the Ethics Adviser for village employees and officers. 
(Code 1993, § 2-19.3; Ord. No. 99-O-51, 6-22-1999; Ord. No. 2004-O-49, 5-11-2004) 
Sec. 2-1228. - Amendments to the State Officials and Employees Ethics Act; constitutionality; severability. 
(a)  Any amendment to the Act that becomes effective after the effective date of this article shall be incorporated into this article reference, and shall be applicable to the solicitation, acceptance, offering and making of gifts, and to prohibited political activities. However, any amendment that makes its provisions optional for adoption by municipalities shall not be incorporated into this section by reference, without formal action by the corporate authorities of the village. 
(b)  If the Illinois Supreme Court declares the Act unconstitutional in its entirety, then this section shall be repealed as of the date that the Illinois Supreme Court's decision becomes final, and not subject to any further appeals or rehearing. This article shall be deemed repealed without further action by the corporate authorities of the village, if the Act is found unconstitutional by the Illinois Supreme Court. 
(c)  If the Illinois Supreme Court declares part of the Act unconstitutional, but upholds the constitutionality of the remainder of the Act, or does not address the remainder of the Act, then the remainder of the Act, as adopted by this article, shall remain in full force and effect; however, that part of this article relating to the part of the Act found unconstitutional shall be deemed repealed, without further action by the corporate authorities of the village. 
(Code 1993, § 2-19.4; Ord. No. 99-O-51, 6-22-1999; Ord. No. 2004-O-04, 5-11-2004) 
Sec. 2-1229. - Attendance required. 
    Any person appointed to any public body pursuant to law or the provisions of this Code, including, but not limited to, any board or commission described in this article, or any special, ad hoc or other committee, commission, or board, as the case may be, must be physically present at the place of any public meeting of the public body in order to be considered present for the purposes of constituting a quorum, in order to vote, or in order to participate in the discussion of any matter of business at said meeting. 
(Code 1993, § 2-20; Ord. No. 96-O-112, 1-14-1997) 
Secs. 2-1230-2-1246. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XLIV. - FREEDOM OF INFORMATION 

Sec. 2-1247. - Freedom of Information Officers. 
(a)  The Deputy Village Clerk, Deputy Chief of Police, Deputy Chief of the Fire Department, and Assistant Director of Community Development shall be the Freedom of Information Officers as required in section 3.5 of the Freedom of Information Act on and after January 1, 2010 (ILCS ch. 5, act 140, § 3.5). In the temporary absence of any Freedom of Information Officer, the Village Manager may designate any employee of the village to act as an interim Freedom of Information Officer. 
(b)  Designees. The Clerk may designate an individual or individuals to receive requests under the Freedom of Information Act. Such designation is subject to the approval of the Village Manager. 
(Code 1993, § 2-21.1; Ord. No. 2010-O-13, 2-9-2010) 
Sec. 2-1248. - Duties of Freedom of Information Officers. 
(a)  The Freedom of Information officers shall receive requests submitted to the village under the Freedom of Information Act, ensure that the village responds to requests in a timely fashion, and issue responses under the Freedom of Information Act. The Freedom of Information officers shall develop a list of documents or categories of records that the village shall immediately disclose upon request and shall prepare other documents required to be prepared in compliance with the Freedom of Information Act. 
(b)  Upon receiving a request for a public record, the Freedom of Information officers shall: 
(1)  Note the date the village receives the written request; 
(2)  Compute the day on which the period for response will expire and make a notation of that date on the written request; 
(3)  Maintain an electronic or paper copy of a written request, including all documents submitted with the request until the request has been complied with or denied; 
(4)  Create a file for the retention of the original request, a copy of the response, a record of written communications with the requester, and a copy of other communications. 
(Code 1993, § 2-21.2; Ord. No. 2010-O-13, 2-9-2010) 
Sec. 2-1249. - Denials and exemptions. 
    In issuing responses, the Freedom of Information officers shall consult with the Corporation Counsel, Village Manager and other appropriate village employees to determine whether items are exempt from disclosure or whether exempt matter should be redacted as part of a response to a Freedom of Information request. In all instances where the Freedom of Information Act allows the public body to deny or redact information which is exempt from disclosure, the Freedom of Information Officers shall have the authority to make such determinations upon their consultation with the Corporation Counsel and Village Manager as set forth above. 
(Code 1993, § 2-21.3; Ord. No. 2010-O-13, 2-9-2010) 
Sec. 2-1250. - Training. 
    The Deputy Village Clerk, Deputy Chief of Police, Deputy Chief of the Fire Department, Assistant Director of Community Development and any other employees designated by the Village Manager shall comply with the training requirements set forth in the Freedom of Information Act. 
(Code 1993, § 2-21.4; Ord. No. 2010-O-13, 2-9-2010) 
Sec. 2-1251. - FOIA fees. 
    Except as otherwise provided by statute, the Freedom of Information Officers shall charge the following fees for copying documents: 
Number of Pages Amount of Charge First 50 pages No charge Letter/legal, black and white copies for each page after the first 50 pages $0.15 per page Certified copies $1.00 per document in addition to copy charges Large format, audio tapes, digital copies or color copies Actual cost to the village, excluding any personnel costs The Freedom of Information Officers may waive or reduce the above fees upon a finding by any of them that the request is in the public interest as set forth in section 6 of the Freedom of Information Act.  
(Code 1993, § 2-21.5; Ord. No. 2010-O-13, 2-9-2010) 
Secs. 2-1252-2-1275. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XLV. - EMPLOYEE TRAINING 

Sec. 2-1276. - Employees designated to receive training. 
(a)  The Village Manager, Deputy Clerk and any other employee designated by the Village Manager are hereby designated to receive the annual training required under the Open Meetings Act. 
(b)  Whenever new individuals not currently holding the above offices assume the above offices, those persons must successfully complete the electronic training curriculum within 30 days after assuming office. 
(Code 1993, § 2-22.1; Ord. No. 2012-O-14, 4-24-2012) 
Sec. 2-1277. - Members designated to receive training. 
(a)  Each elected or appointed member of a public body of the village subject to the Open Meetings Act who is such a member on January 1, 2012, must successfully complete the electronic training curriculum developed and administered by the Public Access Counselor. For these members, the training must be completed on or before December 31, 2012. 
(b)  Each elected or appointed member of a public body of the village subject to the Open Meetings Act who becomes such a member after January 1, 2012, shall successfully complete the electronic training curriculum developed and administered by the Public Access Counselor. For these members, the training must be completed on or before the 90th day after the date the member: 
(1)  Takes the oath of office, if the member is required to take an oath of office to assume the person's duties as a member of the public body; or 
(2)  Otherwise assumes responsibilities as a member of the public body, if the member is not required to take an oath of office to assume the person's duties as a member of the governmental body. 
(c)  Each member successfully completing the electronic training curriculum shall file a copy of the certificate of completion with the Village Clerk. Completing the required training as a member of the village satisfies the requirements of this section with regard to the member's service on a committee or subcommittee of the village and the member's ex officio service on any other public body. 
(Code 1993, § 2-22.2; Ord. No. 2012-O-14, 4-24-2012) 
Sec. 2-1278. - Validity of village actions. 
    The failure of one or more members of a public body to complete the training required by this section does not affect the validity of an action taken by the public body. 
(Code 1993, § 2-22.3; Ord. No. 2012-O-14, 4-24-2012) 
Sec. 2-1279. - Designated officers list. 
    On or before January 1, 2013 and, thereafter, within 15 days of an office-holder being designated to receive the training required under the Open Meetings Act or assuming such designated office, as the case may be, the Village Clerk shall submit a list of names of such designated officers to the Public Access Counselor. 
(Code 1993, § 2-22.4; Ord. No. 2012-O-14, 4-24-2012) 
Secs. 2-1280-2-1301. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XLVI. - ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION SYSTEM 

Sec. 2-1302. - Establishment of an Administrative Adjudication System. 
(a)  Pursuant to Division 2.1 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/1-2.1-1 et seq.), section 11-208.3 of the Illinois Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/11-208.3) and the village Home Rule authority, there is hereby created a system of administrative adjudication for charges of this Code as amended ("Code") violations of the village and for the administrative adjudication of standing, parking and vehicle compliance citations (collectively referred to as the "Administrative Adjudication System"). The system authorizes a hearing officer to conduct adjudicatory hearings of cases instituted by various village departments ("Hearings"). 
(b)  The village adopts Division 2.1 of the Illinois Municipal Code, (65 ILCS 5/1-2.1-1 et seq.), and section 11-208.3 of the Illinois Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/11-208.3) as it may be amended from time to time. In the event of a conflict between said statues and this chapter, this chapter shall prevail. 
(c)  The adoption of this chapter does not preclude the village from using other lawful methods to enforce the provisions of the Code. In the construction and interpretation of this chapter, the revocation of a license or permit shall not be considered as a recovery or penalty so as to bar any other penalty being enforced. 
(Code 1993, § 2-24.1; Ord. No. 2017-O-77, 12-12-2017) 
Sec. 2-1303. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the Administrative Adjudication System is to provide a method for the fair and efficient enforcement of violations of the Code and for those violations relating to the standing, parking and compliance of vehicles. 
(Code 1993, § 2-24.2; Ord. No. 2017-O-77, 12-12-2017) 
Sec. 2-1304. - Jurisdiction. 
(a)  Those matters subject to the Administrative Adjudication System provided for by this article are those charges of a violation of any ordinance or regulation of the village (violation), which shall include, but not limited to: 
(1)  All provisions of the Code. 
(2)  The following model codes and regulations as adopted by the village, or any like model code adopted by the village at a future time: 
a.  International Property Maintenance Code; 
b.  International Building Code; 
c.  International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings; 
d.  The Fire Prevention of Wilmette, which includes the International Fire Code and National Fire Protection Association Codes; 
e.  International Mechanical Code; 
f.  International Energy Conservation Code; 
g.  National Electrical Code; 
h.  Illinois Plumbing Code; 
i.  Elevator and Escalator Codes; 
j.  Illinois Accessibility Code. 
(3)  The Illinois Vehicle Code, except any offense that is a traffic regulation governing the movement of vehicles or any reportable offense under section 6-204 of the Illinois Vehicle Code. 
(4)  Jurisdiction. An ordinance regulating the use of the parks and property owned or controlled by the Wilmette park district, as amended. 
(b)  The Administrative Adjudication System does not have jurisdiction over cases where the relief sought is a penalty of incarceration or a total fine in excess of $50,000.00, excluding allowable costs. The $50,000.00 limitation shall not apply to those cases brought to enforce the collection of any tax imposed and collected by the village. 
(c)  Each day that any violation of any provision of this Code or any ordinance shall continue, shall constitute a separate offense and be subject to a daily fine. 
(Code 1993, § 2-24.3; Ord. No. 2017-O-77, 12-12-2017) 
Sec. 2-1305. - Penalties and costs. 
(a)  General penalty. All defendants subsequently found liable of a violation shall be subject to the following penalties, or combination thereof: 
(1)  Fines; 
(2)  Restitution; 
(3)  Deferred prosecution (including, but not limited to, a period of community service, and mandatory attendance at remedial counseling, treatment, or education); and 
(4)  Corrective action. 
(b)  Fines. When a specific fine amount is provided for in Table 1 of this section that conflicts with fine amounts imposed either by the general penalty provisions of this Code or a specific fine amount provided in other portions of this Code, the fine amounts in Table 1 of this section shall apply. If there is no fine amount provided for in Table 1 of this section for a Violation, then the specific fine amount in the other provisions of this Code shall apply, or if no specific fine amount in this Code is provided for then the fine amounts of the general penalty shall apply. 
(c)  Late penalty. 
(1)  Wherever in this article a fine that is imposed is not paid in the timeframe required by this article or by the deadline imposed by a hearing officer after a hearing or settlement, there shall be a late penalty which shall be in addition to the original fine amount as follows: 
a.  For a violation where the minimum fine is less than $50.00, the minimum fine shall be increased by $50.00. 
b.  For a violation where the minimum fine is $50.00 or greater, but less than $100.00, the minimum fine shall be increased by $100.00. 
c.  For a violation where the minimum fine is $100.00 or greater, the minimum fine shall be increased by $200.00. 
(2)  In the event that the fine, costs and late penalty amounts, as applicable, are not made within 30 days after the time required to make sure payment, the village's collection of said fines, costs and late penalty shall be deemed a debt due and owing to the village and may be referred to a private collection agency under contract with the village. The collection agency's fees shall be added to the unpaid amounts and shall be collected by the collection agency. 
(d)  Costs. All defendants subsequently found liable, or otherwise avail themselves of deferred prosecution, shall pay a $50.00 administrative adjudication cost, in addition to any penalty imposed. Costs for deferred prosecution may be reduced in the manner provided for in this chapter. 
(e)  Prepayment of fines and required appearance. 
(1)  The following defendants must appear before the hearing officer and may not pay the fine amount prior to such appearance: 
a.  Any defendant under the age of 21 charged with a violation must appear before the hearing officer in person. Any defendant under the age of 18 years charged with a violation must appear before the hearing officer in person and with a parent or legal guardian; 
b.  Any defendant charged with a violation where "Appearance Required" in Table 1 of this section is marked "Yes"; 
c.  Any defendant that has not settled, compromised and paid the fine amount listed in the "Settlement Amount Paid Prior to Hearing" in Table 1 of this section at least 24 hours prior to the hearing date provided on the violation notice; 
d.  Any defendant charged with a violation where a fine is not provided for in Table 1 of this section; and 
e.  Any authorized village employee may require appearance of a defendant by marking such requirement upon the violation notice. 
(2)  Except for those defendants not authorized from doing so pursuant to this section and those non-residents charged with parking, standing and equipment violations, any violation listed in the "Settlement Amount Paid Prior to Hearing" in Table 1 of this section may be settled by a defendant, upon the submission of payment of the listed minimum fine paid 24 hours prior to the assigned hearing date on the violation notice. Such pre-payment settlement shall not be subject to costs. 
(3)  Table of offenses and fines: 
TABLE 1 - Section 2-1305 Code section Offense Settlement Amount Paid Prior to Hearing Date Minimum Fine on Hearing Date Maximum Fine on Hearing Date Appearance Required Chapter 4 Animals 4-3 Regulations of General Applicability (a) Attract Abandoned, Stray, or Wild Animal, Venomous Insect, Rodent, or Other Vermin $50.00 $750.00 Yes (b) Placement of Food Outside $50.00 $750.00 Yes (c) Notification of Stray $25.00 $750.00 (d) Render Aid $25.00 $750.00 (e) Placement and Burial of Animals $50.00 $750.00 (f) Duty to Report Bite $50.00 $750.00 Yes 4-25 Maximum Number of Animals $50.00 $750.00 Yes 4-26 Prohibited Animals $150.00 first offense; $300.00 second offense; $750.00 any offense thereafter $750.00 Yes 4-28 Feral Cats $75.00 first offense; $150.00 second offense; $300.00 third offense $750.00 Yes 4-60 Animal Neglect $75.00 $75.00 for second and subsequent offenses $750.00 Yes, for second and subsequent offenses 4-61 Cruelty to Animals $75.00 for first offense, $150.00 for second offense, and $300.00 for any subsequent offense after the second offense $750.00 Yes 4-63 Promotion of Animal Fights $500.00 $750.00 Yes Article IV of Chapter 4 Control of Rabies $50.00 $750.00 4-86 Duties of Animal Owners $50.00 $750.00 Article V of Chapter 4 Licensing of Dogs and Cats $75.00 (first offense); $150.00 (second and any subsequent offense) $750.00 Yes Article VI of Chapter 4 Nuisances $75.00 (first offense); $100.00 (second and any subsequent offense) $750.00 Chapter 8 Housing and Building Regulations Article IV-Article X of Chapter 8 Housing and Building Regulations $50.00 $750.00 Yes 8-106-8-110 Building Permits $250.00 $750.00 Yes Article V of Chapter 8 Regulation of Land-Disturbing Activities $250.00 $750.00 Yes Article IX of Chapter 8 Tree Removal Permits $250.00 $1,500.00 Yes 8-410 and 8-411 Site Development and Maintenance Requirements $75.00 for first offense, $250.00 for each subsequent offense $1,500.00 Yes Article XII of Chapter 8 Tree Protection During Construction $150.00 $750.00 Yes Article XIV of Chapter 8 Plumbing Code $200.00 $750.00 Yes Article XIX of Chapter 8 Fences in Disrepair $100.00 $750.00 Yes Article XXVI of Chapter 8 Real Estate Transfer Tax $200.00 $750.00 Yes Chapter 10 Liquor Control 10-3 License Required $100.00 $1,000.00 Yes 10-19(b) False ID $100.00 first offense, $250.00 second or subsequent offense $250.00 first offense, $750.00 second or subsequent offense Yes 10-23 Sales to Minors, Known Substance Abusers, Habitual Drunkards and Mental Incompetents $50.00 $750.00 Yes 10-53 Possession of Alcohol by Underage Persons $100.00 first offense, $750.00 second offense $750.00 Yes 10-55 Parental Responsibility $100.00 first offense, $750.00 second offense $750.00 Yes 10-56 Owner or Occupant Responsibility $100.00 first offense, $750.00 second offense $750.00 Yes 10-64(g) Kegs $100.00 $1,000.00 Chapter 12 Miscellaneous Offenses 12-1 Assault $50.00 $750.00 Yes 12-2 Battery $50.00 $750.00 YesArticle II of Chapter 12 Curfew $50.00 $750.00 Yes Article III of Chapter 12 Disorderly Conduct $50.00 $750.00 Article IV of Chapter 12 Gambling Places $50.00 $750.00 Yes 12-141 Impersonating an Officer or Employee $50.00 $750.00 Yes 12-142 Indecent Conduct or Exposure $50.00 $750.00 Yes 12-143 Interfering with Village Officers $50.00 $750.00 Yes 12-144 Mechanical Amusement Devices $50.00 $750.00 Yes 12-145 Obscene Literature $50.00 $750.00 Yes Article VII of Chapter 12 Picketing $50.00 $750.00 Article VIII of Chapter 12 Prostitution $50.00 $750.00 Article IX of Chapter 12 Public Property Damage $50.00 $750.00 Yes 12-230-12-233 Public Facilities $50.00 $750.00 12-234 Trespass $50.00 $750.00 Yes Article IX of Chapter 12 Weapons $50.00 $750.00 12-291 Park District Code $25.00 $750.00 Article XII of Chapter 12 Vandalism $50.00 $750.00 Yes 12-351-12-352 Possession of Marijuana $200.00 $750.00 12-378a Drug Paraphernalia (sales) $250.00 $1,000.00 12-378b Drug Paraphernalia (possession) $50.00 $750.00 Article XIII of Chapter 12 Marijuana and Drug Paraphernalia $50.00 $750.00 Yes Article XV of Chapter 12 Fireworks $50.00 $750.00 Article XVI of Chapter 12 Theft $150.00 $750.00 Yes Article XVII of Chapter 12 Theft of Mislaid Property $150.00 $750.00 Yes Article XVIII of Chapter 12 Theft of Service $150.00 $750.00 Yes 12-516(a)-(e) Smoking Regulations $100.00 $750.00 12-516(f)-(h) Smoking Regulations $250.00 first violations, $500.00 second violations (within one year after the first violations), $2,500.00 subsequent violations (within one year after the first violation) $750.00 first violations, $750.00 second violations (within one year after the first violations), $3,000.00 subsequent violations (within one year after the first violation) Yes 12-523 Owner/Occupant Responsibility $50.00 $750.00 Yes Article XX of Chapter 12 Air Rifles $50.00 first offense, $100.00 each subsequent offense $500.00 Article XXI of Chapter 12 Air Pollution 12-579 Air Pollution; Nuisance $50.00 $750.00 Yes 12-580 Open Burning $50.00 $750.00 Chapter 14 Motor Vehicles and Traffic 14-2 Illinois Vehicle Code - General $50.00 $250.00 Article II of Chapter 14 Vehicle License Required $100.00 $250.00 Yes 14-164 Unattended Motor Vehicles $50.00 $250.00 14-176 Clinging to Motor Vehicle $50.00 $250.00 14-177 Loud or Unnecessary Noise $50.00 $250.00 Yes 14-178 Vehicles Imitating Public Vehicles $50.00 $250.00 Yes 14-179 Vehicles Emitting Gas or Smoke $50.00 $250.00 Yes 14-180 Obstructing Fire Station Driveway $100.00 $250.00 14-203 Pedestrian Walk-or-Wait Signals $25.00 $250.00 14-205 Display of Unauthorized Signs, Signals or Markings $50.00 $250.00 14-206 Interference with Office Traffic-Control Devices or Railroad Signs $50.00 $250.00 14-235 To Use Right Half of Crosswalk $25.00 $250.00 14-236 Crossing at Other than Crosswalks $25.00 $250.00 14-238 Walking Along or Standing on Roadways $25.00 $250.00 14-239 Hitchhiking $50.00 $250.00 14-264 False Reports $100.00 $250.00 14-265 Failure to Report $100.00 $250.00 Article X of Chapter 14 Parking Violations (unless fine amount specifically provided below) $40.00 $250.00 14-296 Parking Left Wheel to Curb $40.00 $200.00 14-296(1) Parking Angle/Failure to Heed $40.00 $200.00 14-297 Parking- 
Prohibited $40.00 $200.00 14-298 Parking in Alleys $40.00 $200.00 14-299 All-Night Parking $40.00 $200.00 14-300 Parking for Purpose of Sale, Etc. $40.00 $200.00 14-301 Parking Adjacent to Schools $100.00 $250.00 14-303 Standing or Parking on One-Way Street $100.00 $250.00 14-304 Standing or Parking on One-Way Roadways $100.00 $250.00 Article XI of Chapter 14 Parking Violations (unless fine amount specifically provided below) $40.00 $250.00 14-327 Street Parking Prohibited-Snow Ban $30.00 $250.00 14-328 Street Parking Prohibited- 
Winter Precipitation $30.00 $250.00 Article XII of Chapter 14 Parking Violations (unless fine amount specifically provided below) $40.00 $250.00 14-361 Standing in Curb Loading Zone $40.00 $250.00 14-364 Restricted Use of Bus and Public Carrier Stand $100.00 $250.00 14-365 Parking of Trucks, Tractors, Buses, Etc. $40.00 $250.00 14-366 Parking on Private Property $40.00 $250.00 14-368 Inoperable Motor Vehicles $100.00 $250.00 14-370 Parking-No Parking Anytime $40.00 $250.00 14-371 Parking- 
Prohibited During Certain Hours $40.00 $250.00 14-372 Parking-Posted Time Limit $40.00 $250.00 Article XIII of Chapter 14 Parking Violations (unless fine amount specifically provided below) $40.00 $250.00 14-404 Parking-Village Center $40.00 $250.00 14-405 Stopping, Standing and Parking Prohibited During Certain Hours $40.00 $250.00 14-406 Parking- 
Prohibited 7:00 a.m.-6:00 p.m. Except Sunday $40.00 $250.00 Article XIV of Chapter 14 Parking Violations (unless fine amount specifically provided below) $40.00 $250.00 14-429 Use of Slugs $40.00 $250.00 14-430 Tampering with Meters $40.00 $250.00 14-431 Maximum Parking Time $40.00 $250.00 14-432 Overtime Parking $40.00 $250.00 14-434 Parking Meters- 
Prohibited Acts Generally $40.00 $250.00 14-456 Residential Permit Violation $40.00 $250.00 14-458 Parking-No Valid Permit in Village Lots/Streets $40.00 $250.00 14-459 Covering Parked Vehicles Prohibited $100.00 $250.00 14-460 Parking Violations (unless fine amount specifically provided below) $40.00 $250.00 14-490 Bicycle License Required $100.00 $250.00 14-495 Removing, Destroying, Mutilating Frame Numbers or License Decals $100.00 $250.00 14-497 Requirements of Rental Agencies $100.00 $250.00 14-498 Bicycle Riding Restrictions $100.00 $250.00 14-520 Skateboard and Roller Skates Prohibited Certain Areas $20.00 $200.00 14-551 Vehicle Equipment Violations $50.00 $250.00 14-552 When Lighted Lamps are Required $50.00 $250.00 14-554 Lamps on Other Vehicles and Equipment $50.00 $250.00 14-558 Special Restrictions on Lamps $50.00 $250.00 14-559 Special Lighting Equipment on School Buses $40.00 $250.00 14-560 Brakes $50.00 $250.00 14-561 Horns and Warning Devices $40.00 $250.00 14-562 Mufflers, Prevention of Noise $40.00 $250.00 14-563 Tires $40.00 $250.00 14-591 Obedience to Traffic Regulations $40.00 $250.00 Article XXII of Chapter 14 Public Demonstration Permits $50.00 $750.00 Yes Chapter 16 Nuisances Chapter 16 Nuisances $50.00, $100.00 for a second offense; $300.00 for a third and subsequent offense $750.00 Yes 16-56 Removal of dead, dying or diseased trees or limbs $100.00 $750.00 Yes Article V of Chapter 16 Noise $75.00, $150.00 for each subsequent offense $750.00 Yes Chapter 20 Public Ways 20-91 Obstructing Streets $50.00 $750.00 20-92 Dumping Snow on Streets $50.00 $750.00 Article VII of Chapter 20 Trees and Shrubs on Public Property $50.00 $7,500.00 Yes Chapter 22 Refuse, Recycling and Yard Waste Article II of Chapter 22 Refuse Storage Containers $50.00 $750.00 Chapter 24 Regulation of Commercial and Quasi-Commercial Activities 24-3 General Business License $100.00 $750.00 Yes 24-4 24-Hour License $100.00 $750.00 Yes 24-5 Food Handler License $100.00 $750.00 Yes 24-6 Gasoline Service Station License $100.00 $750.00 Yes 24-7 Firearms Dealers Prohibited $100.00 Yes Article II of Chapter 24 Outdoor Restaurant Seating and Cooking License $100.00 $750.00 Yes Article III of Chapter 24 Massage Establishments $100.00 $750.00 Yes 24-100(a) Unlawful Sale or Delivery $50.00 $750.00 Yes 24-133 Newsrack Permit $100.00 $750.00 Yes Article VI of Chapter 24 Regulation of Certain Business Activities $100.00 $750.00 Yes 24-194 Operating without a License or Permit $100.00 $750.00 Yes 24-196 Penalty for Furnishing False Fee Information $5,000.00 $5,000.00 Yes Article VIII of Chapter 24 Police Alarm Systems $100.00 $750.00 24-236-24-238 Fire Alarm Systems $100.00 $750.00 Article IX of Chapter 24 Regulation of Film Production $150.00 $1,000.00 Article X of Chapter 24 Valet Parking Services $100.00 $750.00 Article XII of chapter 24 Towing and Relocating of Vehicles $200.00 $2,000.00 Yes Article XIII of chapter 24 Booting and Immobilization of Vehicles $200.00 $2,000.00 Yes Article XIV of Chapter 24 Group Homes $200.00, $750.00 for each subsequent offense $750.00, $1,500.00 for each subsequent offense Yes Chapter 26 Sewer and Water Facilities Article VI of Chapter 26 Water Meters $500.00 $750.00 Yes Article IX of Chapter 26 Sewer Use $50.00 $750.00 Yes Article XI of Chapter 26 Lawn Sprinkling $50.00 $200.00 Yes Chapter 28 Telecommunications Chapter 28 Telecommuni- 
cations $100.00 $750.00  
(Code 1993, § 2-24.4; Ord. No. 2017-O-77, 12-12-2017; Ord. No. 2018-O-19, § 4, 4-24-2018; Ord. No. 2018-O-26, § 3, 5-22-2018) 
Sec. 2-1306. - Administrative adjudication composition. 
    The Administrative Adjudication System shall provide for one or more hearing officers, a Code Hearing Unit, a Traffic Compliance Administrator and a Village Prosecutor all with the power, authority, and limitations as set forth in this article. 
(1)  Hearing officer. 
a.  Appointment. The Village Manager shall appoint one or more qualified hearing officers ("hearing officer") to perform the functions set forth in this section. 
b.  Independent contractor. A hearing officer shall be contracted as an independent contractor of the village and shall not be considered an employee of the village. A hearing officer may be removed, with or without cause, by the Village Manager. 
c.  Qualifications. To qualify as a hearing officer, an individual must: 
1.  Be an attorney licensed to practice law in the State for at least three years; 
2.  Be in good standing with the Illinois Supreme Court Attorney Registration and Disciplinary Commission; 
3.  Complete a formal training program approved by the Village Manager consisting of: 
(i)  Instruction on the rules of procedure for administrative hearings; 
(ii)  Orientation to each subject area of this Code that will be adjudicated; 
(iii)  Observation of hearings conducted by Illinois municipalities that have adopted the administrative hearing system; and 
(iv)  Participation in hypothetical hearings, including ruling on evidence and issuance of final orders. 
d.  Compensation. Authorization for compensation for a hearing officer shall be made by the President and Board of Trustees through the village's annual budget process. Compensation shall be determined by the Village Manager within approved budget limitations. 
e.  Authority and powers. A hearing officer shall have all powers necessary to conduct fair and impartial hearings, including, but not limited to, the power to: 
1.  Hold conferences for the settlement or simplification of the issues; 
2.  Administer oaths and affirmations; 
3.  Hear testimony and accept evidence that is relevant to the allegation of a violation; 
4.  Issue subpoenas directing witnesses to appear and give relevant testimony at the hearing, upon the request of the parties or their representatives; 
5.  Preserve and authenticate the record of the hearing, including all exhibits and evidence introduced at the hearing; 
6.  Issue a determination, based on the evidence presented at the hearing, on whether a violation occurred or exists. The hearing officer's determination shall be in writing and shall include a written finding of fact, decision, and order, including the fine, penalty, or other action with which the defendant must comply; 
7.  Impose monetary fines consistent with this article and applicable Code provisions, however, that in no event shall a hearing officer have the authority to: 
(i)  Impose a penalty of incarceration; or 
(ii)  Impose a fine in excess of $50,000.00; 
8.  Order a defendant to obtain a compliance bond; 
9.  Require a defendant to take corrective action to cure a violation; 
10.  Assess costs as provided for in this article, when the defendant has been found liable, or availed themselves of a deferred prosecution as part of a settlement; 
11.  Impose a term of community service in addition to or in lieu of any applicable fine; and 
12.  Impose, if applicable, a late penalty pursuant to article. 
(2)  Code hearing unit. 
a.  Appointment. The Village Manager shall establish a Code Hearing Unit ("Code Hearing Unit") and appoint the necessary personnel to perform the functions set forth in this article. 
b.  Authority. The Code Hearing Unit is authorized, empowered, and directed to: 
1.  Recommend rules and regulations reasonably required to manage the Administrative Adjudication System; 
2.  Adopt, distribute, and process all notices as may be required under this article, or as may reasonably be required to carry out the purpose of this article; 
3.  Collect payments made as a result of fines, costs, and/or penalties assessed after a final determination of liability; 
4.  Certify copies of final determinations of violations adjudicated pursuant to this article, and any factual reports verifying the final determination of any liability that was issued in accordance with this article or the laws of the State, as from time to time amended; and 
5.  Keep accurate records of appearances and non-appearances at hearings, pleas entered, fines, costs, and penalties assessed and paid. 
(3)  Traffic Compliance Administrator. The Village Manager shall appoint one or more Village Traffic Compliance Administrators ("Village Traffic Compliance Administrator") who are authorized to: 
a.  Operate and manage the system of administrative adjudication of vehicular standing, parking and compliance violations; 
b.  Adopt, distribute and process standing, parking and compliance violation notices, collect money paid as fines and penalties for violations of standing, parking and compliance ordinances; 
c.  Establish procedures necessary for the prompt, fair and efficient operation of the traffic Administrative Adjudication System; 
d.  Certify copies of the final determinations of violations liability and factual reports, verifying that the final determination of violating liability was issued in accordance with this article and 625 ILCS 5/11-208.3; 
e.  Certify reports to the Secretary of State concerning initiation of suspension of driver's licenses in accordance with the provisions of this article and 625 ILCS 5/6-306.5; and 
f.  Promulgate rules and regulations pertaining to the hearing process, the content of forms and procedures, and the daily operation of the administrative adjudication of standing, parking and compliance violations program. 
(4)  Village Prosecutor. 
a.  The Corporation Counsel, or any assistant corporation counsel, or any other attorney duly appointed by the Village Manager shall act as the Village Prosecutor ("Village Prosecutor") and may represent the village at hearings and in all matters related to Administrative Adjudication System. 
b.  The Village Prosecutor shall be authorized to prepare and prosecute all violations before the hearing officer. 
c.  The Village Prosecutor, in the Village Prosecutor's discretion may: 
1.  Enter into settlement agreements on behalf of the village in matters before the hearing officer, including the discretion to reduce court costs by half for those defendants participating in deferred prosecution; 
2.  Dismiss violations and any other matter before the hearing officer; 
3.  Seek all available legal remedies; 
4.  Enforce judgments; and 
5.  Perform any other function reasonably related to the Administrative Adjudication System. 
(Code 1993, § 2-24.5; Ord. No. 2017-O-77, 12-12-2017) 
Sec. 2-1307. - Hearings. 
    All hearings shall be conducted by a hearing officer and shall be in accordance with the following rules and procedures: 
(1)  A record of the hearing shall be made by audio tape recording or other appropriate means. 
(2)  Parties may be represented by counsel, present witnesses, and cross-examine opposing witnesses. 
(3)  The hearing officer may grant continuances only upon a finding of good cause or upon the agreement of the village and the defendant. 
(4)  All testimony shall be given under oath or affirmation. 
(5)  Parties may request the hearing officer to issue, and the hearing officer shall have the authority to issue in the hearing officer's discretion, subpoenas to direct the attendance and testimony of relevant witnesses and produce relevant documents. 
(6)  The formal and technical rules of evidence shall not apply. Evidence, including hearsay, may be admitted only if it is of a type commonly relied upon by reasonably prudent persons in the conduct of their affairs. 
(7)  The burden shall be upon the village to prove by a preponderance of the evidence that the alleged violation occurred. 
(8)  Each hearing shall culminate in a determination of liability or non-liability by the hearing officer or a determination of liability based upon the failure of the defendant to appear at the hearing. 
(9)  Representation at hearings. 
a.  Village representation. The case for the village may be presented by the Village Prosecutor or a village employee, other than any employee assigned to the Code Hearing Unit or the Traffic Compliance Administrator. 
b.  Defendant representation. The case for the defendant may be presented by the defendant. A defendant may be represented by an attorney at the defendant's expense. An attorney appearing at a hearing on behalf of a defendant shall present the hearing officer with a signed appearance form stating, on oath or affirmation, that he has been authorized by the defendant to represent the defendant at the hearing. 
(10)  Hearing shall be held at least once a calendar month at a date, time and location as determined by the Village Manager. 
(Code 1993, § 2-24.6; Ord. No. 2017-O-77, 12-12-2017) 
Sec. 2-1308. - Procedure for violations. 
    The following procedures shall apply to the issuance of a violation notice and the adjudication of Violations in the Administrative Adjudication System. A violation notice shall be the formal charging document alleging a violation of this Code (violation notice) against a person or entity (defendant). 
(1)  All violations, except those violations for parking, standing and vehicle compliance violation notices, to be adjudicated against the party alleged to have violated one or more code provisions by issuing and serving upon the alleged violator, owner, operator or any other interested party a violation notice shall be conducted in accordance with the following procedures: 
a.  A violation notice shall be issued by an authorized village employee. 
b.  A violation notice issued pursuant to this article shall contain the following information: 
1.  The name; village position; and identification number, if applicable, of the authorized village employee issuing the violation notice; 
2.  The name and address of the person or entity being charged with one or more violations; 
3.  The name and address of the person to whom the violation notice is given if that person is not the individual being charged; 
4.  The section of this Code alleged to have been violated; 
5.  The date, time, and place of the alleged violations; 
6.  A legally sufficient description of the activity or conduct alleged to constitute a violation of each Code section set forth in the violation notice or a legally sufficient description of the facts giving rise to the allegations set forth in the violation notice; 
7.  The authorized village employee issuing the violation notice shall certify the correctness of the information by signing his name (electronic or otherwise) to the violation notice to be issued; which shall establish a prima facie case. In the case of a violation notice produced by a computerized device, the authorized village employee may establish a prima facie case by signing a single certificate to be kept by the Traffic Compliance Administrator attesting to the correctness of all notices produced by the device while it was under his control; and 
8.  A violation notice issued pursuant to this subsection shall set forth the date, time and place of the adjudicatory hearing to be held with respect to the violations alleged in the violation notice and the legal authority and jurisdiction under which the hearing will be held. 
c.  The original or a legible copy of the violation notice shall be filed with this Code Hearing Unit as soon as practicable. Upon receiving the original or legible copy of the violation notice, this Code Hearing Unit shall set the hearing date and provide the defendant notice of the date, time, and place of the hearing in the manner set forth in this article, unless the violation notice sets forth the date, time, and location of the hearing and was served personally on the defendant. A hearing date shall not be held within less than 14 days of the date of the alleged violation. 
d.  If at the time set for hearing, the defendant, or an attorney representing the defendant, fails to appear, the hearing officer may enter a default judgment of liability against the defendant and impose fines and assess costs. A copy of the order of default shall be served in any manner permitted by this article and applicable to the violation. A copy of the default judgment, which constitutes a final determination for the purposes of judicial review and is subject to review under the Illinois Administrative Review Law, shall apprise the defendant of the procedure for setting aside the default judgment and shall also apprise the defendant of the availability of an appeal of the default judgment to the Circuit Court of Cook County. 
e.  A defendant against whom a default judgment has been entered may file a motion with the Code Enforcement Unit to set aside the default judgment and request a new hearing. A motion to set aside a default judgment may be filed at any time if the defendant alleges lack of subject matter or personal jurisdiction; in all other cases, the motion must be filed within 21 days of entry of the default judgment excepting Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays. A motion to set aside a default judgment shall set forth the reasons the defendant failed to appear on the original hearing date. A hearing officer shall hear and rule on the motion. If the hearing officer grants the motion, a hearing will be held immediately on the alleged violation set forth in violation notice unless the defendant requests another hearing date and presents good cause for continuing the hearing. 
f.  If any default judgment is set aside pursuant to this article, the hearing officer shall have authority to enter an order extinguishing any lien which has been recorded for any debt due and owing the village as a result of the vacated default judgment. 
(2)  All parking, standing and equipment violations shall be commenced against the defendant alleged to have violated one or more Code provisions by issuing and serving upon that party a violation notice and shall be conducted in accordance with the following procedures: 
a.  The violation notice shall be issued by an authorized village employee and served as provided for in this article. 
b.  Any violation notice issued pursuant to this article shall contain the following information: 
1.  The date, time and location of the violation; 
2.  The particular vehicular standing, parking or compliance regulation alleged to have been violated; 
3.  Vehicle make and state registration number; 
4.  The fine and any penalty which may be assessed for late payment; 
5.  The signature and identification number of the authorized village employee (which may be made by signing a certificate kept by the Administrator attesting to the correctness of all notices produced by a computerized device while under his control) issuing the violation notice; 
6.  A section entitled, "request for hearing," which shall explain how a hearing may be requested and shall state that a hearing shall be held within not less than 14 days in accordance with this article; and 
7.  A statement that payment of the indicated fine and any late penalty shall operate as a final disposition of the violation. 
c.  Service of the violation notice shall be made by the person issuing such notice by: 
1.  Affixing the original or a facsimile of the violation notice to an unlawfully standing or parked vehicle; or 
2.  Handing the notice to the registered owner, operator or lessee of the vehicle, if present. 
d.  The original or a facsimile of the violation notice shall be retained by the Traffic Compliance Administrator and kept as a record in the ordinary course of business. 
e.  Any violation notice issued, signed and served in accordance herewith, or a copy of the violation notice, or any recorded image, shall be prima facie correct and shall be prima facie evidence of the correctness of the facts shown on the notice. 
f.  Violation notice or a copy or any recorded image shall be admissible in any subsequent administrative or legal proceeding. 
g.  Upon the failure of the defendant to pay the fine, to request a hearing or to contest the matter by mail, an additional notice shall be sent, and shall contain, but not be limited to, the following information: 
1.  The date and location of violation cited in the vehicular standing, parking, or compliance in the violation notice; 
2.  The particular standing, parking, or compliance regulation alleged to have been violated; 
3.  The vehicle make and state registration; 
4.  The fine and any penalty that may be assessed for late payment; 
5.  The date, time and place of the hearing at which the alleged violation may be contested on its merits; 
6.  A statement that failure to either pay the fine and any applicable penalty or failure to appear at the hearing on its merits on the date and at the time and place specified will result in a final determination of vehicle standing, parking, or compliance regulation for the cited vehicle violation in the amount of the fine and penalty indicated; and 
7.  A statement that upon the occurrence of a final determination of vehicular standing, parking, or compliance violation liability for the failure, and the exhaustion of, or the failure to exhaust, available administrative or judicial procedures for review, any unpaid fine or penalty will constitute a debt due and owing the village. 
h.  Any additional notices shall be served by first-class mail, postage prepaid, to the address of the registered owner of the vehicle as recorded with the Secretary of State (or applicable state), and, if any notice to that address is returned as undeliverable, to the last known address recorded in a United States Post Office approved database, or if to the lessee of the cited vehicle at the time of the lease and, if any notice to that address is returned as undeliverable, to the last known address recorded in a United States Post Office database. Service of such notice shall be deemed complete as of the date of deposit in the United States mail. 
i.  A notice of final determination of vehicular standing, parking, or compliance violation liability shall be sent following an appearance by the defendant and a determination of liability or the failure to appear by the defendant at a hearing and upon conclusion of any administrative and/or judicial review procedures, as is hereinafter set forth, and the notice shall contain, but not be limited to, the following information and warnings: 
1.  A statement that the unpaid fine and any penalty assessed is a debt due and owing the village; 
2.  A warning that failure to pay the fine and any penalty due and owing the village or failure to complete any required traffic education program within the time specified may result in the village's filing a complaint in the Circuit Court to have the unpaid fine or penalty rendered a judgment in accordance with 625 ILCS 5/11-208.3(f), incorporated herein by reference; and 
3.  A warning that the failure to pay the fine and penalty or complete any required traffic education program may result in the suspension of the person's driver's license for failure to pay fines or penalties for ten or more vehicular standing or parking violations under 625 ILCS 5/6-306.5. 
j.  A defendant owing an unpaid fine or penalty for a vehicular standing, parking or compliance violation may file a motion to set aside such default judgment within 21 days after service by the village of such an order. Such a petition shall be filed by sending it, together with any documentation in support thereof, to the Traffic Compliance Administrator, by certified mail, return receipt requested, or by personal delivery to the Traffic Compliance Administrator. The grounds for such motion shall be limited to: 
1.  The person not having been the owner or lessee of the cited vehicle on the date the violation notice was issued; 
2.  The person having already paid the fine or penalty for the violation in question; or 
3.  Excusable failure to appear at or request a new date for a hearing. 
k.  Nonresidents of the village who have been served vehicular standing, parking, or compliance regulation violation notice, in accordance with this article, may contest the violation on its merits, as could a resident, or may contest the validity without personally appearing at a hearing by filing a notarized statement of facts specifying the grounds for challenging the violation notice which must be filed with the Traffic Compliance Administrator within 30 days of the date on the violation notice. The statement shall set forth any facts relevant to establishing a defense to the alleged violation. The request shall be deemed filed upon receipt by the Traffic Compliance Administrator. The acceptance of a "nonresident request for hearing" after the due date or with cause, is at the discretion of the Traffic Compliance Administrator, and may be accepted for hearing consideration and decision. The hearing officer shall make an adjudication based upon the facts set forth in the notarized statement of facts filed by the nonresident as is contained in the violation notice. Notice of the determination of the hearing officer shall be served upon the nonresident by first class mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the nonresident at the address set forth in the statement of facts submitted. Service of the notice shall be complete on the date the notice is placed in the United States mail. All other provisions of this section shall apply equally to nonresidents of this village. 
(Code 1993, § 2-24.7; Ord. No. 2017-O-77, 12-12-2017; Ord. No. 2018-O-26, § 4, 5-22-2018) 
Sec. 2-1309. - Violation notice and village employees authorized to issue violation notices. 
(a)  The following village employees (collectively referred to as authorized village employees) shall have the authority to issue a violation notice: 
(1)  All full-time and part-time sworn police officers, community service officers, parking control officers, parking control assistants; 
(2)  Fire Chief, Deputy Fire Chief, Battalion Chiefs, Fire Inspector; 
(3)  All full-time and part-time code enforcement officers, zoning enforcement officers, building inspectors, Village Inspectors, Zoning Administrator; 
(4)  Finance Director, Director of Administrative Services, the Assistant Director of Finance; 
(5)  Water Department Meter Shop Supervisor, Water Meter Repair Technician; 
(6)  Director of Engineering and Public Works, Village Engineer, Assistant Village Engineer, Deputy Engineering and Public Works Director, Village Forester, Engineering and Public Works Technician; and 
(7)  Any other village employees specifically authorized by the Village Manager. 
(b)  Any authorized village employee who detects a violation, is authorized to issue a violation notice thereof and shall serve the violation notice in the manner set forth in this article. 
(c)  The correctness of facts contained in any violation notice shall be certified by the authorized village employee issuing the violation notice by affixing his name (electronic or otherwise) to the violation notice at the time of issuance. 
(d)  The Code Hearing Unit or the Traffic Compliance Administrator shall retain the original or a computer generated copy of the violation notice and keep it as a record in the ordinary course of business. 
(e)  The violation notice or a copy thereof shall be admissible in any subsequent administrative or judicial proceeding to the extent permitted by law. 
(f)  The violation notice shall be served upon the appropriate parties, as provided for in this article. 
(Code 1993, § 2-24.8; Ord. No. 2017-O-77, 12-12-2017; Ord. No. 2018-O-26, § 5, 5-22-2018) 
Sec. 2-1310. - Judicial review. 
    Any final decision by a hearing officer that a violation does or does not exist shall constitute a final determination for the purposes of judicial review and shall be subject to review under the Illinois Administrative Review Law (735 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq.). 
(Code 1993, § 2-24.9; Ord. No. 2017-O-77, 12-12-2017) 
Sec. 2-1311. - Enforcement of judgments. 
(a)  Any fine, other sanction, or costs imposed, or part of any fine, other sanction, or costs imposed, remaining unpaid after the exhaustion of or the failure to exhaust judicial review procedures under the Illinois Administrative Review Law are a debt due and owing the village and may be collected in accordance with applicable law. 
(b)  After expiration of the period in which judicial review under the Illinois Administrative Review Law may be sought for a final determination of a Code violation, unless stayed by a court of competent jurisdiction, the findings, decision, and order of the hearing officer may be enforced in the same manner as a judgment entered by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(c)  In any case in which a defendant has failed to comply with a judgment ordering a defendant to correct a Code violation or imposing any fine or other sanction as a result of a Code violation, any expenses incurred by the village to enforce the judgment, including, but not limited to, attorney's fees, court costs, and costs related to property demolition or foreclosure, after they are fixed by a court of competent jurisdiction or a hearing officer, shall be a debt due and owing the village and may be collected in accordance with applicable law. 
(d)  Prior to any expenses being fixed by a hearing officer pursuant to this article, the village shall provide notice to the defendant that states that the defendant shall appear at a hearing before the administrative hearing officer to determine whether the defendant has failed to comply with the judgment. The notice shall set the date for such a hearing, which shall not be less than seven days from the date that notice is served. If notice is served by mail, the seven-day period shall begin to run on the date that the notice was deposited in the mail. 
(e)  Upon being recorded in the manner required by article XII of the Code of Civil Procedure or by the Uniform Commercial Code, a lien shall be imposed on the real estate or personal estate, or both, of the defendant in the amount of any debt due and owing the village under this article. The lien may be enforced in the same manner as a judgment lien pursuant to a judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Code 1993, § 2-24.10; Ord. No. 2017-O-77, 12-12-2017) 
Secs. 2-1312-2-1320. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XLVII. - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 

Sec. 2-1321. - Inspection of records. 
    All records kept by any officer or employee of the village, excepting employee personnel records, police investigatory and criminal history records, employment and promotional testing materials, and personal medical records, shall be open to inspection by the President, or any Trustee of the village at all reasonable times, whether or not such records are required to be kept by statute, the provisions of this Code or other ordinance. 
(Code 1993, § 2-14.1) 
Sec. 2-1322. - Monies and property to Treasurer. 
    Every officer of the village, unless otherwise provided by ordinance or statute, shall periodically turn over all money or property received by him in his official capacity to the Village Treasurer, with a statement showing the source thereof. 
(Code 1993, § 2-14.2) 
Sec. 2-1323. - Appointment and qualification of officers. 
    Unless otherwise provided by statute or ordinance, officers shall be appointed on or before the first Tuesday in May in the year in which the term of office expires or as soon thereafter as is convenient for the term provided for that office by ordinance or statute. No officer shall enter upon his duties until he has qualified by furnishing such bond as may be required, or equivalent proof of insurance, and by taking the oath of office. 
(Code 1993, § 2-14.3) 
Sec. 2-1324. - Failure to qualify. 
    If any officer fails to qualify within ten days, or such other time as is provided by ordinance, from the time he is notified by the Village Clerk of his appointment or election, the office shall be deemed vacant. 
(Code 1993, § 2-14.4) 
Sec. 2-1325. - Salaries. 
    All officers and employees of the village shall receive such salary or other compensation, as is fixed by the Board unless otherwise provided by ordinance or statute. 
(Code 1993, § 2-14.5) 
Sec. 2-1326. - Bonds of officers and employees. 
(a)  All officers and employees of the village shall give such bond as is required by statute or ordinance, or equivalent proof of insurance; or if there is no such statutory requirement, then as is required at any time by the Board. Whenever a bond is required of a village officer or employee, it shall have as surety a corporation licensed to do business in the State as an insurance or surety company, in the absence of provisions to the contrary by statute or ordinance. All bonds and the security thereon of officers or employees of the village must be approved by the Board. 
(b)  Whenever any bond becomes insecure, in the opinion of the Board for any reason, the Board may order a new bond to be filed or an additional surety to be procured. A failure to file a new bond or procure additional surety, when required, shall operate to discontinue the tenure of office for the holding of which the filing of a bond was a prerequisite. 
(Code 1993, § 2-14.6) 
Sec. 2-1327. - Duty upon termination of office; appointment of successor. 
(a)  Every officer of the village upon termination of his incumbency in office, for any cause whatsoever, shall deliver to his successor all books, records and property which belong to the village or which he has received in his official capacity. If no successor is appointed within one week after the termination of the incumbent, the books, records and property shall be delivered to the Village Clerk. 
(b)  When the term of any officer expires, the appointment of his successor shall be made on or before the first Tuesday in May in the year in which such term expires, or as soon thereafter as may be convenient, for the term provided for such officer by ordinance or statute. 
(Code 1993, § 2-14.7) 
Sec. 2-1328. - Dismissal of employees. 
    The discharge of any officer or employee shall be made by the same officer or body who made the original appointment, subject to the provisions of state law. 
(Code 1993, § 2-14.8) 
Sec. 2-1329. - Delegation. 
    When authority or duties are assigned to an official of the village under this Code, the official may designate other employees of the village to assist in carrying out such authority or duties, and such designees may exercise such authority or perform such duties to the same extent as the official who designated them. 
(Code 1993, § 2-14.9) 
Chapter 4 - ANIMALS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 4-1. - Interpretation and construction. 
(a)  In interpreting and applying this chapter, the requirements contained herein are declared to be the minimum requirements for the protection of public health, safety, and the general welfare of village residents. The provisions of this chapter shall be liberally construed so as to accomplish its stated purposes. 
(b)  This chapter shall not be deemed to interfere with, or abrogate, annul, or otherwise affect in any manner whatsoever, any laws, ordinances, rules, or regulations; provided however, that where this chapter expands the scope of prohibitions or imposes stricter requirements upon the care, maintenance and control of animals than are stated in other laws, ordinances, rules, or regulations, the provisions of this chapter shall prevail. 
(c)  The provisions of this chapter are declared to be severable. If any section, sentence, clause, or phrase of this chapter is held by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, unconstitutional, void, or unenforceable, then notwithstanding such decision, the validity of the remaining provisions of this chapter shall remain in full force and effect and shall in no way be affected, impaired, or invalidated. 
(d)  The provisions of this chapter shall constitute, and shall be interpreted as, an exercise of the home rule authority of the village to the full extent permitted under article VII of the Constitution of the State (1970). The provisions of this chapter shall be deemed to control over the provisions of any ordinance of the County of Cook to the extent said ordinances are conflicting in whole or in part. 
(Code 1993, § 4-1.1; Ord. No. 2011-O-32, 5-10-2011) 
Sec. 4-2. - Definitions. 
    When used in this chapter, the following words, terms, and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Allow means and includes both the taking of action and the failure to act. 
    Animal means any living nonhuman creature. 
    Animal control facility means any facility, which does not breed animals, approved by the village for the purpose of carrying out the provisions this chapter, including use by the facility as a shelter for seized, impounded, stray, homeless, abandoned, diseased, or unwanted animals. 
    Animal control officer means an employee of the village, or agent acting on behalf of the village as may be designated by the Village Manager, to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
    Animal establishment means any for profit business that, in whole or in part, sells, offers to sell, exchanges, delivers, or otherwise transfers dogs or cats, regardless of age, to consumers, wholesalers, or other retailers. 
    Animal hospital means any establishment maintained and operated by a licensed veterinarian for surgery, diagnosis, and treatment of animal diseases and injuries. 
    Animal shelter means any facility, which does not breed animals, operated by a nonprofit humane society for the temporary care, confinement and detention of animals and for the humane killing and other disposition of animals. The term "animal shelter" shall also include any private facility authorized by the Village Manager or his/her designee to impound, confine, detain, care for, or destroy any animal. 
    At-large means not confined; off the premises of the owner and not on a leash under the immediate control of a person physically capable of restraining the animal. 
    Attack means physical contact with a human being in an aggressive manner by an animal that results in a bite or causes scratches, bruising, or an abrasion; or with respect to a domestic animal, contact in an aggressive manner by an animal that causes an injury requiring veterinarian treatment. 
    Bird of prey means and includes any of the following birds: eagle, osprey, hawk, owl, kite, falcon, or vulture. 
    Bite means seizure by the teeth or jaws of an animal so that the skin of the person or animal seized has been pierced or broken and further includes contact of the saliva of the biting animal with any break or abrasion of the skin of the person or animal bitten. 
    Cat means and includes all members of the domestic feline family (Felis catus). 
    Confined means restriction of an animal to an escape-proof yard, house, or other secure enclosure away from other animals and the general public. 
    Dangerous animal means an animal that: 
(1)  Has without provocation attacked, bitten, or otherwise caused physical injury to a person; 
(2)  Has without provocation attacked, bitten, or otherwise caused serious physical injury to another animal; or 
(3)  Has without provocation chased or approached any person on any public property, or on any private property that is not the property of the animal's owner, in an apparent attempt to attack or injure that person, or, in a manner that a reasonable person would believe poses a serious and unjustified imminent threat of physical injury to a person or a companion animal. 
    Disposition means and includes, but is not limited to, adoption, quarantine, voluntary or involuntary custodianship, placement or sale of an animal to the general public; transfer of an animal to a zoological park, state or federally licensed exhibit, humane society, or animal shelter; or euthanasia humanely administered to an animal. 
    Dog means and includes all members of the domestic canine family (Canis familiaris). 
    Domesticated animal means any animal that is socialized, accustomed to living in an environment managed by humans, and generally considered suitable for the purposes of human companionship or service. 
    Enclosure means an outdoor pen, fence, or structure at least six feet in height that is roofed and that has sides and is designed and constructed in such a manner that the type of animal contained within the enclosure cannot reasonably be expected to escape and the entry of young children is prevented. 
    Exotic animal means any mammal, amphibian, reptile or fowl (including any hybrid thereof) of a species that generally lives in its original and natural habitat (ferae naturae), or that because of its size, nature, or other characteristics is dangerous to human beings; and/or requires a standard of care and control greater than that required for domestic animals. Exotic animals include, but are not limited to, any: 
(1)  Elephant, rhinoceros, or bear; 
(2)  Any monkey, baboon, chimpanzee, orangutan, ape, gorilla or other nonhuman primate; 
(3)  Any raccoon, opossum, skunk (whether deodorized or not), fox, or wild rodent; 
(4)  Any member of the feline species other than domestic cat (Felis domesticus), including, but not limited to, any leopard, ocelot, jaguar, cheetah, margay, lion, caracal, lynx, bobcat, jaguarondi, serval, cougar, tiger, or panther; 
(5)  Any hyena or jackal; 
(6)  Any member of the canine species other than domestic dog (Canis familiaris) including any wolf, wolf-dog hybrids, coyote, or coyote-dog hybrids; 
(7)  Any venomous insects; 
(8)  Any crocodilian (including, but not limited to, alligators, crocodiles, and caimans); 
(9)  Any fowl larger than a macaw; 
(10)  All forms or hybrids of venomous reptiles, including, but not limited to, gila monster, and all venomous snakes, whether native or non-native; 
(11)  Any constrictor snakes that are reasonably expected to grow to a length greater than six feet, including, but not limited to, Burmese Python, Reticulated Python, African Rock Python, Green Anaconda, Yellow Anaconda, Australian Amethystine Python, Indian Python; 
(12)  Any monitor lizard, including, but not limited to, Asiatic Monitor, Nile Monitor, White Throat Monitor, Black Throat Monitor, Crocodile Monitor, and Komodo Dragon; 
(13)  Any animal listed as an endangered species under the federal Endangered Species Act of 1973, as amended, or any fowl protected by the federal Migratory Bird Treaty Act shall also be considered an exotic animal for the purposes of this chapter. 
    Feral cat means a cat that: 
(1)  Is born in the wild or is the offspring of an owned or feral cat and is not socialized; or 
(2)  Is a formerly owned cat that has been abandoned or is no longer under the control of a human and is no longer socialized; or 
(3)  Lives on a farm. 
    Feral cat colony means a group of feral cats that congregate, more or less, together as a unit. Although not every cat in a colony may be feral, any non-feral cat that congregates with a colony shall be deemed to be a part of the colony. 
    Fowl means any waterfowl and any fowl of the falcon, pheasant, quail, duck, goose, chicken, turkey, guinea, peacock, or pigeon species. 
    Impoundment means the taking into custody of an animal by any police officer, animal control officer, or any authorized representative of the village. 
    Includes and including shall not be construed as limited to. 
    Intact animal means an animal that has not been spayed or neutered and therefore is capable of reproducing. 
    Kennel means any premises wherein any person engages in the business of boarding, breeding, buying, letting for hire, training for a fee, or the selling of dogs or cats. 
    Livestock means any cattle, sheep, pigs, chickens, turkeys, peacocks, pigeons, cows, donkeys, llama, mules, ponies, poultry, swine, hogs, goats, calves, steer, bull, or any horse, mule, donkey or other animal of the equine family. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the term "livestock" shall also include any animal generally kept or raised for the purposes of the production of goods or food, or for other commercial consumption or use. 
    May is permissive; except the phrase "no person may" means that no person is authorized or permitted to do the act prohibited. 
    Microchip means a passive electronic animal identification device ("EAID") that is implanted into an animal for the purposes of identification and/or recovery. 
    Muzzle means a device constructed of a strong material or of metal, designed to fasten over the mouth of an animal to prevent the animal from biting any person or other animal. 
    Neuter means to make a male animal incapable of reproducing. 
    Nuisance means that which unreasonably annoys any person, endangers the life or health of persons or other animals, or substantially interferes with the rights of citizens (other than that of the animal owner) to enjoyment of life or property. 
    Own means to have property rights in, to have possession or custody of, or responsibility for; or to shelter, harbor, keep, or exercise control over. 
    Owner means any person who, temporarily or permanently, owns any animal covered by this chapter. The occupant of any premises upon which a dog or cat remains (or repeatedly or customarily returns to) who provides food for such animal on at least three consecutive days (or four days within any seven-day period) is presumed to be harboring or keeping any such animal within the meaning of this chapter. The definition of the term "owner" shall not apply to any animal shelter, animal control facility, animal hospital, or kennel. 
    Person means any individual, firm, corporation, partnership, society, association or other legal entity, any public or private institution, the State, a municipal corporation, or political subdivision of the State. 
    Physical injury means the impairment of physical condition, including scratches, abrasions, bruises, open wounds, punctures, or mucous membranes contaminated with saliva or other potentially infectious material from an animal. 
    Pigeon means any live bird of the family Columbidae. 
    Prohibited animal means any animal, the owning, harboring, keeping, possessing, or maintaining of which has been specifically declared unlawful under this chapter. 
    Restraint means a device, enclosure, or structure such as a cage, corral, fenced area, house, pen, or vehicle without means of escape, or a leash or other form of cable, rope, tether, or attachment used to securely and safely confine an animal. 
    Sanitary means a condition of good order and cleanliness that minimizes the possibility of disease transmission. 
    Serious physical injury means bodily injury which creates a substantial risk of death or that causes death to a person or another domesticated animal, or that causes serious or permanent disfigurement, lacerations requiring sutures or cosmetic surgery, unconsciousness, permanent or protracted loss or impairment of the function of a body member or organ, or results in broken bones or teeth, or any other medical condition resulting in an inpatient hospital stay or repeated treatments or therapy. 
    Service animal means any guide dog, signal dog, or other animal individually trained to do work or perform tasks for the benefit of a person with a disability, including, but not limited to, guiding individuals with impaired vision, alerting individuals with impaired hearing to sounds, alerting individuals of the likelihood of a seizure, or providing seizure response. 
    Spay means to make a female animal incapable of reproducing. 
    Stray means any socialized animal that is regularly off the property of the owner or not under the physical control or restraint of the owner, and not regularly provided with food by its owner. 
    TNR means trap, neuter and return. 
    TNR program means a program pursuant to which feral and stray cats are trapped, neutered or spayed, micro-chipped, vaccinated against rabies, and/or returned to the location where they congregate. 
    Under restraint means that an animal is secured by a leash, led under the control of a person physically capable of restraining the animal and obedient to that person's commands, or securely enclosed within the owner's property limits. 
    Veterinarian means a veterinarian licensed by the State in which he engages in the practice of veterinary medicine. 
    Vicious dog means a dog that, without provocation, mauls, bites, or attacks a person and causes serious physical injury or death to that person, or, any individual dog that has been found to be a "dangerous dog" upon three separate occasions. 
    Village Manager means the Village Manager of the village, or the Village Manager's designee. 
    Without provocation , when applied to the threat, injury, or death caused to a person by an animal shall mean that: 
(1)  The injured, threatened, or killed person was not committing or attempting to commit a trespass or other criminal offense on the property of the animal owner; 
(2)  The injured, threatened, or killed person was not committing or attempting to commit an act of abuse, assault, or attack upon the animal; 
(3)  The injured, threatened, or killed person was not taunting or tormenting the animal; and 
(4)  The animal was not responding to pain or injury, or was not protecting itself or coming to the aid or defense of its owner, custodian, member of its household, or offspring. 
(Code 1993, § 4-1.2; Ord. No. 2011-O-32, 5-10-2011) 
Sec. 4-3. - Regulations of general applicability. 
(a)  No person shall engage in any conduct or activity that is likely to attract to such person's property or to the property of an adjacent property owner any abandoned, stray, or wild animal, venomous insect, rodent, or other vermin. 
(b)  Placement of food outside. It shall be unlawful for any person to place, scatter, leave, or otherwise set food of any kind outside, whether directly on the ground or in a bowl, on any public or private property within the village (including the property owned by such person) so as to be accessible for consumption by any animal. This prohibition shall not include the placement of bird food in containers designed or intended for the feeding of birds and which are maintained at least four feet above the ground and affixed to a tree, pole, apparatus, or other structure. 
(c)  Notification of stray. Any person finding a stray or lost animal shall notify the Wilmette Police Department at the earliest possible opportunity but no later than 48 hours after finding such animal. 
(d)  Render aid. No person shall fail to: 
(1)  Stop immediately and render such aid as may be possible after striking an animal with a motor vehicle; or 
(2)  Fail to immediately report the injury to the animal owner, if known; or if the animal owner is not known, to the Wilmette Police Department. 
(e)  Placement and burial of animals. No person shall leave, place, or throw onto any public property, street, place or other public right of way, or, offensively expose or bury within the village, the body or any part thereof of any dead or fatally sick or injured animal; nor shall any person keep any dead animal in a place where it may be dangerous to the health or safety of any other animal or person. 
(f)  Duty to report bite. Any person having personal knowledge that a person or animal was attacked or bitten by another animal shall report such incident to the Wilmette Police Department as soon as possible, but no later than 24 hours after the attack or bite occurred. 
(Code 1993, § 4-1.3; Ord. No. 2011-O-32, 5-10-2011) 
Secs. 4-4-4-24. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LIMITATIONS AND PROHIBITIONS 

Sec. 4-25. - Maximum number of animals; authority to seize. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to own or keep more than a total of seven dogs, cats, and other domestic animals (excluding aquatic life inside tank enclosures) within a single family dwelling in the village, not more than three of which may be dogs or cats, except that a litter of pups, kittens, or other young domestic animals may be kept for a period of time not exceeding six months from birth. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to own or keep more than three dogs, cats, or other domestic animals (excluding aquatic life inside tank enclosures) within a multifamily dwelling unit in the village, not more than two of which may be dogs or cats, except that a litter of pups, kittens, or other young domestic animals may be kept for a period of time not exceeding six months from birth. 
(c)  In addition to any fine or penalty that may be sought for violation of this subsection, the village shall provide notice to the owner of an animals in excess of the maximum allowable number requiring the removal of the unauthorized animals from the dwelling as follows: 
(1)  The animal owner shall be given a reasonable period of time, but no longer than 45 days from the date of the notice, to comply with said notice. 
(2)  To the extent reasonable attempts by the village to obtain voluntary compliance are not successful, the village may file an action with a court of competent jurisdiction seeking an order allowing the village to seize the animals and arrange for the disposition of the animals to an animal shelter. 
(3)  To the extent the animal owner refuses to voluntarily comply and the village is required to seize the animals the owner of said animals shall reimburse the village for any cost and expense incurred by the village in seizing the unlawful animals impounding, and arranging for the disposition of said animals. 
(d)  This section shall not apply to any establishment where animals are kept for sale, adoption, veterinarian care, grooming, or boarding. 
(Code 1993, § 4-2.1; Ord. No. 2011-O-32, 5-10-2011) 
Sec. 4-26. - Prohibited animals; violations, penalties. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to own, harbor, keep, care for, or possess within the village any: 
(1)  Exotic animal; 
(2)  Livestock; 
(3)  Bird of prey; 
(4)  Pigeon; or 
(5)  Vicious dog previously ordered by a court of competent jurisdiction to be euthanized. 
(b)  Any prohibited animal found to be present within the village shall be subject to immediate seizure and impoundment by the village in an approved animal control facility. The owner of the prohibited animal shall reimburse the village for all costs and expenses incurred by the village relating to the seizure, transfer, and disposition of the prohibited animal. 
(c)  Any person guilty of violating subsection (a) of this section shall be fined not less than $150.00 for the first offense, not less than $300.00 for a second offense, and not less than $750.00 for any offense thereafter. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense. It shall be no defense to a violation of this section that the owner of the prohibited animal has attempted, or is attempting, to domesticate the prohibited animal. 
(Code 1993, § 4-2.2; Ord. No. 2011-O-32, 5-10-2011) 
Sec. 4-27. - Prohibited animals; exemptions. 
(a)  The provisions of section 4-26 shall not prohibit or apply to: 
(1)  The temporary keeping of any prohibited animal for treatment by any animal control facility, animal hospital, or animal shelter; or the keeping of a prohibited animal that has been the rescued for such limited time as reasonably necessary to transport any such animal to the appropriate authorities or agency; 
(2)  The temporary or permanent keeping of any prohibited animal for teaching or research purposes at a licensed medical institution or educational facility (elementary or middle school, junior high school, high school, university, or college); provided that the person in charge of such prohibited animal shall not be relieved of the operation of any of the other applicable provisions of this chapter, including, without limitation, those governing sanitary conditions, nuisances, and noises. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall also exempt the use of prohibited animals in a "production" which, for the purposes of this subsection shall mean a film production regulated under chapter 24, or a temporary circus or carnival performance, traveling zoo, or properly licensed and bonded bona fide animal exposition or exhibition. The exemption stated herein shall be for a period of not more than 15 days and shall be contingent upon obtaining from the village a temporary permit to possess a prohibited animal in the village. The applicant for such a permit shall demonstrate to the village that: 
(1)  The prohibited animal will be in the direct charge of its trainer or another person who is familiar with the prohibited animal and has been trained in its handling and care; 
(2)  The applicant will, consistent with the size and characteristics of the prohibited animal, have additional handlers available as required to control the wild animal at any time that it is not confined; 
(3)  The owner of each place where the production will take place and the owner of each place where the prohibited animal will be kept, if different, has consented in writing to its presence; 
(4)  The prohibited animal will be kept in such a manner so as to prevent its escape and prevent injury to persons; and 
(5)  The applicant holds a policy of public liability insurance issued by a carrier authorized to write the policy under Illinois law in an amount of not less than $250,000.00, per occurrence, providing coverage in case of injury or death of any person or damage to any property that results from the negligent control or handling of the prohibited animal. 
(c)  Application for animal permit. An application for an animal permit shall be: 
(1)  Made upon forms supplied by the village at least 20 days before the commencement of the production; and 
(2)  Accompanied by a nonrefundable fee of $250.00 for five or fewer prohibited animals, $350.00 for six to ten prohibited animals, or $500.00 for or more prohibited animals. 
(d)  A permit issued under this section is valid only for the limited purpose of the designated production and shall only extend for the duration of the production. 
(e)  The village shall have the right to inspect a prohibited animal at any time while it is being kept under a permit issued under this section. 
(f)  In the event that the village denies a permit application, the applicant shall be afforded notice as to the basis for the denial and an opportunity to meet with the Village Manager, whose decision shall be final. 
(g)  Upon due notice to the applicant, the village may revoke a permit issued hereunder for any violation of this chapter or any applicable state or federal law. 
(Code 1993, § 4-2.3; Ord. No. 2011-O-32, 5-10-2011) 
Sec. 4-28. - Feral cats and feral cat colonies; penalties. 
(a)  Maintaining feral cats prohibited. 
(1)  No person shall attend to feral cats by providing such cats any form of sustenance or care. The term "care," for the purposes of this section, shall mean, but not be limited to, feeding, sheltering, trapping, spaying, neutering, vaccinating, ear-tipping or micro-chipping, or providing medical aid to any feral cat. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful to establish, manage, or participate in managing a feral cat colony within the village, either informally or through a more formalized Trap-Neuter-Release (TNR) program, Trap-Alter-Release (TAR) program, or otherwise. 
(3)  No person shall bring into or release within the village any feral cat that was trapped or taken from a location either outside of the village limits or, taken from a location inside the village limits and then brought to any location or place outside of the village. 
(b)  Penalty. Any person who violates the provisions of this section shall be fined not less than $75.00 or more than $750.00. Each violation of any of the provisions of this section shall constitute a separate offense. The fine for a second violation of this section occurring within any 12 month period shall not be less than $150.00. Any person committing a third or subsequent violation of this section within any 18 month period shall be fined a minimum of $300.00. 
(Code 1993, § 4-2.4; Ord. No. 2011-O-32, 5-10-2011) 
Secs. 4-29-4-59. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - MISTREATMENT OF ANIMALS 

Sec. 4-60. - Animal neglect. 
(a)  An owner of any animal is guilty of animal neglect if that person: 
(1)  Fails to supply his animal with a sufficient quantity of food and clean potable water; 
(2)  Fails to provide adequate shelter in terms of proper ventilation, appropriate size for the animal and with sufficient protection of the animal from inclement weather, including heat, cold, moisture, and other such weather conditions; 
(3)  Fails to provide adequate veterinary care consisting, at a minimum, of proper immunizations and preventive health care including parasite control; and all sick, diseased, or injured animals shall be provided with a proper program of care by a veterinarian, or humanely euthanized; 
(4)  Tortures, mutilates, beats, kicks, or hits an animal by any means or otherwise causes unjustified pain, distress or suffering; 
(5)  Abandons any animal on a street, highway or public place, or on private property when not in the care of another person; or 
(6)  Fails to adequately and periodically clean or sanitize any area, enclosure, or other housing facility where the animal is confined or restrained and remove excreta and other waste materials and dirt, so as to minimize vermin infestation, odors, and the potential for disease. 
(b)  Exemption. This section does not apply to animals kept or owned for teaching or research purposes at a licensed medical institution, or educational facility (elementary or middle school, junior high school, high school, or university or college), provided that the institution performs functions within the scope of accepted practices and disciplines associated with the institution. 
(Code 1993, § 4-3.1; Ord. No. 2011-O-32, 5-10-2011) 
Sec. 4-61. - Cruelty to animals; animals as inducements. 
(a)  It is unlawful to engage in any act of cruelty toward animals and therefore no person shall: 
(1)  Beat, abuse, torment, torture, wound, attempt to wound, or inflict unnecessary pain or injury on any animal; except that reasonable force may be used to drive away any dangerous, menacing, or trespassing animal, or any animal that is attacking, or is about to attack, any person or other domestic animal; 
(2)  Disturb, take, or injure in any way the nest, eggs, or young of any wild bird or bird of prey; 
(3)  Leave any animal unattended inside a motor vehicle or enclosed trailer when the outside temperature exceeds 86 degrees Farenheit (30 degrees Celsius); or 
(4)  Administer poison to any animal, or knowingly leave any poisonous substance of any kind or ground glass in any place with the intent to injure any animal; except that the provisions of this section are not applicable to licensed veterinarians for humanitarian purposes, licensed exterminators using poisons as part of a pest control program, or the use of commercial insecticides and rodent baits used to control insects or wild rodents. 
(b)  No person shall own, keep, or otherwise possess, or slaughter any domesticated animal for food consumption purposes. This section applies to any cult that kills or sacrifices animals for, or as part of, any type of ritual, regardless of whether or not the flesh or blood of the animal is to be consumed. Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted as prohibiting: 
(1)  Any duly licensed business from slaughtering animals for food consumption purposes which are specifically raised for said purposes; or 
(2)  The slaughtering of an animal where the animal is maintained for the purposes of consumption as part of a bona fide religious observance. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to give away or use any live animal, excluding goldfish, as a novelty or prize, or, as an inducement to enter any contest, game, or other competition, or, as an inducement to enter a retail establishment, including a place of amusement. 
(Code 1993, § 4-3.2; Ord. No. 2011-O-32, 5-10-2011) 
Sec. 4-62. - Penalties; payment without prosecution. 
(a)  Any person who violates any of the provisions of sections 4-60 or 4-61 shall be fined not less than $75.00 or more than $750.00. Each violation of any of the provisions of these subsections shall constitute a separate offense. The fine for a second violation of any of these subsections occurring within any 12-month period shall not be less than $150.00. 
(b)  Any person committing a third or subsequent violation of sections 4-60 or 4-61 within any 12-month period may be fined a minimum of $300.00. 
(Code 1993, § 4-3.3; Ord. No. 2011-O-32, 5-10-2011) 
Sec. 4-63. - Promotion of animal fights; penalties. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to promote, stage, hold, manage, conduct, allow, carry on, or in any other manner assist or aid in the presentation of any animal fight or any other type of contest, program, exhibition, game or fight of a similar combative nature, or any version of same for the purpose of baiting or inciting an animal toward fighting with another animal or between any animal and human. 
(b)  Any person who violates this subsection shall be fined not less than $500.00 or more than $750.00. Each violation of this provision shall constitute a separate offense. The fine for a second violation occurring within any 12-month period shall be not less than $750.00. 
(Code 1993, § 4-3.4; Ord. No. 2011-O-32, 5-10-2011) 
Secs. 4-64-4-84. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - RESPONSIBILITIES 

Sec. 4-85. - Generally. 
(a)  Reporting obligation. Any person having a reasonable suspicion as to, or knowledge of, the existence and whereabouts of any rabid animal or, of any violation of a confinement or quarantine order with respect to a rabid animal shall notify the Wilmette Police Department as soon as possible. 
(b)  Authority of village. Whenever a case of rabies has occurred within the village or when a determination has been made that the risk from rabies (or other communicable infectious disease) is great, the village may take such reasonable action it deems necessary to protect the general health and welfare of persons and animals within the village, including, but not limited to, issuing a declaration that all dogs or other animals in the village be kept within an enclosure, muzzled, or otherwise confined to control the spread of rabies. 
(Code 1993, § 4-4.1; Ord. No. 2011-O-32, 5-10-2011) 
Sec. 4-86. - Duties of animal owners. 
(a)  Vaccination required. It shall be unlawful for any owner of a dog or cat four months of age or older to keep or harbor such animal in the village unless that animal has been properly vaccinated against rabies as follows: 
(1)  Vaccination of dogs and cats shall be required every one to three years depending upon the type of vaccination and duration of immunity, or at such other interval as required by the U.S. Department of Agriculture or other specifically designated department of the State. 
(2)  Every animal owner shall retain written proof of the vaccination provided by the veterinarian until the date of its expiration. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful for any animal owner to allow the rabies vaccination required by this chapter to lapse at any time. 
(b)  Duty to report rabies. Any person who owns, harbors, keeps or shelters a dog or cat which has contracted rabies, or is suspected of having contracted rabies, or which has been exposed to rabies, including being sheltered in the same enclosure with a known rabid animal, shall immediately upon knowledge or suspicion: 
(1)  Make a report to the Wilmette Police Department of the known or suspected case of rabies; and 
(2)  Surrender such animal to the animal control facility designated by the village to be detained for the purpose of clinical observation for the period of time determined necessary by a veterinarian. 
(c)  Confinement of infected animal. Upon the determination of a licensed veterinarian, any animal to be quarantined under this section may be allowed to remain in quarantine for the required period on the property of the owner so long as such animal remains muzzled, confined, and out of contact with members of the public and other animals at all times during the quarantine period. 
(d)  Dogs or cats found at-large which are either known to be rabid or, are in violation of the confinement requirements of subsection (c) of this section, may be destroyed by the animal control officer if the animal control officer is unable with reasonable effort to apprehend such animal for impoundment. 
(Code 1993, § 4-4.2; Ord. No. 2011-O-32, 5-10-2011) 
Secs. 4-87-4-115. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - LICENSE AND TAGS 

Sec. 4-116. - General applicability. 
(a)  Animal license required. It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep, or harbor within the village any dog or cat over the age of four months unless such dog or cat is properly licensed pursuant to this chapter. 
(b)  Exemptions. The licensing requirements of this section shall not apply to: 
(1)  Dogs owned and used by law enforcement agencies; 
(2)  Dogs or cats belonging to a nonresident of the village and kept within the boundaries of the village for not longer than 20 days; provided however, that all such dogs and cats of nonresidents shall be properly vaccinated against rabies at the time of entry into the village; and shall comply with all other requirements of this chapter while kept within the village; and 
(3)  Dogs or cats maintained temporarily within the village for the purposes of a production as provided for in section 4-27. 
Any person claiming the licensing exemption set forth in subsection (b)(2) of this section shall have the burden of proof to demonstrate the applicability of the exemption. 
(Code 1993, § 4-5.1; Ord. No. 2011-O-32, 5-10-2011) 
Sec. 4-117. - Application for animal license. 
(a)  Timing of application. Application for any animal license required by this section shall be made by the owner, on a form to be provided by the village, within ten business days after acquiring any dog or cat over four months of age or, within ten business days after a dog or cat becomes four months of age; provided that any owner moving into and becoming a first-time resident of the village shall have 30 days from the date of such move to obtain an animal license. 
(b)  Proof of rabies vaccination. All persons applying for an animal license must present evidence of current rabies vaccination, consisting of an original certificate signed by a veterinarian licensed to practice in the State. 
(c)  Payment of license fee. A license fee shall be paid for each dog and cat at the time of submitting an initial application as follows: 
(1)  Animal license fees. 
Type of Animal Amount Intact dog or cat without microchip $40.00 Spayed/neutered dog or cat without microchip $20.00 Intact dog or cat with microchip $20.00 Spayed/neutered dog or cat with microchip $5.00  
(2)  Late fees. In addition to any fine or penalty that may be imposed for a violation of this section, a late fee equal to 25 percent of the applicable license fee shall be paid when any owner of a dog or cat over the age of six months fails to obtain an animal license within the time period specified in this section. 
(3)  Exemptions. The payment of license fees shall not be required for service animals or dogs used for law enforcement purposes. 
(d)  Proof of sterilization. Any owner claiming that his dog or cat has been spayed or neutered, or micro-chipped must submit a signed original written certification from a licensed veterinarian showing that such an operation has been performed. 
(Code 1993, § 4-5.2; Ord. No. 2011-O-32, 5-10-2011) 
Sec. 4-118. - Denial or revocation of license. 
(a)  Denial of license. No license shall be issued to any person who has: 
(1)  Failed to confine a vicious dog as ordered by an administrative tribunal or court of competent jurisdiction or, has failed to confine or surrender an infectious dog or cat as ordered by the village or otherwise required under this chapter; 
(2)  Failed to reimburse the village or animal control facility for costs and expenses associated with the seizure, confinement, treatment, or disposition of an animal impounded pursuant to this chapter (except that upon full payment of amounts due a license may thereafter issue); 
(3)  Been found guilty on two or more occasions of violating sections 4-60 or 4-61; 
(4)  Been previously been issued the maximum applicable number of dog and/or cat licenses, except upon the submission of an affidavit stating that one or more of the dogs and/or cats previously licensed at the applicant's dwelling has died, been permanently transferred to a person not at the same dwelling, or has been reported as lost and has not been located by the owner for at least two months; or 
(5)  Refused, when so ordered, to voluntarily surrender a dog or cat that has attacked or bitten a person or other animal. 
(b)  Revocation. Any license issued under this chapter may be revoked if it is shown that the applicant withheld or falsified any material information set forth on the license application. 
(Code 1993, § 4-5.3; Ord. No. 2011-O-32, 5-10-2011) 
Sec. 4-119. - Issuance of tags. 
(a)  License tags. Upon approval of the license application and payment of the license fee, the village shall issue a tag made of metal or other durable material stamped with the term "village," an identifying number. License tags shall be worn at all times when the animal is off the owner's property. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to transfer a license tag from one dog or cat to another or to obscure or deface a tag in any way. 
(c)  In the event of a lost tag, a replacement tag will be issued for upon payment of a $5.00 fee. 
(Code 1993, § 4-5.4; Ord. No. 2011-O-32, 5-10-2011) 
Sec. 4-120. - Penalties; payment without prosecution. 
(a)  Any person who violates the provisions of section 4-116 or 4-119 shall be fined not less than $75.00 or more than $750.00. The fine for a second violation of section 4-116 or 4-119 shall not be less than $150.00 or more than $750.00. 
(b)  In any prosecution under this section it shall be presumed that no valid, current license exists for an animal hereunder unless at the time of the alleged offense the animal was wearing the license tag furnished by the village. 
(Code 1993, § 4-5.5; Ord. No. 2011-O-32, 5-10-2011) 
Secs. 4-121-4-138. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - NUISANCES 

Sec. 4-139. - Nuisances defined. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the owner of any animal to create a nuisance, fail to exercise reasonable care and control so as to prevent a nuisance, or allow any animal to create or become an animal nuisance. 
(b)  A nuisance under subsection (a) of this section shall be deemed to include, but not be limited to, violation of any of the following requirements and/or prohibitions: 
(1)  The owner of any female animal in heat (estrus) shall confine such animal in a building or secure enclosure and shall attend to the female animal in such a manner that it cannot come into contact with a male of the same species, except for planned breeding. 
(2)  No animal owner shall, without the consent of the owner of the property affected, permit any animal to injure, destroy or carry away any vegetable, plant, fruit, shrub, tree, flower or other thing which may be on said premises or which may be planted or seeded there. 
(3)  No animal owner shall, without authorization, allow or cause its animal to enter onto, across, or under the private property of another, including, but not limited to, reaching over, under, or through a fence of another. 
(4)  No animal owner shall cause or allow its animal to soil, defile, or defecate on any public property, sidewalk, public way, or upon the private property of another (other than that of the animal owner) unless such animal owner immediately removes and properly disposes of all feces deposited by its animal by the following methods: 
a.  Collection of the feces by appropriate implement and placement in a paper or plastic bag or other container; and 
b.  Removal of such bag or container to the property of the animal owner or otherwise properly dispose of the waste in a manner permitted by law. 
It shall not be a violation of this chapter for a blind or disabled person with a service animal to fail to promptly and properly collect and dispose of any animal waste or excrement on any public or private property. 
(5)  No animal owner shall allow or permit animal waste to collect, accumulate and remain on the property of the owner so as to cause or create an unhealthy, unsanitary, dangerous, or offensive living condition on the owner's property, or on that of any adjacent property owner. 
(6)  It shall be unlawful for the owner of any animal to fail to keep such animal under restraint or to permit such animal to run at-large upon the private property of others, or upon the streets and public ways within the village. 
(7)  It shall be unlawful for any dog, even though on a leash, to be or enter upon any public hall, restaurant, store, or place where food is served or offered for sale, or any other office, store, or retail establishment anywhere within the village, except any retail establishment for the sale of animal pets, any animal hospital, kennel, boarding facility or veterinarian's office. This subsection shall not apply to service animals and dogs used for law enforcement purposes. 
(8)  It shall be unlawful for any dog, even though on a leash, to go or be upon any school premises, public playground, or other public area within the village, or upon a path or sidewalk extending through or within any of the foregoing, or on any public property which has been posted with signs indicating that no dogs are allowed; except that dogs are allowed in public areas that have been specifically designated and posted as permissible dog areas, provided that any dog is under the immediate control of the animal owner. This subsection shall not apply to service animals and dogs used for law enforcement purposes. 
(9)  It shall be unlawful for any person to construct or maintain a dog run in violation of the regulations herein and those set forth in the Zoning Ordinance, appendix A of this Code. 
(10)  Any dog, while on a street, sidewalk, or other public way shall be secured by a leash or chain of sufficient tensile strength to restrain the particular dog, except that this requirement shall not apply to any service animal or any dog being used for law enforcement purposes. 
(11)  Any animal that makes disturbing noises, including, but not limited to, continued and repeated howling, barking, whining, or other utterances causing unreasonable annoyance, disturbance, or discomfort to adjacent property owners or occupants or others in close proximity to the premises where the animal is being kept shall be deemed a nuisance under this chapter. 
(12)  Any animal that without provocation and in a manner reasonably considered by another person to be threatening, interferes with the freedom of movement of such person in a public right-of-way shall be deemed a nuisance under this chapter. 
(13)  Any animal that chases motor vehicles in a public right-of-way shall be deemed a nuisance under this chapter. 
(14)  Any animal that bites, threatens to bite, attacks or threatens to attack a person or other animal shall be deemed a nuisance and shall be impounded as provided under the terms of this chapter. 
(Code 1993, § 4-6.1; Ord. No. 2011-O-32, 5-10-2011) 
Sec. 4-140. - Abatement of nuisances. 
    Violation of any of the provisions set forth in section 4-139 shall constitute a public nuisance, and therefore nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the village from acting summarily to abate the nuisance. All costs and expenses incurred by the village in abating any nuisance shall be reimbursed by the person who allowed, caused, or maintained said nuisance. Such action on the part of the village shall be in addition to any other remedy provided for in this chapter and shall not affect the right of the village to enforce any penalty provided for herein. Nor shall this chapter be construed to deny any common law right to any person to abate a nuisance. 
(Code 1993, § 4-6.2; Ord. No. 2011-O-32, 5-10-2011) 
Sec. 4-141. - Violations; penalties; animal surrender or seizure. 
(a)  Fines. Any person who violates any of the provisions of section 4-139 shall be fined not less than $75.00 or more than $750.00. Each violation of any of the provisions of section 4-139 shall constitute a separate offense. The fine for a second violation of the same subsection of section 4-139 occurring within any 12-month period shall be not less than $100.00 or more than $750.00. 
(b)  The fines stated herein shall be in addition to any and all impoundment fees and costs imposed pursuant to this chapter. 
(Code 1993, § 4-6.3; Ord. No. 2011-O-32, 5-10-2011) 
Secs. 4-142-4-165. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - ANIMALS CAUSING INJURY TO PERSONS OR OTHER ANIMALS 

Sec. 4-166. - Attack or bite of persons or animals. 
    Any animal that bites, threatens to bite, attacks, or threatens to attack a person, or that attacks or bites another animal, shall be deemed a nuisance and shall be impounded as provided herein and the owner of such animal shall comply with the requirements set forth in this chapter. 
(Code 1993, § 4-7.1; Ord. No. 2011-O-32, 5-10-2011) 
Sec. 4-167. - Duties of animal owner. 
(a)  It shall be the duty and responsibility of any animal owner having personal knowledge or a reasonable basis to believe that a person or other animal has been attacked or bitten by the owner's animal to immediately report the incident to the Wilmette Police Department and provide all information requested. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any animal owner who has personal knowledge or a reasonable basis to believe that a person or other animal was attacked or bitten by the owner's animal to allow that animal to be euthanized, sold, given away, or taken outside the village limits prior to the expiration of the impoundment period set forth herein. 
(c)  It shall be the duty and responsibility of any animal owner having personal knowledge or a reasonable basis to believe that a person or other animal has been attacked or bitten by the owner's animal, to surrender said animal for impoundment to the village's designated animal control facility for an observation period of at least ten days, all at the sole cost and expense of said owner. The village shall have the authority to seize and impound any such animal when the owner of said animal is unwilling to voluntarily surrender said animal for the required observation. 
(Code 1993, § 4-7.2; Ord. No. 2011-O-32, 5-10-2011) 
Sec. 4-168. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Dangerous animal. 
(1)  Means an animal that: 
a.  Has without provocation attacked, bitten, or otherwise caused physical injury to a person; or 
b.  Has without provocation attacked, bitten, or otherwise caused serious physical injury to another animal; or 
c.  Has without provocation chased or approached any person on any public property, or on any private property that is not the property of the animal's owner, in an apparent attempt to attack or injure that person or in a manner that a reasonable person would believe poses a serious and unjustified imminent threat of physical injury to such person or a companion animal. 
(2)  Exception. The term "dangerous animal" does not include a dog used for law enforcement purposes which exhibits behavior that may otherwise fall within the definition of dangerous animal. 
    Without provocation , when applied to the threat of or injury to a person by an animal, means that: 
(1)  The threatened or injured person was not committing or attempting to commit a trespass or other criminal offense on the property of the animal owner; 
(2)  The threatened or injured person was not committing or attempting to commit an act of abuse, assault, or attack upon the animal; 
(3)  The threatened or injured person was not taunting or tormenting the animal; and 
(4)  The animal was not responding to pain or injury, or was not protecting itself or coming to the aid or defense of its owner, custodian, member of its household, or offspring. 
    Vicious animal. 
(1)  Means any animal that, without provocation, bites or attacks a person and causes serious physical injury or death to that person or, any animal that has been found to be a dangerous animal on three separate occasions. 
(2)  The term "vicious animal" does not include a dog that has killed or caused serious physical injury to any person or animal during the performance of law enforcement purposes. 
(Code 1993, §§ 4-7.3, 4-7.4; Ord. No. 2011-O-32, 5-10-2011) 
Sec. 4-169. - Burden of proof and owner responsibility. 
(a)  Burden of proof. Any animal that has attacked, bitten, or otherwise caused physical injury to a person or another animal, or has chased or approached any person in an apparent attempt to attack or injure that person or in a manner that a reasonable person would believe poses a serious and unjustified imminent threat of physical injury to a person or a companion animal shall be prima facie dangerous, and the burden of proof as to provocation shall be upon the animal owner. 
(b)  Upon a finding that an animal is dangerous, the animal owner: 
(1)  May be ordered, among other things, to muzzle the dangerous animal whenever it is off the owner's property so as to prevent the animal from biting any person or other animal. 
(2)  At the owner's expense, shall have an identifying microchip implanted under the animal's skin by an authorized veterinarian, if not done already; and the animal shall be spayed or neutered, if not done already, at the owner's expense. 
(Code 1993, §§ 4-7.3, 4-7.4; Ord. No. 2011-O-32, 5-10-2011) 
Sec. 4-170. - Disposition of vicious animal. 
(a)  Humane destruction. 
(1)  Where an animal is deemed to be vicious, the village may request an order from a court of competent jurisdiction for the humane destruction of said animal, where appropriate, taking into consideration the severity and the circumstances of the matter. 
(2)  Where an animal is declared to be vicious, and the animal has caused death to any person, the court shall order the humane destruction of said animal. 
(b)  Permanent confinement. In all cases where an animal is deemed to be vicious and the animal will not be humanely destroyed, the animal owner shall be ordered to comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  While on the animal owner's property, the owner must confine the dangerous animal inside the dwelling or within a secure and locked enclosure. If the enclosure is a room within the dwelling, then the animal shall not have direct ingress from or egress to the outdoors unless that ingress and egress is directly to a secure and locked enclosure. A vicious animal may be allowed to move about freely within the entire dwelling upon the condition that the animal is muzzled at all times. 
(2)  If the animal has ingress and egress directly to an outside enclosure that has no bottom secured to the sides, then the sides of the enclosure must be embedded into the ground no less than two feet deep. The enclosure must also meet the minimum requirements for the protection of persons and animals stated in this chapter. 
(3)  The owner must confine the vicious animal to the enclosure described above at all times. The animal shall be allowed out only when it is necessary to obtain veterinary care for the animal or to comply with a court order. While off of the owner's property, a vicious animal must be muzzled, restrained by a leash not exceeding six feet in length, and must at all times be under the control of a person 18 years of age or older. The muzzle must be made in a manner that will not cause injury to the animal or impair its vision or respiration but must prevent the animal from biting any person or other animal. 
(4)  The animal owner must post a sign, in a conspicuous location on the owner's premises, warning that a vicious animal is on the premises. This sign must be visible from at least 50 feet away from the public sidewalk or street and shall state in bold capital letters: "DANGER-VICIOUS ANIMAL-KEEP AWAY." A second identical sign shall be posted in a conspicuous location on the exterior of any outside enclosure. 
(5)  The owner, at the owner's expense, shall have an identifying microchip implanted under the animal's skin by an authorized veterinarian, if not done already. 
(6)  The animal shall be spayed or neutered, if not done already, at the owner's expense. 
(7)  Within ten business days of an order issued under this subsection, the animal owner shall obtain, and maintain in effect at all times that the dog remains within the village, liability insurance in an amount not less than $150,000.00 which includes coverage of claims arising from the conduct of said vicious animal. 
(c)  Violation of confinement requirements. It shall be unlawful for any person to allow a vicious dog to be out of the required enclosure, except that a vicious dog may be allowed outside of the enclosure when: 
(1)  It is necessary to obtain veterinary care for the dog; 
(2)  In the case of an emergency or natural disaster where the dog's life is threatened; or 
(3)  To comply with the order of a court of competent jurisdiction, provided that the vicious animal remains muzzled at all times. 
(d)  A vicious dog which is found at-large more than twice shall be permanently removed from the village or humanely euthanized. An animal which is returned to the village after removal under this section shall be humanely euthanized. 
(Code 1993, § 4-7.5; Ord. No. 2011-O-32, 5-10-2011) 
Secs. 4-171-4-193. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - IMPOUNDMENT 

Sec. 4-194. - Authority to impound. 
(a)  Impoundment for observation. The village shall have the authority to seize and impound to a designated animal control facility any animal which the animal control officer has knowledge or a reasonable basis to believe: 
(1)  Has threatened to bite, or has bitten, threatened to attack, or has attacked a person; 
(2)  Has attacked or bitten another animal; or 
(3)  Has rabies, or has been bitten by an animal that is reasonably suspected of having rabies. 
Any animal impounded pursuant to subsection (a) of this section shall be under the observation of a licensed veterinarian for a period of ten days, or otherwise in accordance with the applicable state requirements. 
(b)  Impoundment at owner's dwelling. When evidence is presented that the animal has been properly vaccinated against rabies within the time prescribed by law, the animal may be confined to the animal owner's dwelling, or, in a manner which will prohibit it from being out in public and biting any person, if a licensed veterinarian concludes that such confinement will be satisfactory and the conditions for redemption of impounded animals have been satisfied. At the end of the ten-day confinement period, the animal shall be taken to, and examined by, the same licensed veterinarian. 
(c)  Impoundment for violations and other matters. In addition to any other remedies provided for in this chapter, the animal control officer may seize, impound, and confine to an animal control facility any of the following animals: 
(1)  Any dog or cat without a valid and current animal license tag; 
(2)  Stray animals or animals at-large; 
(3)  Any animal constituting a public nuisance or considered to be a danger to the public; 
(4)  Any animal that is in violation of any temporary or permanent quarantine or confinement order; 
(5)  Any unattended animal that is ill, injured, or otherwise in need of care, or reasonably believed to have been abused or neglected; 
(6)  Any prohibited animal under this chapter; 
(7)  Any animal that a court of competent jurisdiction has ordered impounded or destroyed; or 
(8)  Any animal that is part of an unlawful animal fight under section 4-63. 
(Code 1993, § 4-8.1; Ord. No. 2011-O-32, 5-10-2011) 
Sec. 4-195. - Notice to animal owner. 
(a)  When impoundment of a dog or cat occurs pursuant to this section and there is no evidence of ownership or other animal identification, either by collar, license tag or microchip, the Wilmette Police Department shall make every reasonable attempt to locate and contact the owner as soon as practicable. If the owner cannot be ascertained, the village shall post written notice for seven days at three or more conspicuous locations within the village describing the animal and the time and place of taking. 
(b)  Any notice to an animal owner, whether by posting or written notice to the last known address, shall also include the location of the animal control facility where the animal is confined, the hours during which the animal can be reclaimed, the conditions under which redemption of said animal can be made, and the fees to be paid by the animal owner prior to redemption. The animal owner shall also be advised that the failure to redeem the animal within the period of time specified may result in the disposition of the animal. 
(Code 1993, § 4-8.2; Ord. No. 2011-O-32, 5-10-2011) 
Sec. 4-196. - Conditions for redemption. 
(a)  Any animal impounded for rabies observation, evidence, or other purpose may be redeemed by the owner thereof only upon satisfaction of the following conditions: 
(1)  The animal has been properly licensed, if not already; 
(2)  A microchip or electronic animal identification device has been implanted into the animal for the purposes of identification and/or recovery, if it has not been done already; 
(3)  An impoundment fee of $100.00 has been paid to the village, except that if any such animal has been previously impounded the impoundment fee shall be doubled, and then tripled, for any third and subsequent impoundment; 
(4)  The animal has been spayed or neutered, as applicable, unless the veterinarian determines that sterilization would endanger the life or health of the animal; and 
(5)  The animal control facility, animal hospital or animal shelter has been paid for all boarding charges and any cost or expense of any necessary medical treatment provided to the animal, including the cost of spaying or neutering, implanting a microchip, and vaccinating for rabies, if applicable. 
(b)  When not redeemed by the owner, agent, or caretaker, a dog or cat must be scanned for a microchip. If a microchip is present, the registered owner must be notified. When redemption of an animal does not occur, the manner of disposition of said animal shall be within the discretion of the village in accordance with state law, except that any such disposition does not relieve the animal owner of liability for violations, or for the costs associated with the animal's disposition, any impoundment fees, accrued boarding charges and necessary medical expenses. After contact has been made or attempted, dogs or cats not redeemed yet deemed adoptable by the animal control facility shall be offered for adoption, or made available to a licensed humane society or rescue group, or otherwise dispose of in accordance with state law. 
(Code 1993, § 4-9.1; Ord. No. 2011-O-32, 5-10-2011) 
Sec. 4-197. - Liability for all amounts due. 
(a)  Payment of impoundment fees and other charges required prior to redemption shall be in addition to, and not in lieu of, any fine, penalty, or other fees imposed under this chapter. 
(b)  In addition any right of action to recover unpaid fees, costs, or expenses provided for under this chapter, the village shall be authorized to place a lien on the property of any owner who fails to make payments as required. 
(Code 1993, § 4-9.2; Ord. No. 2011-O-32, 5-10-2011) 
Chapter 6 - FINANCE 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 6-1. - General provisions. 
    The financial transactions of the village shall be under the administration of the Village Treasurer, operating under the provisions set forth in chapter 2. The Board of Trustees shall review and approve the payment of bills against the village as provided in article V of this chapter. 
(Code 1993, § 6-1; Ord. No. 81-O-47, 12-15-1981) 
Secs. 6-2-6-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BUDGET OFFICER[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- sections 8-2-9.1 through 8-2-9.10 of the Illinois Municipal Code, (65 ILCS 5/8-2-9.2 through 65 ILCS 5/8-2-9.10), are hereby adopted as set forth in this article. 

Sec. 6-21. - Created. 
(a)  There is created hereby the position of Budget Officer who shall be designated by the Village Manager. 
(b)  The Budget Officer may hold another municipal office, either elected or appointed, and may receive the compensation established from time to time by the Village President and Board of Trustees. Such Budget Officer shall serve at the pleasure of the Village Manager. 
(c)  Before entering upon the duties of this office, the Budget Officer shall take oath and post bond as provided by statute. 
(Code 1993, § 6-2.1; Ord. No. 2014-O-64, 11-11-2014) 
Sec. 6-22. - Powers and duties of Budget Officer. 
    The Budget Officer shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)  To permit, encourage, and establish the efficient planning, budgeting, auditing, reporting, accounting, and other fiscal management procedures in all municipal departments, commissions, and boards; 
(2)  To compile an annual budget; 
(3)  To examine all books and records of all village departments, commissions, and boards which relate to moneys received and paid out by the village, its departments, commissions, and boards and debts and accounts receivable, amounts owed by or to the village, its departments, commissions, and boards; 
(4)  To obtain such additional information from the village, its departments, commissions, and boards as may be useful for the purposes of compiling a municipal budget, such information to be furnished by the village, its departments, commissions, and boards in the form required by the Budget Officer; and 
(5)  To establish and maintain such procedures as shall ensure that no expenditures are made by the village, its departments, commissions, or boards except as authorized by the budget. 
(Code 1993, § 6-2.2; Ord. No. 2014-O-64, 11-11-2014) 
Sec. 6-23. - Compilation and contents of budget. 
    The Budget Officer shall compile a budget which contains estimates of revenues available to the village for the fiscal year for which the budget is drafted, together with recommended expenditures for the village and all of its departments, commissions, and boards. Revenue estimates and expenditure recommendations shall be presented in a manner which is in conformity with good fiscal management practices. Substantial conformity to a chart of accounts recommended by the National Committee on Governmental Accounting, the Auditor of Public Accounts of the State, or the Division of Local Government Affairs and Property Taxes of the Department of Revenue of the State or successor agencies thereof shall be deemed proof of such conformity. The budget shall contain actual or estimated revenues and expenditures for the two years immediately preceding the fiscal year for which the budget is prepared. So far as is possible, the fiscal data for such two preceding fiscal years shall be itemized in the manner which is in conformity with the chart of accounts recommended above. Each budget shall show the specific fund from which each anticipated expenditure shall be made. 
(Code 1993, § 6-2.3; Ord. No. 2014-O-64, 11-11-2014) 
Sec. 6-24. - Passage of annual budget; effect. 
(a)  Passage of the annual budget by adoption of an appropriate ordinance by the corporate authorities shall be in lieu of passage of the appropriation ordinance as required by statute. 
(b)  The annual budget shall be published in the manner provided for in section 6-28. 
(c)  The annual budget shall be adopted by the corporate authorities before the beginning of the fiscal year to which it applies. 
(Code 1993, § 6-2.4; Ord. No. 2014-O-64, 11-11-2014) 
Sec. 6-25. - Capital improvement, repair or replacement fund. 
(a)  In the preparation of the budget by the Budget Officer, an amount not to exceed three percent of the equalized assessed value of property subject to taxation by the village may be accumulated in a separate fund for the purpose or the purposes of specific capital improvements, repairs, and/or replacement of specific types of municipal equipment or other tangible property, both real and personal, to be designated as the "Capital Improvement, Repair or Replacement Fund." 
(b)  Expenditures from the Capital Improvement, Repair or Replacement Fund shall be budgeted in the fiscal year in which the capital improvement, repair or replacement will occur. 
(c)  Upon the completion or abandonment of any project, or in the event any surplus moneys remain after the completion or abandonment of any project for which the Capital Improvement, Repair or Replacement Fund was instituted, then such funds no longer necessary for capital improvement, repair or replacement shall be transferred to the General Corporate Fund of the village on the first day of the fiscal year following such abandonment or completion, or discovery of surplus funds. 
(Code 1993, § 6-2.5; Ord. No. 2014-O-64, 11-11-2014) 
Sec. 6-26. - Revision of annual budget. 
(a)  While the Village President and Board of Trustees have ultimate authority over the budget, the Village Manager is authorized to delete, add to, change or create line items within funds budgeted previously to any department provided he notifies the Budget Officer who shall promptly document such revisions and report them as part of the regular financial reporting to the Village President and Board of Trustees. The revisions allowed in this subsection (a) shall not include the authority to appropriate additional monies above the total appropriated for a given fund at the time the budget is adopted unless the budget is amended as set forth below. 
(b)  By a vote of two-thirds of the members of the corporate authorities then holding office, the annual budget for the village may be amended by deleting, adding to, changing, or creating funds or any item within the budget. 
(c)  No revision of the budget shall be made increasing the total budget in the event funds are not available to effectuate the purpose of the revision. 
(d)  Nothing in this section shall be deemed to alter the Village Manager's purchasing authority as provided elsewhere in this Code or the Village Manager's authority to hire employees pursuant to article VII of chapter 2 in accordance with the duly adopted pay plan or salary ordinance. 
(Code 1993, § 6-2.6; Ord. No. 2014-O-64, 11-11-2014) 
Sec. 6-27. - Funds for contingency purposes. 
    The annual budget may contain money set aside for contingency purposes not to exceed ten percent of the total budget, less the amount set aside for contingency purposes, which moneys may be expended for contingencies upon a majority vote of the corporate authorities then holding office. 
(Code 1993, § 6-2.7; Ord. No. 2014-O-64, 11-11-2014) 
Sec. 6-28. - Public inspection, notice and hearing on budget. 
(a)  The Village President and Board of Trustees shall make the tentative annual budget conveniently available to public inspection for at least ten days prior to the passage of the annual budget by publication in the journal of the proceedings of the corporate authorities or in such other form as the Village President and Board of Trustees may prescribe. 
(b)  Not less than one week after the publication of the tentative annual budget, and prior to final action on the budget, the Village President and Board of Trustees of the village shall hold at least one public hearing on the tentative annual budget, after which hearing or hearings the tentative annual budget may be further revised and passed without any further inspection, notice or hearing. 
(c)  Notice of the public hearing shall be given by publication in a newspaper having a general circulation in the village at least one week prior to the time of the hearing. 
(Code 1993, § 6-2.8; Ord. No. 2014-O- 64, 11-11-2014) 
Secs. 6-29-6-59. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TAXES 

Sec. 6-60. - Tax levy. 
    The annual tax levy ordinance shall be prepared by the Village Treasurer and shall be submitted to the Board of Trustees for adoption as provided by state statute. 
(Code 1993, § 6-3) 
Secs. 6-61-6-78. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - AUDITS AND ACCOUNTING 

Sec. 6-79. - Monthly statements. 
    The Village Treasurer shall submit monthly financial statements to the Village Manager and Board of Trustees, clearly reflecting the village's assets and liabilities, receipts and disbursements, and expended and unexpended balances of appropriation. 
(Code 1993, § 6-4.1) 
Sec. 6-80. - Independent audit. 
    The financial accounts of the Village Treasurer shall be subject to annual audit by an independent certified public accountant retained by the President and Board of Trustees. 
(Code 1993, § 6-4.2) 
Secs. 6-81-6-103. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - APPROVAL OF BILLS 

Sec. 6-104. - Prior approval required. 
(a)  The following bills shall not be paid without prior approval by the Board of Trustees unless otherwise directed by the Board of Trustees: 
(1)  Bills which have been submitted pursuant to contract approved by the Board of Trustees under section 6-130 or by the Village Manager under section 6-129, and which, if paid, would cause the total amount paid under the contract to exceed the contract amount; and 
(2)  Bills which, if paid, would cause the total amount expended within a category of the applicable appropriation ordinance to exceed the amount authorized for such category. 
(b)  Any bill for which prior approval is required by the Board of Trustees shall first be reviewed by the standing committee of the Board having jurisdiction over the subject matter of the bill. If no standing committee clearly has jurisdiction, the matter shall be referred to the Finance Committee. 
(Code 1993, § 6-5.1; Ord. No. 2002-O-24, 8-27-2002) 
Sec. 6-105. - Prior approval not required; payment; review and subsequent approval. 
(a)  All bills which do not require prior approval by the Board of Trustees before payment is made shall be paid as promptly as practicable after submission of the bills to the village, unless the Village Manager directs otherwise. 
(b)  An itemized report of all bills paid pursuant to subsection (a) of this section shall be submitted to the Board of Trustees during the month immediately following the month of payment. The report shall include a certification by the Finance Director that all bills shown in the report were due and payable and that funds were appropriated for the expenditure in accordance with the provisions of ILCS ch. 65, act 5. The Board of Trustees shall approve the bills listed in the report, with such exceptions as considered necessary by the Board. If the Board of Trustees withholds approval from any bill listed in the report, the Board shall provide for such corrective measures as the Board considers appropriate. 
(Code 1993, § 6-5.2) 
Sec. 6-106. - Payroll. 
    The payroll account shall be considered as a bill which is subject to section 6-105. 
(Code 1993, § 6-5.3; Ord. No. 81-O-47, 12-15-1981) 
Secs. 6-107-6-125. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - MUNICIPAL CONTRACTS AND PURCHASE AGREEMENTS 

Sec. 6-126. - Authority. 
(a)  All municipal contracts and purchase agreements shall be adopted in accord with the requirements of this Code as set forth in section. 
(b)  The Village Manager and the Village Manager's designee, if one shall be designated, shall have the authority provided in this section to approve purchasing for all departments of the village, and shall procure the necessary supplies, services and equipment required by the various departments of the village on requisitions of the proper officer in charge of said departments, provided the funds for the purchase of such supplies, services and equipment have been duly appropriated. 
(Code 1993, § 6-6; Ord. No. 2002-O-24, 8-27-2002) 
Sec. 6-127. - Procedure for expenditures. 
    Unless otherwise specifically provided by law, ordinance or resolution, no officer or employee of the village shall have authority to make any expenditure on the village's account except upon a requisition submitted by the head of the department for which said expenditure shall be made and with the prior approval of the Village Manager. The Village Manager may require purchase orders for such expenditures, in which event said purchase orders shall be consecutively numbered, and the Village Manager may require all bills rendered for supplies, services and equipment to bear the number of the order authorizing same to be purchased. 
(Code 1993, § 6-6.1; Ord. No. 2002-O-24, 8-27-2002) 
Sec. 6-128. - Contracts of $1,000.00 or less. 
    No contract shall be made for any supplies, services or equipment unless such supplies, services and equipment shall have been authorized by the Village Manager, except that when such supplies, services and equipment shall be necessary and the total cost thereof shall not in any case exceed $1,000.00, the Village Manager may, without such previous authorization, cause the contract to be executed and the supplies, services or equipment to be furnished. 
(Code 1993, § 6-6.2; Ord. No. 2002-O-24, 8-27-2002) 
Sec. 6-129. - Contracts authorized by the Village Manager. 
(a)  The Village Manager may authorize the purchase of supplies, services or equipment of any kind where the same exceed in amount the sum of $1,000.00, but not more than $25,000.00; provided there are at least three written informal bids for furnishing the same without the necessity of public advertising. In the absence of special circumstances, the order, purchase or contract shall be given to the lowest reliable and responsible bidder. The Village Manager is authorized to order or purchase supplies, services or equipment without obtaining three informal bids when utilizing contracts awarded by the state or federal government or by any association of governmental agencies. If the Village Manager is unable to obtain three informal bids because the item is a "single-source item," the Village Manager may authorize procurement of supplies, services or equipment without the necessity of three informal bids for items under $25,000.00 when the Village Manager deems it in the best interest of the village to do so. 
(b)  The Village Manger may authorize the purchase of motor fuels required for the village operations in an amount not to exceed $42,000.00, provided that the purchase is made: 
(1)  Pursuant to an intergovernmental purchasing contract or similar intergovernmental cooperative purchasing program that has been previously approved by the Board of Trustees; or 
(2)  After obtaining at least three price quotations, and is made from the motor fuel seller who provided the lowest reliable and responsible price quotation. 
(Code 1993, § 6-6.3; Ord. No. 2002-O-24, 8-27-2002; Ord. No. 2007-O-89, 12-11-2007; Ord. No. 2008-O-22, 4-22-2008; Ord. No. 2018-O-72, § 2, 10-9-2018) 
Sec. 6-130. - Contracts authorized by the Board of Trustees. 
(a)  All contracts exceeding in amount the sum of $25,000.00 for services, supplies, equipment or any other necessities required by the village, other than motor fuel, shall require the approval of the Village Manager and the Board of Trustees. All contracts for the purchase of motor fuel exceeding in amount the sum of $42,000.00 shall require the approval of the Village Manager and Board of Trustees. 
(b)  Any such contract shall be awarded to the lowest reliable and responsible bidder after advertising for the same, and bonds may be taken for faithful performance thereof; however, this bid provision shall not apply to contracts for services, supplies or equipment when: 
(1)  The contract is authorized by a vote of two-thirds of the Board of Trustees; or 
(2)  The contract is for the services of individuals, possessing a high degree of professional skill where the ability or fitness of the individual plays an important part; or 
(3)  The contract is for the purchase of supplies, materials, parts or equipment available only from a single source; or 
(4)  The contract is to be paid in whole or in part by special assessment, which contracts shall be subject to the applicable statutory assessment procedure; or 
(5)  The contract is to provide the normal utilities to the various village activities; or 
(6)  The contract is awarded in accordance with the state statutes concerning the expenditure of Motor Fuel Tax Funds; or 
(7)  The contract is for membership or participation in an intergovernmental organization or entity, which includes the payment of periodic dues or assessments as a condition of membership; or 
(8)  The contract is for the periodic purchase of motor fuels, provided that the purchase is made: 
a.  Pursuant to an intergovernmental purchasing contract or similar intergovernmental cooperative purchasing program that has been previously approved by the Board of Trustees; or 
b.  After obtaining at least three price quotations, and is made from the motor fuel provider who provided the lowest reliable and responsible price quotation. 
(c)  Unless otherwise required as a condition of receipt of state or federal funding, whenever the village awards a contract for professional services pursuant to subsection (b)(2) of this section, the village shall be entitled, in the exercise of its sole discretion and in such manner as it may determine, to require persons or entities responding to requests for proposals, requests for qualifications, or any other form of solicitation for such services issued by the village, to provide cost information, whether in terms of estimated costs or expenses, hourly rates, fixed or variable costs, hours of work anticipated, percentage of construction costs, or any other measure of the same or similar information as may be determined by the village. The village shall have the right and ability to evaluate proposals or submissions for such professional services in such manner, including negotiating price or cost, as it deems in the public interest. The provisions of this section are an exercise of the village's constitutional home rule authority, shall constitute the total, comprehensive and exclusive regulation of the subject matter covered herein, and shall wholly displace and preempt all provisions of the Local Government Professional Services Selection Act, chapter 50, act 510, section 0.01 et seq. (50 ILCS 510/0.01 et seq.), in effect now or as amended hereafter. 
(Code 1993, § 6-6.4; Ord. No. 2002-O-24, 8-27-2002; Ord. No. 2004-O-109, 11-22-2004; Ord. No. 2007-O-33, 4-24-2007; Ord. No. 2007-O-89, 12-11-2007; Ord. No. 2008-O-22, 4-22-2008; Ord. No. 2017-O-67, § 2, 11-28-2017; Ord. No. 2018-O-72, § 3, 10-9-2018) 
Sec. 6-131. - Contracts requiring bids. 
(a)  Whenever bids or proposals are required, the Village Manager shall advertise such bid or proposal as required by this section. The Village Manager shall have the discretion to advertise such bid or proposal in following manner: 
(1)  In a publication of general circulation; or 
(2)  Posting on the village's website; or 
(3)  Any other manner deemed necessary by the Village Manager. 
(b)  Plans and specifications of the services to be rendered or the supplies or equipment to be furnished shall first be placed on file in the office of the Village Manager before any such advertisement shall be made, which plans and specifications shall at all times be open for public inspection. The advertisement, unless otherwise required by law, shall be advertised not less than seven days before the day fixed for receiving bids or responses. 
(Code 1993, § 6-6.5; Ord. No. 2002-O-24, 8-27-2002; Ord. No. 2017-O-90, § 2, 1-9-2018) 
Sec. 6-132. - Emergency procurement. 
    In cases of emergency where it is necessary to protect life or property, the Village Manager is authorized to make such emergency purchases as may be necessary under such circumstances, provided that any such purchases shall be submitted to the President and Board of Trustees for ratification at their next regular meeting. If under such emergency circumstances the Village Manager cannot be contacted to provide approval in advance, a department head is authorized to make such emergency procurements as necessary, provided the department head notifies the Village Manager of same as soon thereafter as possible. 
(Code 1993, § 6-6.6; Ord. No. 2002-O-24, 8-27-2002) 
Sec. 6-133. - Joint purchases with other governmental agencies. 
    The Village Manager is authorized to participate in joint purchasing with other governmental agencies when the Village Manager deems that it is in the best interest of the village to do so. 
(Code 1993, § 6-6.7; Ord. No. 2002-O-24, 8-27-2002) 
Secs. 6-134-6-164. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - MUNICIPAL ELECTRIC UTILITY TAX 

Sec. 6-165. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Person means any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association, joint stock company, joint venture, corporation, limited liability company, municipal corporation, the State or any political subdivision thereof, and state university created by statute, or a receiver, trustee, conservator or other representative appointed by order of any court or by operation of law. 
    Person maintaining a place of business in this state means any person having or maintaining within the State, directly or by a subsidiary or other affiliate, an office, generation facility, distribution facility, transmission facility, sales office or other place of business, or any employee, agent, or other representative operating within the State under the authority of the person or its subsidiary or other affiliate, irrespective of whether such place of business or agent or other representative is located in the State permanently or temporarily, or whether such person, subsidiary, or other affiliate is licensed or qualified to do business in this state. 
    Purchase at retail means any acquisition of electricity by a purchaser for the purposes of use or consumption, and not for resale, but shall not include the use of electricity by a public utility as defined in section 8-11-2 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-2) directly in the generation, production, transmission, delivery or sale of electricity. 
    Purchaser means any person who uses or consumes, within the corporate limits of the village electricity acquired in a purchase at retail. 
    Tax collector means the person delivering electricity to the purchaser. 
    Village means the Village of Wilmette, Illinois. 
(Code 1993, § 6-7.1; Ord. No. 98-O-64, 7-28-1998) 
Sec. 6-166. - Tax imposed. 
(a)  Pursuant to section 8-11-2 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-2) and any and all other applicable authority, a tax is imposed upon the privilege of using or consuming electricity acquired in a purchase at retail and used or consumed within the corporate limits of the village at the following rates, calculated on a monthly basis for each purchaser: 
(1)  For the first 2,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month: 0.552 cents per kilowatt-hour; 
(2)  For the next 48,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month: 0.363 cents per kilowatt-hour; 
(3)  For the next 50,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month: 0356 cents per kilowatt-hour; 
(4)  For the next 400,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month: 0.291 cents per kilowatt-hour; 
(5)  For the next 500,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month: 0.260 cents per kilowatt-hour; 
(6)  For the next 2,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month: 0.220 cents per kilowatt-hour; 
(7)  For the next 2,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month: 0.180 cents per kilowatt-hour; 
(8)  For the next 5,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month: 0.140 cents per kilowatt-hour; 
(9)  For the next 10,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month: 0.105 cents per kilowatt-hour; 
(10)  For all electricity used or consumed in excess of 20,000,000 kilowatt-hours in a month: 0.080 cents per kilowatt-hour. 
(b)  The tax imposed in subsection (a) of this section is in addition to all taxes, fees and other revenue measures imposed by the village, the United States of America, the State or any other political subdivision of the State. 
(c)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, the tax provided for herein shall not be imposed if and to the extent that the imposition or collection of the tax would violate the Constitution or laws of the United States of America, or the Constitution of the State. 
(d)  The tax provided for in subsection (a) of this section shall be imposed with respect to the use or consumption of electricity by residential customers beginning with the first bill issued on or after September 1, 1998; and with respect to the use or consumption of electricity by non-residential customers beginning with the first bill issued to such customers for delivery services in accordance with section 16-104 of the Illinois Public Utilities Act (220 ILCS 5/16-104), or the first bill issued to such customers on or after January 1, 2001, whichever issuance shall occur sooner. 
(Code 1993, § 6-7.2; Ord. No. 98-O-64, 7-28-1998) 
Sec. 6-167. - Collection of municipal electric utility tax. 
(a)  Subject to the provisions of section 6-169 concerning the delivery of electricity to resellers, the tax imposed under section 6-166 shall be collected from purchasers by the person maintaining a place of business in the State who delivers the electricity to such purchasers. This tax shall constitute a debt of the purchaser to the person who delivers the electricity to the purchaser and is recoverable at the same time and in the same manner as the original charge for delivering the electricity. 
(b)  Any tax required to be collected by this section, and any tax in fact collected, shall constitute a debt due and owing to the village by the person delivering the electricity, provided that the person delivering the electricity shall be allowed credit for such tax related to deliveries of electricity the charges for which are written off as uncollectible after reasonable collection efforts have been made, and provided further, that if such charges are thereafter collected, the person delivering the electricity shall be obligated to remit such tax to the village. 
(c)  Persons delivering electricity shall collect the tax from the purchaser by adding such tax to the gross charge for delivering the electricity. Persons delivering electricity shall also be authorized to add to such gross charge an amount equal to three percent of the tax they collect to reimburse them for their expenses incurred in keeping records, billing customers, preparing and filing returns, remitting the tax, and supplying data to the village upon request. For the purposes of this article, any partial payment of a billed amount not specifically identified by the purchaser shall be deemed to be for the delivery of electricity. 
(Code 1993, § 6-7.3; Ord. No. 98-O-64, 7-28-1998) 
Sec. 6-168. - Tax remittance and return. 
(a)  Every tax collector shall, on a monthly basis, file a return in a form prescribed by the Finance Director. The return and the accompanying remittance shall be due on or before the last day of the month following the month during which the tax is collected or is required to be collected under this article. 
(b)  If the person delivering electricity fails to collect the tax from the purchaser or is excused from collecting the tax under this article, then the purchaser shall file a return in a form prescribed by the Finance Director and pay the tax directly to the village on or before the last day of the month during which the electricity is used or consumed. 
(Code 1993, § 6-7.4; Ord. No. 98-O-64, 7-28-1998) 
Sec. 6-169. - Resales of electricity. 
(a)  Electricity that is delivered to a person in the village shall be considered to be for use and consumption by that person unless said person receiving the electricity has an active resale number issued by the Finance Director and furnishes that number to the person who delivers the electricity, and certified to that person that the sale is either entirely or partially non-taxable as a sale for resale. 
(b)  If a person who receives electricity in the village claims to be an authorized reseller of electricity, that person shall apply to the Finance Director for a resale number. The applicant shall state in such application facts showing why it is not liable for the tax imposed by this article on any purchases of electricity and shall furnish such additional information as the Finance Director may reasonably require. 
(c)  Upon approval of the application, the Finance Director shall assign a resale number to the applicant and shall certify the number to the applicant. 
(d)  The Finance Director may cancel the resale number of any person if: 
(1)  That person fails to pay any tax payable under this article for electricity used or consumed by that person; or 
(2)  The resale number was obtained through misrepresentation; or 
(3)  The resale number is no longer necessary because the person having obtained the number has discontinued making resales. 
(e)  If a reseller has acquired electricity partly for use or consumption and partly for resale, the reseller shall pay the tax imposed by this article directly to the village pursuant to section 6-168(b) and remit the tax pursuant to section 6-168(a) to the village for the amount of electricity delivered by the reseller to a purchaser. 
(f)  Any person who delivers electricity to a reseller having an active resale number and complying with all other conditions of this section shall be excused from collecting and remitting the tax on any portion of the electricity delivered to the reseller, provided that the person reports to the Finance Director the total amount of electricity delivered to the reseller, and such other information that the Finance Director may reasonably require. 
(Code 1993, § 6-7.5; Ord. No. 98-O-64, 7-28-1998) 
Sec. 6-170. - Books and records. 
    Every tax collector, and every taxpayer required to pay the tax imposed by this article, shall keep accurate books and records of its business or activity, including contemporaneous books and records denoting the transactions that gave rise, or may have given rise, to any tax liability under this article. These books and records shall be subject to and available for inspection by the village at all times during business hours of the day. 
(Code 1993, § 6-7.6; Ord. No. 98-O-64, 7-28-1998) 
Secs. 6-171-6-193. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - MUNICIPAL GAS USE TAX 

Sec. 6-194. - Short title. 
    The tax imposed by this article shall be known as the "Municipal Gas Use Tax" and is imposed in addition to all other taxes imposed by the village, the State, or any other municipal corporation or political subdivision thereof. 
(Code 1993, § 6-8.1; Ord. No. 99-O-17, 3-23-1999) 
Sec. 6-195. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Person means any individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association, joint stock company, joint venture, corporation, limited liability company, municipal corporation or political subdivision of this state, or a receiver, trustee, conservator or other representative appointed by order of any court. 
    Public utility means a public utility as defined in section 3-105 of the Public Utilities Act (ILCS ch. 220, act 5, 3-105). 
    Public Utilities Act means the Public Utilities Act, as amended (ILCS ch. 220, Act. 5, 1-101 et seq.). 
    Retail purchaser means any person who purchases gas in a sale at retail. 
    Sale at retail means any sale of gas by a retailer to a person for use or consumption, and not for resale. The term "retailer" means any person engaged in the business of distribution, supplying, furnishing or selling gas. 
(Code 1993, § 6-8.2; Ord. No. 99-O-17, 3-23-1999) 
Sec. 6-196. - Tax. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided by this article, a tax is imposed on the privilege of using or consuming gas in the village that is purchased in a sale at retail at the rate of $0.024 (2.4 cents) per therm. 
(b)  The ultimate incidence of and liability for payment of the tax is on the retail purchaser, and nothing in this article shall be construed to impose a tax on the occupation of distributing, supplying, furnishing, selling or transporting gas. 
(c)  The retail purchaser shall pay the tax, measured by therms of gas delivered to the retail purchaser's premises, to the public utility designated to collect the tax pursuant to section 6-197 on or before the payment due date of the public utility's bill first reflecting the tax, or directly to the Village Treasurer on or before the 15 th day of the second month following the month in which the gas is delivered to the retail purchaser if no public utility has been designated to collect the tax pursuant to said subsection, or if the gas is delivered by a person other than a public utility so designated. 
(d)  A purchaser who purchases gas for resale and therefore does not pay the tax imposed by this article with respect to the use or consumption of the gas, but who later uses or consumes part or all of the gas, shall pay the tax directly to the Village Treasurer on or before the 15 th day of the second month following the month in which the gas is used or consumed. 
(e)  The tax shall apply to gas for which the delivery to the retail purchaser is billed by a public utility on or after May 1, 1999. 
(Code 1993, § 6-8.3; Ord. No. 2003-O-56, 9-9-2003; Ord. No. 99-O-17, 3-23-1999; Ord. No. 2002-O-11, 2-26-2002) 
Sec. 6-197. - Collection of tax. 
(a)  The Village Manager is authorized to enter into a contract, subject to final approval by the President and Board of Trustees, for collection of the tax imposed by this article with any public utility providing gas service in the village. The contract shall include and substantially conform with the following provisions: 
(1)  The public utility will collect the tax with respect to gas delivered by it to its customers as an independent contractor; 
(2)  The public utility will remit collected taxes to the Village Treasurer no more often than the once each month; 
(3)  The public utility will be entitled to withhold from tax collections a service fee not to exceed three percent of the amounts collected and timely remitted to the Village Treasurer; 
(4)  The public utility shall not be liable to the village for any tax not actually collected from a retail purchaser; and 
(5)  Such additional terms as the parties may agree upon. 
(b)  A public utility designated to collect the tax imposed by this article from its customers shall bill each customer for the tax on all gas delivered to the customer. 
(Code 1993, § 6-8.4; Ord. No. 99-O-17, 3-23-1999) 
Sec. 6-198. - Books and records. 
    Every taxpayer shall keep accurate books and records, including original source documents and books of entry, denoting the activities or transactions that gave rise, or may have given rise to any tax liability or exemption under this article. All such books and records shall, at all times during business hours, be subject to and available for inspection by the village. 
(Code 1993, § 6-8.5; Ord. No. 99-O-17, 3-23-1999) 
Secs. 6-199-6-219. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - SERVICE AND USER FEES 

Sec. 6-220. - Purpose. 
    The service and user fees imposed by this article and its further subsections below, are fees for services and benefits provided by the village to particular individuals or properties that are also obtainable, if desired, through private vendors or service providers, and are intended to defray a portion of the cost incurred by the village in providing such services. Such fees as may be provided for herein are imposed and shall be collected on fee for service basis, and shall not be interpreted as constituting taxes or otherwise be subject to the provisions of article XI of this chapter. 
(Code 1993, § 6-9; Ord. No. 2001-O-81, 12-11-2001) 
Secs. 6-221-6-248. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - AMBULANCE TRANSPORTATION FEE 

Sec. 6-249. - Imposition of Ambulance Transportation Fee. 
    On and after March 1, 2002, any person who, as part of the provision of emergency medical services by the village, is transported in an ambulance owned by the village to a hospital for further treatment or to another location for treatment or further transportation, such as for helicopter transportation, shall be obligated to pay to the village an Ambulance Transportation Fee for said service. 
(Code 1993, § 6-9.1.1; Ord. No. 2001-O-81, 12-11-2001) 
Sec. 6-250. - Amount of Ambulance Transportation Fee. 
    The amount of the Ambulance Transportation Fee shall be $450.00 for basic life services, and $550.00 for advanced life services (level I); and $700.00 for advanced life services (level II) plus a mileage charge of $7.50 per mile. 
(Code 1993, § 6-9.1.2; Ord. No. 2001-O-81, 12-11-2001; Ord. No. 2004-O-104, 11-22-2004; Ord. No. 2007-O-87, 11-27-2007; Ord. No. 2009-O-72, 11-24-2009; Ord. No. 2010-O-71, 11-23-2010) 
Sec. 6-251. - Collection of Ambulance Transportation Fee. 
    The Ambulance Transportation Fee shall be considered a debt due and owing to the village at the time the service is provided by the village, and shall be collected by the Finance Director in the same manner as other debts due and owing to the village. In conformance with village contract and purchasing approval and practices as provided in chapter 2, the Finance Director may arrange for contractual services of an outside vendor for the billing and collection of this fee. 
(Code 1993, § 6-9.1.3; Ord. No. 2001-O-81, 12-11-2001) 
Secs. 6-252-6-280. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - SOLID WASTE COLLECTION FEE 

Sec. 6-281. - Imposition of Solid Waste Collection Fee; joint liability. 
(a)  On and after January 1, 2002, any person or entity that, as the owner or occupant of property, receives solid waste pick-up and disposal services from the village, whether such service is performed by the village or a contractor retained by the village, shall be obligated to pay to the village a Solid Waste Collection Fee for said service. 
(1)  In the case of multi-unit dwellings, owners or occupants receiving individual solid waste collection service performed by the village or a contractor retained by the village, and whose water is separately metered for that individual dwelling unit, shall be individually obligated to pay said Solid Waste Collection Fee. 
(2)  In the case of multi-unit dwelling structures, such as apartment buildings, condominiums, townhouses, co-operatives and the like, receiving solid waste collection service performed by the village or a contractor retained by the village and using communal dumpsters or similar receptacles, the apartment building owner, condominium association, cooperative or owners' association, or other similar entity responsible for payment of the property's water service bill, shall also be responsible for payment of the Solid Waste Collection Fee. 
(b)  The owner or premises receiving solid waste collection service from the village and subject to the Solid Waste Collection Fee, and the occupant thereof receiving solid waste collection service if not the owner, are and shall be jointly and severally liable to the village for payment of the Solid Waste Collection Fee provided for in this article. Solid waste collection service will be furnished by the village only upon the condition that the owner of the premises and the occupant, if different, are both jointly and severally liable for payment of the Solid Waste Collection Fee to the village. 
(Code 1993, § 6-9.2.1; Ord. No. 2001-O-81, 12-11-2001; Ord. No. 2002-O-9, 2-12-2002) 
Sec. 6-282. - Amount of Solid Waste Collection Fee. 
    The amount of the Solid Waste Collection Fee shall be as follows: 
(1)  For detached dwellings, the Solid Waste Collection Fee shall be $23.75 per month or any portion thereof, said Solid Waste Collection Fee to be billed and paid in installments of $71.25 per calendar quarter or pro rated fraction thereof. 
(2)  For each dwelling unit that is a townhouse or part of a multi-unit dwelling that receives individual solid waste collection service and individual water service metered separately for that dwelling unit, as described in section 6-281(a)(1), the Solid Waste Collection Fee shall be $23.75 per month or any portion thereof, said Solid Waste Collection Fee to be billed and paid in installments of $71.25 per calendar quarter or pro rated fraction thereof. 
(3)  For multi-unit dwellings wherein each dwelling unit that is part of the multi-unit dwelling that does not receive individual solid waste collection service and individual water service metered separately for that dwelling unit, as described in section 6-281(a)(2), the Solid Waste Collection Fee to be paid by the entity responsible for payment of the water service bill for that multi-unit dwelling shall be the total of $23.75 per month, multiplied by the number of all the dwelling units in the multifamily structure, said Solid Waste Collection Fee to be billed and paid in installments of $71.25 per calendar quarter times the number of all the dwelling units, or pro rated fraction thereof. 
(4)  Any multi-unit dwelling described in subsections (2) and (3) of this section shall either receive its solid waste collection service from the village and pay the Solid Waste Collection Fee as provided in this section, or alternatively, may elect to receive solid waste collection service from the village's commercial waste franchise holder as provided in chapter 22, subject to the franchisee's collection fee. A multi-unit dwelling described in subsection (3) of this section shall be presumed to have not elected to receive solid waste collection service from the village's commercial waste franchise holder unless it has notified the Finance Director that it will receive such service from the village's commercial waste franchise holder. The Solid Waste Collection Fee shall thereafter cease to accrue beginning on the first day of the month next following receipt of said notice by the Finance Director. 
(Code 1993, § 6-9.2.2; Ord. No. 2001-O-81, 12-11-2001; Ord. No. 2002-O-9, 2-12-2002; Ord. No. 2002-O-31, 5-14-2002; Ord. No. 2002-O-100, 12-10-2002; Ord. No. 2003-O-90, 11-24-2003; Ord. No. 2004-O-102, 11-22-2004; Ord. No. 2005-O-113, 11-21-2005; Ord. No. 2006-O-95, 11-28-2006; Ord. No. 2007-O-85, 11-27-2007; Ord. No. 2008-O-60, 9-9-2008; Ord. No. 2008-O-90, 12-9-2008; Ord. No. 2009-O-70, 11-24-2009; Ord. No. 2010-O-69, 11-23-2010; Ord. No. 2011-O- 73, 11-22-2011; Ord. No. 2012-O-62, 11-27-2012; Ord. No. 2013-O-73, 11-26-2013; Ord. No. 2014-O-66, 11-25-2014; Ord. No. 2017-O-82, 12-12-2017; Ord. No. 2018-O-06, § 3, 1-23-2018) 
Sec. 6-283. - Collection of Solid Waste Collection Fee; consolidated billing with charges for water service. 
(a)  The Solid Waste Collection Fee shall be considered a debt due and owing to the village at the time the service is provided by the village, and shall be collected by the Finance Director in the same manner as other debts due and owing to the village. 
(b)  Persons or entities who are consumers of water billed by the village as provided in chapter 26, and who are also obligated to pay the Solid Waste Collection Fee, shall receive and be obligated to pay a consolidated bill covering water service, sewer charges if applicable, and the Solid Waste Collection Fee. In such cases, the Solid Waste Collection Fee shall be billed and collected by adding the quarterly amount of the Solid Waste Collection Fee to the person's or entity's water bill issued by the village. Said quarterly charge for the Solid Waste Collection Fee shall be added as a separate line item on the water bill, shall be paid by the consumer coincident with payment of the water bill, and shall be collected by the village in the same manner as the charge for water service. Persons receiving consolidated bills pursuant to this section shall be obligated to pay the Solid Waste Collection Fee at the same time, under the same terms and subject to the same conditions and remedies as provided in article VII of chapter 26 for the collection of water bills. 
(c)  Persons who receive consolidated bills for water service and the Solid Waste Collection Fee as provided in subsection (b) of this section, and who fail to pay the Solid Waste Collection Fee, shall be subject to the same penalties, charges, and village remedies as provided in article VII of chapter 26 for non-payment of water bills, including, but not limited to, penalties, interest, joint liability, disconnection of water service and reconnection charges, all as provided in section 26-183, liens for unpaid bills as provided in section 26-184, and foreclosure of lien as provided in section 26-185. 
(Code 1993, § 6-9.2.3; Ord. No. 2001-O-81, 12-11-2001) 
Secs. 6-284-6-314. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - BUSINESS TAXES; AUTOMOBILE RENTING OCCUPATION TAX 

Sec. 6-315. - Automobile renting occupation tax imposed. 
    Pursuant to the authority granted under ILCS ch. 65, act 5, § 8-11-7, now or hereafter amended, a tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of renting automobiles in the village at the rate of one percent of the gross receipts from such rentals made in the course of such business, in accordance with the provisions of, and to the full extent authorized by, said provisions of the Illinois Municipal Code. 
(Code 1993, § 6-10.1.1; Ord. No. 2003-O-35, 5-27-2003) 
Sec. 6-316. - Collection and enforcement; returns. 
    The tax imposed in this article shall be enforced, collected and remitted to the village by the Illinois Department of Revenue in the manner provided in ILCS ch. 65, act 5, § 8-11-7, now or hereafter amended, and pursuant to such regulations as the Illinois Department of Revenue may promulgate thereunder. Persons subject to said tax shall submit returns to the Illinois Department of Revenue in the manner provided in ILCS ch. 65, act 5, § 8-11-7, now or hereafter amended, and pursuant to such regulations as the Illinois Department of Revenue may promulgate thereunder. 
(Code 1993, § 6-10.1.2; Ord. No. 2003-O-35, 5-27-2003) 
Secs. 6-317-6-335. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIII. - BUSINESS TAXES; AUTOMOBILE RENTING USE TAX 

Sec. 6-336. - Automobile renting use tax imposed. 
    Pursuant to the authority granted under ILCS ch. 65, act 5, § 8-11-8, now or hereafter amended, a tax is hereby imposed upon the privilege of using in the village an automobile which is rented from a renter outside of the State and which is titled or registered with an agency of the State in the village, at the rate of one percent of the rental price of such automobile, in accordance with the provisions of, and to the full extent authorized by, said provisions of the Illinois Municipal Code. 
(Code 1993, § 6-10.2.1; Ord. No. 2003-O-35, 5-27-2003) 
Sec. 6-337. - Collection and enforcement; returns. 
    The tax imposed in this article shall be enforced, collected and remitted to the village by the Illinois Department of Revenue in the manner provided in ILCS ch. 65, act 5, § 8-11-8, now or hereafter amended, and pursuant to such regulations as the Illinois Department of Revenue may promulgate thereunder. Persons subject to said tax shall submit returns to the Illinois Department of Revenue in the manner provided in ILCS ch. 65, act 5, § 8-11-8, now or hereafter amended, and pursuant to such regulations as the Illinois Department of Revenue may promulgate thereunder. 
(Code 1993, § 6-10.2.2; Ord. No. 2003-O-35, 5-27-2003) 
Secs. 6-338-6-362. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIV. - BUSINESS TAXES; FOREIGN FIRE INSURANCE COMPANY TAX 

Sec. 6-363. - Foreign Fire Insurance Company Tax imposed. 
    Pursuant to the authority granted under ILCS ch. 65, act 5, § 11-10-1, now or hereafter amended, a tax is hereby imposed on every corporation, company and association which is not incorporated under the laws of the State and which is engaged in effecting fire insurance in the village at the rate of two percent of the gross receipts received from such fire insurance upon property situated in the village, in accordance with the provisions of, and to the full extent authorized by, said provisions of the Illinois Municipal Code. 
(Code 1993, § 6-10.3.1; Ord. No. 2003-O-35, 5-27-2003) 
Sec. 6-364. - Collection and enforcement; returns. 
    The tax imposed in this article shall be enforced, collected and remitted to the village in the manner provided in ILCS ch. 65, act 5, § 11-10-1, now or hereafter amended. Persons subject to said tax shall submit returns to the village in the manner provided in ILCS ch. 65, act 5, § 11-10-1, now or hereafter amended. 
(Code 1993, § 6-10.3.2; Ord. No. 2003-O-35, 5-27-2003) 
Sec. 6-365. - Expenditure of Foreign Fire Insurance Company Tax proceeds; Foreign Fire Insurance Board. 
(a)  The tax remitted to the village pursuant to this article shall be set apart by the Village Treasurer and appropriated annually by the corporate authorities of the village to a Foreign Fire Insurance Fund, which fund shall be administered by a Foreign Fire Insurance Board in the manner provided in ILCS ch. 65, act 5, § 11-10-2, now or hereafter amended. Persons subject to said tax shall submit returns to the village in the manner provided in ILCS ch. 65, act 5, § 11-10-1, now or hereafter amended. 
(b)  The members of the Foreign Fire Insurance Board shall be as provided in section 2-553. 
(Code 1993, § 6-10.3.3; Ord. No. 2003-O-35, 5-27-2003) 
Secs. 6-366-6-388. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XV. - BUSINESS TAXES; HOME RULE MUNICIPAL RETAILER AND SERVICE OCCUPATION TAXES 

Sec. 6-389. - Home rule municipal retailer occupation tax. 
(a)  Pursuant to, and in accordance with, the provisions of section 8-11-1 of the Illinois Municipal Code (ILCS ch. 65, act 5, 8-11-1), now or hereafter amended by the State, a tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of selling tangible personal property, other than an item of tangible personal property titled or registered with an agency of the government of the State, at retail in the village, at the rate of one percent on the gross receipts from these sales made in the course of such business. 
(b)  Said tax shall not be imposed on the sales of food for human consumption that is to be consumed off the premises where it is sold (other than alcoholic beverages, soft drinks and food that has been prepared for immediate consumption), and prescription and nonprescription medicines, drugs, medical appliances and insulin, urine-testing materials, syringes and needles used by diabetics. 
(c)  The tax imposed pursuant to this section, and all civil penalties that may be assessed as an incident thereof, shall be collected and enforced by the Illinois Department of Revenue in the manner provided in the provisions of the Illinois Municipal Code aforesaid, now or hereafter amended, and the Illinois Department of Revenue shall have full power to administer and enforce this section, to collect all taxes and penalties due hereunder, to dispose of taxes and penalties so collected in the manner provided by law, and to determine all rights to credit memoranda arising on account of the erroneous payment of tax or penalty hereunder. 
(Code 1993, § 6-10.4.1; Ord. No. 2004-O-84, 9-14-2004; Ord. No. 2014-O-51, 9-23-2014) 
Sec. 6-390. - Home rule municipal service occupation tax. 
(a)  Pursuant to, and in accordance with, the provisions of section 8-11-5 of the Illinois Municipal Code (ILCS ch. 65, act 5, 8-11-5), now or hereafter amended by the State, a tax is hereby imposed upon all persons in the village engaged in the business of making sales of service, at the rate of tax the rate of one percent of the selling price of all tangible personal property transferred by such servicemen, either in the form of tangible personal property or in the form of real estate as an incident to a sale of service. 
(b)  Said tax shall not be imposed on the sales of food for human consumption which is to be consumed off the premises where it is sold (other than alcoholic beverages, soft drinks and food which has been prepared for immediate consumption), and prescription and nonprescription medicines, drugs, medical appliances and insulin, urine-testing materials, syringes and needles used by diabetics. 
(c)  The tax imposed pursuant to this section, and all civil penalties that may be assessed as an incident thereof, shall be collected and enforced by the Illinois Department of Revenue in the manner provided in the provisions of the Illinois Municipal Code aforesaid, now or hereafter amended, and the Illinois Department of Revenue shall have full power to administer and enforce this section, to collect all taxes and penalties due hereunder, to dispose of taxes and penalties so collected in the manner provided by law, and to determine all rights to credit memoranda arising on account of the erroneous payment of tax or penalty hereunder. 
(Code 1993, § 6-10.4.2; Ord. No. 2004-O-84, 9-14-2004; Ord. No. 2014-O-51, 9-23-2014) 
Secs. 6-391-6-408. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XVI. - BUSINESS TAXES; VEHICLE FUEL TAX 

Sec. 6-409. - Authority. 
    This article , and all subsections thereof, is enacted pursuant to the home rule authority of the village granted under article VII of the 1970 Constitution of the State. 
(Code 1993, § 6-10.5.1; Ord. No. 2006-O-75, 9-26-2006) 
Sec. 6-410. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Department means the Finance Department of the village, as provided in chapter 2. 
    Director means the Finance Director of the village, as provided in chapter 2. 
    Person means any individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association, corporation, joint venture, joint stock company, receiver, trustee, conservator, legal representative, or other legally recognized entity. 
    Retail dealer or retail vehicle fuel dealer means any person who is engaged in the business of selling vehicle fuel in the village to a purchaser for the purchaser's use or consumption, and not for resale in any form. 
    Sale at retail means any sale to a person for that person's use or consumption and not for resale to another. 
    Sale, resale, or purchase means any transfer of ownership or title or both, any exchange or any barter, whether conditional or otherwise, in any manner or by any means whatsoever for consideration. 
    Use means the exercise of any right to or power over vehicle fuel incident to the ownership thereof, including, but not limited to, the receipt of vehicle fuel by any person into a fuel supply tank of a vehicle. 
    Vehicle means any machine or device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a rail, street, road highway or otherwise upon land, in or upon water, or through the air. The term "vehicle" includes without limitation automobiles, trucks, buses, trains, motorcycles, boats, and aircraft. 
    Vehicle fuel means any volatile and inflammable liquid or gas produced, blended or compounded for the purpose of or which is suitable for operating a vehicle, or which is used in propelling a vehicle. The term "vehicle fuel" includes without limitation gasoline, gasohol, diesel oil, ethanol, motor benzol, motor benzene, propane gas fuel, kerosene and "special fuel" as that term is defined in the Illinois Motor Fuel Tax Law, as amended (ILCS ch. 35, act 505 § 1.13), and blends thereof. 
(Code 1993, § 6-10.5.2; Ord. No. 2006-O-75, 9-26-2006) 
Sec. 6-411. - Vehicle fuel tax imposed. 
(a)  A vehicle fuel tax is hereby imposed privilege of purchasing or using, in the village, vehicle fuel purchased in a sale at retail. The vehicle fuel tax shall be at a rate of one cent ($0.01) per gallon of vehicle fuel. The ultimate incidence of and liability for payment of the vehicle fuel tax shall be upon the purchaser or user of the vehicle fuel, and nothing in this chapter shall be construed to impose a tax upon the occupation of selling or distributing vehicle fuel. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any retail dealer to fail to add this vehicle fuel tax to the retail price of vehicle fuel or to absorb the vehicle fuel tax. The vehicle fuel tax shall be in addition to any and all other taxes. 
(b)  For the purposes of this article , the term "use in the village" shall be deemed to occur only at the place in the village where the vehicle fuel is transferred into the vehicle by which it is to be consumed. To the extent that a person has paid the vehicle fuel tax imposed herein on the retail purchase of vehicle fuel, such person shall be exempt from the payment of and liability for said vehicle fuel tax on the use of such fuel. 
(c)  It shall be presumed that all sales and uses of vehicle fuel in the village are subject to the vehicle fuel tax until the contrary is established by clear and convincing evidence. The burden of proving that a sale or use is not taxable hereunder shall be upon the retail dealer, purchaser or user so claiming. 
(d)  The vehicle fuel tax imposed by this section shall not be applicable to the privilege of purchasing or using vehicle fuel when such fuel is purchased or used, as the case may be, by the federal government or any of its instrumentalities. 
(Code 1993, § 6-10.5.3; Ord. No. 2006-O-75, 9-26-2006) 
Sec. 6-412. - Collection and remittance of vehicle fuel tax. 
(a)  The vehicle fuel tax shall be collected by each retail dealer, who shall have the duty to collect the vehicle fuel tax in turn from the purchaser of the vehicle fuel, and thereafter remit such vehicle fuel tax to the village. 
(b)  If any purchaser or user receives vehicle fuel upon which the vehicle fuel tax has not been collected by the retail dealer, such purchaser or user shall pay the vehicle fuel tax directly to the village by the last day of the month following the month in which such purchaser or user made the taxable purchase or use of the vehicle fuel. 
(c)  Any person who collects the vehicle fuel tax shall do as a trustee for and on account of the village. 
(d)  Any vehicle fuel tax remittance required to be made directly to the village shall be made to the Finance Department and shall be accompanied by a return form prescribed by the department. Any retail dealer, purchaser or user who is required to remit the vehicle fuel tax directly to the village on a frequently recurring basis shall register with the department on forms prescribed by the department in the manner provided in section 6-414. 
(e)  The vehicle fuel tax return and remittance shall be submitted to the department on the same filing dates as are established for filing sales and use tax returns with the Illinois Department of Revenue (Form ST-1 and Worksheet ST-1, or such similar filing as now or hereafter required by the Illinois Department of Revenue). 
(f)  Late payments of the vehicle fuel tax shall be subject to such interest and penalties as may be provided in article XVIII of this chapter. 
(Code 1993, § 6-10.5.4; Ord. No. 2006-O-75, 9-26-2006) 
Sec. 6-413. - Commission on vehicle fuel tax paid when due. 
    A retail dealer remitting the vehicle fuel tax to the village shall be entitled to retain a commission of one percent of the vehicle fuel tax to be remitted, in order to compensate the retail dealer for the cost of collection, filing returns, and supplying information to the department, but in no event shall any commission be allowed to any retail dealer on any vehicle fuel tax not remitted when due. 
(Code 1993, § 6-10.5.5; Ord. No. 2006-O-75, 9-26-2006) 
Sec. 6-414. - Registration of retail dealers. 
    Each retail dealer doing business in the village shall register with the Finance Department of the village on or before January 1, 2007, or within 20 days after commencement of business as a retail dealer, whichever is later, using such registration form as shall be issued by the department. 
(Code 1993, § 6-10.5.6; Ord. No. 2006-O-75, 9-26-2006) 
Sec. 6-415. - Record-keeping; inspection of records; audits. 
(a)  Each retail dealer shall have the duty to maintain complete and accurate books, records and accounts showing the gross receipts for the sale of motor fuel and the vehicle fuel taxes collected from purchasers thereof. Such records shall be kept as provided in article XVIII of this chapter. 
(b)  All retail dealers and their records shall be subject to inspection and audit by the village in the manner provided in article XVIII of this chapter. 
(Code 1993, § 6-10.5.7; Ord. No. 2006-O-75, 9-26-2006) 
Sec. 6-416. - Penalties. 
    In addition to any interest, penalty, lien or other remedy available to the village as provided in article XVIII of this chapter, or otherwise available at law or in equity, any person who violates the provisions of this section, or who submits false information to the village concerning the vehicle fuel tax, commits an offense punishable by a fine of not less than $1,000.00 nor more than $5,000.00, for each offense. 
(Code 1993, § 6-10.5.8; Ord. No. 2006-O-75, 9-26-2006) 
Secs. 6-417-6-445. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XVII. - BUSINESS TAXES; HOTEL-MOTEL TAX 

Sec. 6-446. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Hotel or motel means an establishment containing lodging accommodations designed for use by transients or travelers or temporary guests which establishment is kept, used or maintained as or advertised or held out to the public to be an inn, motel, hotel, apartment, lodging house, dormitory or place where sleeping, rooming, office, conference, or exhibition accommodations are furnished for lease or rent, whether with or without meals. 
    Hotel or motel accommodation means one room offered for rental within a hotel or motel with or without an adjoining bath. A suite of such rooms having only one access to a corridor or the out-of-doors shall be considered a single hotel or motel room. 
    Person means any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint stock company, corporation, limited liability company, or any combination of individuals of whatever form or character. 
    Village means the Village of Wilmette, Illinois. 
(Code 1993, § 6-10.6.1; Ord. No. 2011-O-49, 9-27-2011) 
Sec. 6-447. - Tax imposed. 
(a)  A tax is hereby levied and imposed upon the use and privilege of renting, leasing or letting of rooms in a motel or hotel in the village at a rate of 9.75 percent of the gross rental receipts from such rental, leasing or letting. Accommodations within hotels or motels which are leased to the same occupant for a period of more than 30 consecutive days shall be exempt from this tax. 
(b)  The ultimate incidence of and liability for payment of the tax shall be borne by the lessee or tenant of any such hotel or motel accommodation. The tax herein levied shall be in addition to any and all other taxes. 
(c)  The tax herein levied shall be secured by the hotel or motel owner, manager, or operator from the lessee or tenant when collecting the price, charge or rent payable upon which the hotel-motel tax shall be stated, charged, and shown separately. It shall be a violation of this section for any owner, manager, or operator of a hotel or motel to fail to cause the tax to be collected from the lessee or tenant of the hotel or motel or to fail to pay over to the Village Treasurer the tax under rules and regulations prescribed by the Village Treasurer. 
(Code 1993, § 6-10.6.2; Ord. No. 2011-O-49, 9-27-2011) 
Sec. 6-448. - Payment of tax and filing of return. 
(a)  On or before the last day of each month every person who is an owner, manager or operator of a hotel or motel within the village shall cause a sworn tax return to be filed with the Village Treasurer of the village showing tax receipts received with respect to hotel-motel accommodations rented or leased during the preceding calendar month, which return shall be made upon forms prescribed by the Village Treasurer. 
(b)  At the time of the filing of said tax return, the owner, manager or operator of a hotel or motel shall pay or cause to be paid to the Village Treasurer all taxes due for the period to which the tax return applies. 
(c)  Penalty. If for any reason any tax is not paid when due, a penalty at the rate of three percent per month on the amount of tax which remains unpaid shall be added and collected. 
(Code 1993, § 6-10.6.3; Ord. No. 2011-O-49, 9-27-2011) 
Sec. 6-449. - Books and records. 
    Every person who is an owner, manager, and/or operator of a hotel or motel in the village shall keep books and records reflecting the price, rents or charges made or charged and occupancies assessed under this article. The Village Treasurer or his designee shall have the right to inspect such books and records upon reasonable notice at reasonable times. 
(Code 1993, § 6-10.6.4; Ord. No. 2011-O-49, 9-27-2011) 
Sec. 6-450. - Use of tax proceeds. 
    All proceeds resulting from the imposition of the hotel-motel tax shall be paid into the treasury of the village and may be used for general corporate purposes. 
(Code 1993, § 6-10.6.5; Ord. No. 2011-O-49, 9-27-2011) 
Secs. 6-451-6-468. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XVIII. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT OF MUNICIPAL TAX ORDINANCES 

Sec. 6-469. - Applicability. 
    The provisions of this article, and subsections thereof, shall be liberally construed and administered to supplement all of the village's tax ordinances, and shall apply to the village's procedures in connection with all of the village's locally imposed and administered taxes. In the event of any conflict between the provisions of this article and the collection, administration, audit and appeal provisions of any other chapter or section of this Code, the provisions of this article shall control. 
(Code 1993, § 6-11.1; Ord. No. 2001-O-24, 4-10-2001) 
Sec. 6-470. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Act means the Local Government Taxpayers' Bill of Rights Act, ILCS ch. 50, act 45, § 1 et seq. 
    Corporate Authorities means the President and Trustees or the Village Board. 
    Locally imposed and administered tax or tax means each tax imposed by the village that is collected or administered by the village. The term "locally imposed and administered tax" or "tax" does not mean or include: 
(1)  Any tax imposed, collected or administered by the United States of America, the State, or an agency or department thereof. 
(2)  Any taxes imposed upon real property under the Property Tax Code. 
(3)  Any fees of any sort collected by the village, other than infrastructure maintenance fees. 
    Local tax administrator means the Village Treasurer, as provided for in article X of chapter 2. 
    Notice means each audit notice, collection notice or other similar notice or communication in connection with each of the village's locally imposed and administered taxes. 
    Tax ordinance means each ordinance adopted by the village that imposes any locally imposed and administered tax. 
    Taxpayer means any person required to pay any locally imposed and administered tax and generally includes the person upon whom the legal incidence of such tax is placed and with respect to consumer taxes includes the business or entity required to collect and pay the locally imposed and administered tax to the village. 
    Village means the Village of Wilmette, Illinois. 
(Code 1993, § 6-11.2; Ord. No. 2001-O-24, 4-10-2001) 
Sec. 6-471. - Responsibilities of local tax administrator. 
    The Village Treasurer, as local tax administrator, shall be charged with the administration and collection of the locally imposed and administered taxes, including staff, employees or agents to the extent they are authorized by the local tax administrator to act in the local tax administrator's stead. The local tax administrator shall have the authority to implement the terms of this article so as to give full effect to this article. The exercise of such authority by the local tax administrator shall not be inconsistent with this section and the Act. 
(Code 1993, § 6-11.3; Ord. No. 2001-O-24, 4-10-2001) 
Sec. 6-472. - Required notices. 
    Unless otherwise provided, whenever notice of any applicable hearing, audit or other scheduled act of the local tax administrator is required to be given relating to a locally imposed and administered tax, said notice shall be in writing and shall be sent by the local tax administrator not less than seven calendar-days prior to the day fixed for said hearing, audit or other scheduled act of the local tax administrator. Said notices shall be sent by the local tax administrator by either: 
(1)  First class or express mail, or overnight mail, addressed to the persons concerned at the persons' last known address; or 
(2)  Personal service or delivery. 
(Code 1993, § 6-11.4; Ord. No. 2001-O-24, 4-10-2001) 
Sec. 6-473. - Late filing and payments. 
    Any notice, payment, remittance or other filing required to be made to the village pursuant to any locally imposed and administered tax ordinance shall be considered late unless it is either: 
(1)  Physically received by the village on or before the due date; or 
(2)  Received in an envelope or other container displaying a valid, readable U.S. postmark dated on or before the due date, properly addressed to the village, with adequate postage prepaid. 
(Code 1993, § 6-11.5; Ord. No. 2001-O-24, 4-10-2001) 
Sec. 6-474. - Application of payments. 
    Any payment or remittance required under the provisions of a locally imposed and administered tax, and received by the village for a tax period, shall be applied to the debt due and owing to the village in the following order: 
(1)  First, to the interest due for the applicable period. 
(2)  Second, to the tax due for the applicable period. 
(3)  Third, to any penalty or late payment fees for the applicable period. 
(Code 1993, § 6-11.6; Ord. No. 2001-O-24, 4-10-2001) 
Sec. 6-475. - Credits and refunds. 
(a)  The village shall not refund or credit any taxes voluntarily paid without written protest made by the taxpayer at the time of payment in the event that a locally imposed and administered tax is declared invalidly enacted or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction. However, a taxpayer shall not be deemed to have paid the tax voluntarily if the taxpayer lacked knowledge of the facts upon which to protest the taxes at the time of payment, or if the taxpayer paid the taxes under duress. 
(b)  The statute of limitations on a claim for credit or refund shall be one year after the end of the calendar year in which payment in error was made. The village shall not grant a credit or refund of locally imposed and administered taxes, interest, or penalties to a person who has not paid the amounts directly to the village. 
(c)  The procedure for claiming a credit or refund of locally imposed and administered taxes, interest or penalties paid in error shall be as follows: 
(1)  The taxpayer shall submit to the local tax administrator in writing a claim for credit or refund together with a statement specifying each of the following: 
a.  The name of the locally imposed and administered tax that is the subject of the claim. 
b.  The tax period for the locally imposed and administered tax subject that is the subject of the claim. 
c.  The date of the tax payment that is the subject of the claim and a cancelled check, receipt or other proof of payment. 
d.  The taxpayer's recalculation, accompanied by an amended or revised tax return, in connection with the claim. 
e.  A request for either a refund or a credit in connection with the claim to be applied to the amount of tax, interest and penalties overpaid, and, as applicable, related interest on the amount overpaid. 
(2)  No refund shall be paid by the village, and only a credit in lieu of a refund will be given, in the event the taxpayer seeking the refund owes any monies or other debt of any sort to the village. 
(3)  No more than 14 days after the date of the receipt by the local tax administrator of any claim for a refund or credit, the local tax administrator shall either: 
a.  Grant the claim; or 
b.  Deny the claim, in whole or in part, together with a written statement as to the reason for the denial or partial denial, as the case may be. 
(4)  In the event the local tax administrator grants, in whole or in part, a claim for refund or credit, the amount of the grant for refund or credit shall bear interest at the rate of three percent per annum, based on a year of 365 days and the number of days elapsed, from the date of the overpayment to the date of issuing a refund check or the grant of a credit. 
(Code 1993, § 6-11.7; Ord. No. 2001-O-24, 4-10-2001) 
Sec. 6-476. - Record-keeping and audits. 
(a)  A notice to a taxpayer made by the local tax administrator for an audit of the taxpayer pursuant to any locally imposed and administered tax shall be in writing and shall contain, at a minimum, the following information: 
(1)  The locally imposed and administered tax that is the subject of the audit; 
(2)  The time period to be covered by the audit; and 
(3)  A description of the books and records to be made available for the auditor. 
(b)  An audit shall be conducted during normal business hours unless otherwise agreed to by the taxpayer and the local tax administrator. If the date and time designated by the local tax administrator is not agreeable to the taxpayer or the taxpayer requests an extension of time for the audit, another date and time may be requested by the taxpayer, provided that said alternate time and date shall be no more than 30 days after the originally designated date and time, unless otherwise agreed by the taxpayer and the local tax administrator. 
(c)  Every taxpayer shall keep accurate books and records of the taxpayer's business or activities, including the transactions which had given rise or may have given rise to any liability, exemption or deduction pursuant to a locally imposed and administered tax. Records requested by the local tax administrator for the purposes of an audit shall be presented to the local tax administrator in the English language. 
(d)  It is the duty and responsibility of every taxpayer to make available its books and records for inspection by the village during an audit. If the taxpayer, or a tax collector acting as an agent of the taxpayer, fails to provide the documents necessary for an audit within the time required, the local tax administrator may issue a tax determination and assessment based on the tax administrator's best estimate of the taxpayer's tax liability. 
(e)  If an audit determines there has been an overpayment of a locally imposed and administered tax, written notice of the amount of overpayment shall be given to the taxpayer by the local tax administrator within 30 days of the village's determination of the amount of overpayment. If the audit should reveal that such overpayment has occurred due to a tax payment being submitted to the incorrect local governmental entity, the local tax administrator shall notify the local governmental entity imposing such tax to whom such payment should have been made. 
(Code 1993, § 6-11.8; Ord. No. 2001-O-24, 4-10-2001) 
Sec. 6-477. - Notice of tax due; manner of appeal. 
(a)  The local tax administrator shall send written notice to a taxpayer upon the local tax administrator's issuance of a protestable notice of tax due, a bill, a claim denial, or a notice of claim reduction regarding any tax. Said notice shall be served by personal service or delivery, or by U.S. mail, either registered or certified with postage pre-paid, and shall be deemed served on the taxpayer on the date that it is either personally served or delivered, or on which it is deposited in the U.S. mail for delivery by the local tax administrator, as the case may be. Said notice shall, at a minimum, include the following information: 
(1)  The reason for the assessment; 
(2)  The amount of the tax liability proposed; 
(3)  The procedure for appealing the assessment; and 
(4)  The obligations of the village during the audit, appeal, refund and collection process. 
(b)  A taxpayer who receives written notice from the local tax administrator of a determination of tax due or assessment may file with the local tax administrator a written appeal and request for a hearing, setting forth the basis of the taxpayer's request for a hearing. The written appeal and request for a hearing must be filed with the local tax administrator no more than 45 days after service of the written notice of the tax determination and assessment. 
(c)  If a timely written appeal and request for a hearing is filed, the local tax administrator shall fix a time and place for hearing, and shall give written notice thereof to the taxpayer. The hearing shall be scheduled for a date within 30 days of receipt of the written protest and petition for hearing, unless otherwise agreed by the taxpayer and the local tax administrator. 
(d)  If a written appeal and request for a hearing is not filed within the 45-day period provided in subsection (b) of this section, the tax determination, audit or assessment issued shall be considered a final bill for the amount of the liability stated therein, which shall immediately be due and owing without further notice to the taxpayer. 
(e)  Upon the showing of reasonable cause by the taxpayer and the full payment of the contested tax liability along with interest accrued as of the due date of the tax, the local tax administrator may reopen or extend the time for filing a written protest and petition for hearing. 
(Code 1993, § 6-11.9; Ord. No. 2001-O-24, 4-10-2001) 
Sec. 6-478. - Hearings. 
(a)  Whenever a taxpayer or a tax collector has filed a timely written appeal and request for a hearing under section 6-477, the local tax administrator shall conduct a hearing regarding said appeal. 
(b)  No continuance of the hearing shall be granted except in cases where good cause is shown. Lack of preparation shall not constitute good cause for a continuance. Any continuance granted shall not exceed 30 days. 
(c)  At the hearing the local tax administrator shall preside and shall hear testimony and accept any evidence relevant to the tax determination, audit or assessment. The strict rules of evidence applicable to judicial proceedings shall not apply. 
(d)  After the conclusion of the hearing, the local tax administrator shall make a written determination on the basis of the evidence presented at the hearing. The taxpayer or tax collector shall be provided with a copy of the written decision, to be sent or delivered in the same manner as the provided for notice in section 6-477(a). 
(Code 1993, § 6-11.10; Ord. No. 2001-O-24, 4-10-2001) 
Sec. 6-479. - Interest and penalties. 
    In the event a determination has been made that a locally imposed and administered tax is due and owing, through audit, assessment or other bill sent, the tax must be paid within the time frame otherwise indicated. 
(1)  Interest. The village hereby provides for the amount of interest to be assessed on a late payment, underpayment, or nonpayment of a locally imposed and administered tax, to be one percent per month, based on calendar months and the number of months elapsed. 
(2)  Late payment penalties. If a locally imposed and administered tax that is due and owning is not paid within the time required for payment, in addition to any interest on such outstanding debt to the village that may be applicable, the person or entity responsible for payment of such tax shall also be obligated to pay a late payment penalty of five percent of the tax due and owning. The local tax administrator may, in the exercise of reasonable discretion, abate such penalty where good cause is shown for delay or failure to make a payment. 
(Code 1993, § 6-11.11; Ord. No. 2001-O-24, 4-10-2001) 
Sec. 6-480. - Installment contracts. 
    The village, in the exercise of reasonable discretion of the local tax administrator, may enter into an installment contract with a taxpayer for the payment of taxes past due under the controlling locally imposed and administered tax ordinance. The local tax administrator may not cancel any installment contract so entered unless the taxpayer fails to pay any amount due and owing. Upon written notice by the local tax administrator that an installment payment is 30 days delinquent, the taxpayer shall have 14 days subsequent to said notice to cure any delinquency. If the taxpayer fails to cure the delinquency within this 14-day period or fails to demonstrate good faith in restructuring the installment contract with the local administrator, the installment contract may be cancelled. 
(Code 1993, § 6-11.12; Ord. No. 2001-O-24, 4-10-2001) 
Sec. 6-481. - Limitations on actions. 
(a)  The village, through the local tax administrator, shall review tax returns in a prompt and timely manner and inform taxpayers of any amounts due and owing. 
(b)  No determination of tax due or assessment may be issued more than four years after the end of the calendar year for which the return for the applicable period was filed, or in which the return for the applicable period was due, whichever occurs later. 
(c)  If any tax return was not filed, or if during any four-year period for which a notice of tax determination or assessment may be issued by the village and the tax paid or remitted was less than 75 percent of the tax due for that period, the period of limitations for actions to collect tax due shall be no more than six years after the end of the calendar year in which the return for the period was due or the end of the calendar year in which the return for the period was filed, whichever occurs later. 
(d)  The period of limitations set forth in subsections (a) and (b) of this section shall not apply if a fraudulent tax return was filed by the taxpayer. 
(Code 1993, § 6-11.13; Ord. No. 2001-O-24, 4-10-2001) 
Sec. 6-482. - Voluntary disclosure. 
(a)  For any locally imposed and administered tax for which a taxpayer has not received a written notice of an audit, investigation, or assessment from the local tax administrator, a taxpayer is entitled to file an application with the local tax administrator for a voluntary disclosure of the tax due. 
(b)  A taxpayer filing a voluntary disclosure application must agree to pay the amount of tax due, along with interest imposed at the rate of one percent per month, for all periods prior to the filing of the application but not more than four years before the date of filing the application. Except for the amount of tax and interest due under this section, a taxpayer filing a valid voluntary disclosure application may not be held liable for any additional tax, interest, or penalty for any period before the date the application was filed, provided, however, that if the taxpayer incorrectly determined and underpaid the amount of tax due as provided in this section, the taxpayer is liable for the underpaid tax along with applicable interest on the underpaid tax, unless the underpayment was the result of fraud on the part of the taxpayer, in which case the application shall be deemed invalid and void. 
(c)  The payment of tax and interest required under this section must be made within 90 days after the filing of the voluntary disclosure application or the date agreed to by the local tax administrator, whichever is longer, except that any additional amounts owed as a result of an underpayment of tax and interest previously paid under this section must be paid within 90 days after a final determination and the exhaustion of all appeals of the additional amount owed or the date agreed to by the local tax administrator, whichever is longer. 
(Code 1993, § 6-11.14; Ord. No. 2001-O-24, 4-10-2001) 
Sec. 6-483. - Publication of tax ordinances. 
    Any locally imposed and administered tax ordinance shall be published at the time adopted as provided by law, and shall be codified in this Code and published therewith. The posting of a tax ordinance on the Internet shall also satisfy this secondary publication requirement. Copies of all locally administered tax ordinances shall be made available to the public upon request at the Village Clerk's office. 
(Code 1993, § 6-11.15; Ord. No. 2001-O-24, 4-10-2001) 
Sec. 6-484. - Imposition of liens; review of liens. 
(a)  The local tax administrator is authorized to cause liens to be recorded in the office of the Recorder of Deeds, and otherwise as may be provided by law, for the failure to pay any locally imposed and administered tax. 
(b)  A taxpayer who believes a lien has been improperly filed may request in writing that the local tax administrator review the validity of the lien. The local tax administrator shall promptly review each such request, and respond thereto in writing. Upon a determination by the local tax administrator that the lien is valid, the lien shall remain in full force and effect. If the lien is determined by the local tax administrator to be improper, the local tax administrator shall: 
(1)  Timely remove the lien at the village's expense; 
(2)  Correct the taxpayer's credit record; and 
(3)  Correct any public disclosure of the improperly imposed lien. 
(Code 1993, § 6-11.16; Ord. No. 2001-O-24, 4-10-2001) 
Chapter 8 - HOUSING AND BUILDING REGULATIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 8-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Basement means a portion of a building located partly underground, but having less than half its clear floor-to-ceiling height below the average grade of the adjoining ground. 
    Building means anything constructed for the shelter of persons, animals, chattels, or movable property of any kind, and which is permanently affixed to the land. 
    Cellar means a portion of a building located partly or wholly underground and having half or more than half of its clear floor-to-ceiling heights below the average grade of the adjoining ground. 
    Dwelling means any building which is wholly or partly used or intended to be used for living or sleeping by human occupants. 
    Dwelling unit means a room or group of rooms used or intended to be used as a housekeeping unit for living, sleeping, cooking and eating. 
    Extermination means the control and elimination of insects, rodents, or other pests by eliminating their harboring places; by removing or making inaccessible materials that may serve as their food; by poisoning, spraying, fumigation, trapping; or by any other recognized and legal pest elimination methods approved by the Director of Community Development. 
    Family means either: 
(1)  One or more persons, each related by blood, marriage or legal adoption (including foster children), living as a single housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit, together with no more than two live-in staff or boarders; or 
(2)  Not more than three persons, not related by blood, marriage or legal adoption, (including foster children), living as a single housekeeping unit, together with no more than two live-in staff. 
For the purposes of this definition, the term "living as a single housekeeping unit" means that each person has the equal right to use, in common with the others, the areas customarily considered to be common areas in a dwelling unit. 
    Garbage means organic kitchen waste, paper, and food wrappings. 
    Habitable room means a room or enclosed floor space used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking or eating purposes, excluding bathroom, water closets, laundries, pantries, foyers or communicating corridors, closet storage spaces. 
    Occupant means any person, over one year of age, living, sleeping, cooking or eating in, or having actual possession of a dwelling unit or rooming unit, provided, however, that any child over one year and under 12 years of age shall be counted as one-half person, for the purpose of this chapter. 
    Operator means any person who has charge, care or control of a building, or part thereof, in which dwelling units or rooming units are let. 
    Owner means any person or group of persons who shall have legal or equitable title to a dwelling unit, the agent of said person, or any person having management or control of any dwelling unit; provided, however, that no person acting as managing agent or collector of rents of any property involved in any proceeding hereunder shall be liable hereunder if such person within five days after receipt of notice of any alleged violation or of summons shall have notified in writing by registered United States mail, or personal service, the owner or owners of the property or the employer of such person of the purported violation or violations of any provision or provisions of this housing code and shall have delivered to the Director of Community Development of the village a copy of the notice with proof of service thereof on the owner or employer. 
    Rooming unit means any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit used or intended to be used for living and sleeping; but not for cooking or eating purposes. 
    Rubbish means combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except garbage, and the term shall include the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke and other combustible material; paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals, mineral matter, glass, crockery, and dust. 
(Code 1993, § 9-1.1) 
Sec. 8-2. - Enforcement of code: inspections, right of entry, notices, orders. 
    It shall be the duty of the Director of Community Development to enforce the provisions of this housing code. The Director of Community Development and his authorized representatives are hereby authorized to make inspections of all buildings, structures, and premises located within the village to determine their compliance with the provisions of this article. For the purpose of making such inspection, the Director of Community Development and his authorized representatives are hereby authorized to examine and survey all buildings, structures and premises within the village. Such inspections shall be made between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. on any days except Sunday, subject to the following standards and conditions: 
(1)  Such inspection may take place only if a complaint respecting said premises has been received by the Director of Community Development and such complaint, in the opinion of said Director, provides reasonable grounds for belief that a violation exists, or such inspection is undertaken as part of a regular inspection program whereby certain areas of the village are being inspected in their entirety by direction of the Director of Community Development or the Village Manager. 
(2)  Such inspections shall be made by the Director of Community Development or the Village Manager or by any duly authorized representative upon the direction of either of said officers. 
(3)  Any person making such inspection shall furnish to the owner or occupant of the structure sought to be inspected, sufficient identification and information to enable the owner or occupant to determine that he is a representative of the village and to determine the purpose of said inspection. 
(4)  The Director of Community Development or the Village Manager or any duly authorized representative upon the direction of either of said officers may apply to any court of competent jurisdiction for a search warrant or other legal process for the purpose of securing entry to any premises if the owner shall refuse to grant entry. 
(5)  Whenever, in the opinion of the Director of Community Development, any violation of the provisions of this housing code is found to exist, he shall, within ten days after the inspection, serve written notice of such alleged violation upon the owner or occupant responsible therefor, by: Personal service; or mailing a copy thereof to the alleged violator, by registered mail, at his last known address; or posting a copy thereof in a conspicuous place in or about the building containing the alleged violation. 
(6)  Such notice may include more than one alleged violation and shall specify a period of time for compliance, which shall be such time as, in the opinion of the Director of Community Development, is reasonably required to effect changes necessary for compliance. 
(7)  Such notice may contain an outline of remedial action, which, if taken, will effect compliance with the provisions of this housing code and with rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto. 
(8)  If any alleged violation, of which notice as aforesaid has been given, is not corrected or eliminated within the time specified in such notice, the owner or occupant shall be subject to the penalty provisions of this housing code for each such uncorrected violation, and for each day such violation exists after service of the notice. 
(Code 1993, § 9-1.2; Ord. No. 67-O-24, 9-19-1967) 
Sec. 8-3. - International Property Maintenance Code. 
(a)  That certain document, marked and designated as the International Property Maintenance Code, 2006 Edition, published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Property Maintenance Code of the Village of Wilmette, for regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance of all property, buildings and structures. Unless otherwise provided in this Code, the Property Maintenance Code provides the standards for: 
(1)  Supplied utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use; 
(2)  The condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy and use, and the demolition of such existing structures as herein provided. 
(b)  Each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Property Maintenance Code are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this chapter. Local Amendments to the Property Maintenance Code are set forth further in this chapter. 
(Code 1993, § 9-1.3; Ord. No. 2016-O-25, § 2, 12-13-2016) 
Sec. 8-4. - Local amendments to property maintenance code. 
    The following additions, insertions, deletions and changes are made to the International Property Maintenance Code, 2006 Edition, so that said sections shall hereafter read as follows: 
(1)  Section 101.1 Title. Village of Wilmette. 
(2)  Section 103.5 Fees. 2016 Village Fee Schedule. 
(3)  Section 111, Means of Appeal, is replaced its entirety so that the same shall read as follows: Section 111 Means of Appeal. Appeals shall be heard pursuant to Section 9-3.1(e) of the Village Code. 
(4)  Section 202 General Definitions. The new definitions below shall be added in alphabetical order, the existing definitions noted below shall be modified so that the definition showing in this local amendment shall wholly replace the definition shown in the published Property Maintenance Code. All other definitions are in full force and effect: 
    BASEMENT. That Portion of a building which is partly or completely below grade, but having less than half its clear floor-to-ceiling height below the average grade the adjoining ground. 
    BUILDING. Anything constructed for the shelter of persons, animals, chattels, or movable property of any kind, and which is permanently affixed to the land. 
    CELLAR. A portion of the building located partly or wholly underground and having half or more than half of its clear floor-to-ceiling heights below the average grade of the adjoining ground. 
    DWELLING. Any building which is wholly or partly used or intended to be used for living or sleeping by human occupants. 
    EXTERMINATION. The control and elimination of insects, rats rodents or other pests by eliminating their harborage places; by removing or making inaccessible materials that may serve as their food; by poisoning, spraying, fumigating, trapping or by any other recognized and legal pest elimination methods approved by the Director of Community Development. 
    OCCUPANT. Any person, over one year of age, living, sleeping, cooking or eating in, or having actual possession of a dwelling unit or rooming unit, provided, however, that any child over one year and under twelve years of age shall be counted as one-half person, for the purpose of this chapter. 
(5)  Section 302.4, Weeds. Insert HEIGHT IN INCHES (10"). 
(6)  Section 304.14, Insect Screens. Insert DATES IN TWO LOCATIONS April 1 and November 1. 
(7)  Section 602.3 is replaced its entirety so that the same shall read as follows: 
602.3. Heat supply. Every dwelling unit or rooming unit to which heat is furnished from a heating plant used in common for the purpose of heating the building shall be supplied with heat, without such undue restriction of ventilation as to interfere with proper sanitary conditions, to provide a minimum temperature of 65 degrees Fahrenheit at 6:30 a.m. and 70 degrees at 8:30 a.m. and thereafter until 10:30 p.m. and a minimum temperature of 60 degrees Fahrenheit thereafter until 6:30 a.m. average through the dwelling unit or rooming unit. All temperature readings shall be made only by the Director of Community Development, or some person duly authorized by him, and shall be taken by means of a standard Fahrenheit thermometer at one or more points within any habitable room not less than four feet nor more than six feet above the floor of such room and at least four feet away from any door or window leading to the outer air. 
(Code 1993, § 9-1.4; Ord. No. 2016-O-25, § 2, 12-13-2016) 
Secs. 8-5-8-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - AFFORDABLE HOUSING CONSULTATION PROCEDURE 

Sec. 8-41. - Applicability. 
    The provisions of this article and its subsections shall be applicable to the following types of construction projects that are required to obtain any permit under the provisions of this chapter: 
(1)  Multifamily dwellings, either newly constructed or as part of the rehabilitation or remodeling of an existing structure where the valuation for Building Permit fee purposes under section 8-106 exceeds 50 percent of the building's value prior to said remodeling or rehabilitation. 
(2)  Mixed-use commercial buildings with two or more residential occupancies that are: 
a.  Newly constructed or as part of the rehabilitation or remodeling of an existing structure where the valuation for Building Permit fee purposes under section 8-106 exceeds 50 percent of the building's value prior to said remodeling or rehabilitation; and 
b.  Located in the following zoning districts, as they are defined in the village Zoning Ordinance, appendix A of this Code, as amended: Village Center (VC), Neighborhood Retail (NR), General Commercial 1 (GC-1), or General Commercial 2 (GC-2). 
(3)  The provisions of this article shall not apply to a construction project with 15 percent or more affordable housing units included in the project, as proposed. 
(Code 1993, § 9-1.12.1; Ord. No. 2005-O-1, 3-22-2005; Ord. No. 2008-O-52, 8-26-2008) 
Sec. 8-42. - Prior consultation concerning affordable housing required. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter or of the model codes adopted by reference in article IV of this chapter, prior to submitting to the Department of Community Development any application for any permit required by this chapter for a construction project identified in section 8-41, the applicant shall meet with the Director of Community Development or the Director's designee. At such meeting, the Director of Community Development shall provide the prospective permit applicant with a copy of the village Affordable Housing Plan and will discuss with the prospective applicant whether there are reasonable options for including affordable housing units in the project. Additionally, at such meeting the Director of Community Development shall provide the prospective applicant a copy of the Planned Use Development provisions of the village Zoning Ordinance and related provisions of this Code. 
(b)  The meeting required in subsection (a) of this section shall be held at least 60 calendar-days prior to the date when an applicant for a construction project covered by section 8-41 files an application with the village, provided that after the required meeting, the Village Board by resolution may waive any remaining portion of the 60-day waiting period in cases where it determines that requiring an exhaustion of the waiting period would not serve the purposes of the plan. 
(Code 1993, § 9-1.12.2; Ord. No. 2005-O-1, 3-22-2005) 
Secs. 8-43-8-72. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - MOVING OF BUILDINGS 

Sec. 8-73. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Building means a structure designed, built or occupied as a shelter or roofed enclosure for persons, animals or property and used for residential, business, mercantile, storage, commercial, industrial, institutional, assembly, educational or recreational purposes. 
    Shall is always mandatory and not merely directory. 
(Code 1993, § 9-2.1; Ord. No. 72-O-3, 1-18-1972) 
Sec. 8-74. - Permit. 
    No person shall move any building over, along or across any highway, street or alley in the village without first obtaining a permit from the Director of Community Development. 
(Code 1993, § 9-2.2) 
Sec. 8-75. - Application. 
    A person seeking issuance of a permit hereunder shall file an application for such permit with the Director of Community Development. 
(1)  Form. The application shall be made in writing, upon forms provided by the Director of Community Development, and shall be filed in the office of the Director of Community Development. 
(2)  Contents. The application shall set forth: 
a.  A description of the building proposed to be moved, giving street number, construction materials, dimensions, number of rooms and condition of exterior and interior; 
b.  A legal description of the lot from which the building is to be moved, giving the lot, block and tract number, if located in the village; 
c.  A legal description of the lot to which it is proposed such building be removed, giving lot, block and tract number, if located in the village; 
d.  The portion of the lot to be occupied by the building when moved; 
e.  The highways, streets and alleys over, along or across which the building is proposed to be moved; 
f.  Proposed moving date and hours; 
g.  Any additional information which the Director of Community Development shall find necessary to a fair determination of whether a permit should be issued; 
h.  An agreement to hold the village harmless from any claims, damages or causes of action that may arise from the moving of a building. 
(3)  Accompanying papers. 
a.  Tax certificate. The owner of the building to be moved shall file with the application sufficient evidence that the building and lot from which it is to be removed are free of any entanglements, and that all taxes and any village charges against the same are paid in full. 
b.  Certificate of ownership or entitlement. The applicant, if other than the owner, shall file with the application a written statement or bill of sale signed by the owner, or other sufficient evidence, that he is entitled to move the building. 
(4)  Fee. The application shall be accompanied by a permit fee in the amount of $50.00. 
(Code 1993, § 9-2.3) 
Sec. 8-76. - Deposit for expenses. 
    Upon receipt of an application it shall be the duty of the Director of Community Development to procure from the Director of Engineering and Public Works (or other appropriate agency) an estimate of the expense that will be incurred in removing and replacing any electric wires, street lamps, or pole lines belonging to the village or any other property of the village, the removal and replacement of which will be required by reason of the moving of the building through the village, together with the cost of materials necessary to be used in making such removals and replacements. Prior to issuance of the permit the Director of Community Development shall require of the applicant a deposit of a sum of money equal to twice the amount of the estimated expense. 
(Code 1993, § 9-2.4) 
Sec. 8-77. - Bond. 
    An application hereunder shall be accompanied by a bond in the sum of $10,000.00 in a form approved by the Corporation Counsel, executed by a bonding or surety company authorized to do business in the State, conditioned upon the assurance that this and other applicable ordinances and laws will be complied with and as an indemnity for any damage which the village may sustain by reason of damage or injury to any highway, street or alley, sidewalk, fire hydrant or other property of the village which may be caused by or be incidental to the removal of any building over, along or across any street in the village and to indemnify the village against any claim of damage to persons or private property and to satisfy any claims by private individuals arising out of, caused by or incidental to the moving of any building over, along or across any street in the village. 
(Code 1993, § 9-2.5) 
Sec. 8-78. - Duties of Director of Community Development. 
(a)  Inspection. The Director of Community Development or his designated agent shall inspect the building and the applicant's equipment to determine whether the standards for issuance of a permit are met. 
(b)  Standards for issuance. The Director of Community Development shall refuse to issue a permit if he finds: 
(1)  That any application requirement or any fee or deposit requirement has not been complied with; 
(2)  That the building is too large to move without endangering persons or property in the village; 
(3)  That the building is in such a state of deterioration or disrepair or is otherwise so structurally unsafe that it could not be moved without endangering persons and property in the village; 
(4)  That the building is structurally unsafe or unfit for the purpose for which moved, if the removal location is in the village; 
(5)  That the applicant's equipment is unsafe and that persons and property would be endangered by its use; 
(6)  That zoning or other ordinances would be violated by the building in its new location; 
(7)  That for any other reason persons or property in the village would be endangered by the moving of the building. 
(c)  Fees and deposits. 
(1)  Deposit. The Director of Community Development shall deposit all fees, deposits and bonds with the Village Treasurer. 
(2)  Return upon non-issuance. Upon his refusal to issue a permit the Director of Community Development shall return to the applicant all deposits, bonds and insurance policies. Permit fees filed with the application shall not be returned. 
(3)  Return upon allowance for expense. After the building has been removed, the Director of Community Development shall furnish the Village Manager with a written statement of all expenses incurred in removing and replacing all property belonging to the village, and of all material used in the making of the removal and replacement, together with a statement of all damage caused to or inflicted upon property belonging to the village; provided however, that if any wires, poles, lamps or other property are not located in conformity with governing ordinances, the permittee shall not be liable for the cost of removing the same. The Village Manager shall authorize the Director of Community Development to return to the applicant all deposits after the Village Treasurer deducts the sum sufficient to pay for all of the costs and expenses and for all damage done to property of the village by reason of the removal of the building. Permit fees deposited with the application shall not be returned. 
(d)  Designate streets for removal. The Director of Community Development shall procure from the Director of Engineering and Public Works a list of designated streets over which the building may be moved. The Director of Community Development shall have the list approved by the Chief of Police and shall reproduce the list upon the permit in writing. In making their determinations the Director of Engineering and Public Works and the Chief of Police shall act to ensure maximum safety to persons and property in the village and to minimize congestion and traffic hazards on public streets. 
(Code 1993, § 9-2.6) 
Sec. 8-79. - Duties of permittee. 
    Every permittee under this article shall: 
(1)  Notice of removal of wires. If necessary to move such building through or past wires, cables or other electrical conductors owned or operated by the village or by any person, serve notice in writing upon the person owning, using, or operating any such wire, cable or other electrical conductor through which the applicant desires to pass, specifying the time the building will reach such wires, cable or other electrical conductor and the time at which he desires such wire, cable or other electrical conductor to be cut or otherwise removed or disposed of so as to allow such building to pass. Such notice shall be served upon such person not less than 24 hours before the time it is desired to cut such wire, cable or other electrical conductor. 
(2)  Remove service connection. Prior to the move, see that the sewer line is plugged with an approved plug, the water is shut off at the main, and the meter has been removed by an authorized village employee. The permittee shall notify the gas, electric and telephone service companies to remove their services. 
(3)  Notify of revised moving time. Notify the Director of Community Development in writing of a desired change in moving date and hours as proposed in the application, and receive the written approval of the Director of Community Development for such change. 
(4)  Use designated streets. Move a building only over streets designated for use in the written permit. 
(5)  Display lights. Cause red warning lights to be displayed during the nighttime on every side of the building, visible from the street, in such manner as to warn the public of the obstruction, and shall at all times erect and maintain barricades across the streets in such manner as to protect the public from damage or injury by reason of the removal of the building. 
(6)  Street occupancy period. Remove the building from the village streets after two days of such occupancy, unless an extension is granted by the Village Manager. 
(7)  Pay expense of officer. Pay the expense of a traffic officer required by the Director of Community Development to accompany the movement of the building to protect the public from injury. 
(8)  Notify of damage. Notify the Director of Community Development in writing of any and all damage done to property belonging to the village within 24 hours after the damage or injury has occurred. 
(9)  Clear old premises. Remove all rubbish and materials and fill all excavations to existing grade at the original building site so that the premises are left in a safe and sanitary condition. 
(10)  Conform with codes. Cause the building in its new location to conform to all building, electrical, and plumbing codes and zoning ordinances of the village. 
(Code 1993, § 9-2.7) 
Sec. 8-80. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Enforcing officers. The Director of Community Development, the Chief of Police and the Director of Engineering and Public Works shall enforce and carry out the requirements of this article. 
(b)  Permittee liable for expense above deposit. The permittee shall be liable for any expense, damages or costs in excess of deposited amounts or securities, and the Corporation Counsel shall prosecute an action against the permittee in a court of competent jurisdiction for the recovery of such excessive amounts. 
(c)  Original premises left unsafe. Where permittee does not comply with the requirements of this article, the village shall proceed to do the work necessary to leave the original premises in a safe and sanitary condition, and the cost thereof shall be charged against the general deposit. 
(Code 1993, § 9-2.8) 
Secs. 8-81-8-103. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - BUILDING CODES 

Sec. 8-104. - Commercial and multifamily construction; adoption of codes. 
(a)  There is adopted by the village that building code known as the 2006 International Building Code, except such portions as are hereinafter deleted, modified or amended. Three copies shall be kept on file in the office of the Village Clerk, and the same is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein. The provisions of said building code shall be controlling in the construction of all buildings and other structures therein contained within the corporate limits of the Village of Wilmette to the extent hereinafter provided. Wherever the word "municipality" is used in said building code, it shall be held to mean the Village of Wilmette. 
(b)  The term "Village of Wilmette" shall be inserted wherever the words "name of jurisdiction" appears. 
(c)  Section 105.2 is amended by deleting items 1 through 7, 9, and 12. 
(d)  Section 110, Certificate of Occupancy, paragraph 110.2, delete items 7 through 12 only. 
(e)  Sections 112.1 through 113.4, and Appendix B, are deleted and replaced as follows: 
Sections 112.1 through 113.4, shall read as follows: 
SECTION 112.0 Building Code Board of Appeal. 
112.1 Appointment. 
    There is hereby established in the village a board to be called the Building Code Board of Appeal, consisting of five members who shall be a resident structural engineer, a resident civil engineer, two resident architects and a resident builder or superintendent of building construction. The members shall be appointed by the Village President with the consent of the Board of Trustees. The Village President shall designate one of the members to serve as Chairperson. 
112.2 Term of office. 
    All members of the Building Code Board of Appeal shall be appointed for a term of five years. Vacancies shall be filled for an unexpired term in the manner in which original appointments are required to be made. Continued absence of any member from regular meetings of the Board shall, at the discretion of the Village President, render any such member liable to immediate removal. 
112.3 Quorum. 
    Four members of the Board shall constitute a quorum. In varying the application of any provision of this Code or in modifying an order of the building official, affirmative votes of 3 members shall be required. No member of the Board shall pass upon any question in which he, or any entity in which that member has an economic interest, is interested. 
112.4 Meetings and records. 
    Meetings of the Board shall be held at the call of the Chairperson and at such other times as the Board may determine. All hearings before the Board shall be open to the public. The Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the vote of each member upon every question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such facts, and shall also keep records of its examinations and other official action. Such minutes and such records shall be public records. 
112.5 Procedure. 
    The Board shall establish rules and regulations for its own procedure not inconsistent with the provisions of this Code. 
112.6 Appeals. 
(i)  Any person aggrieved or the head of any agency of the village may take an appeal to the Building Code Board of Appeal from any decision of the building official. 
(ii)  An appeal may be taken within 30 days from the date of decision appealed, by filing with the building official and with the Building Code Board of Appeal a notice of appeal, specifying the grounds thereof, except that in the case of a building or structure which, in the opinion of the building official, is unsafe or dangerous, the building official may in his order limit the time for such appeal to a shorter period. The building official shall forthwith transmit to the Building Code Board of Appeal all the papers upon which the action appealed from was taken. 
112.7 Modifications and variations by the building code board of appeal. 
(iii)  The Building Code Board of Appeal, when so appealed to and after a public hearing, may vary the application of any provision of this Code to any particular case when in its opinion, the enforcement thereof would do manifest injustice, and would be contrary to the spirit and purpose of this Code or public interest, or when in its opinion, the interpretation of the building official should be modified or reversed. 
(iv)  A decision by the Building Code Board of Appeal to vary the application of any provision of this Code, or to modify an order of the building official, shall specify in what manner such variation or modification is made, the conditions upon which it is made, and the reasons therefore. 
(v)  Financial hardship cannot become a point of discussion on which to base a building code appeal. Decisions of the Building Code Board of Appeal are to be based solely on technical considerations and not cost considerations. 
112.8 Decision of the building code board of appeal. 
(vi)  The Building Code Board of Appeal shall in every case reach a decision without unreasonable or unnecessary delay. Every decision of the Board of Appeal shall be in writing and shall indicate the vote upon the decision. Every decision shall be promptly filed in the office of the building official and shall be open to the public inspection. A certified copy shall be sent by mail or otherwise to the appellant and a copy shall be kept publicly posted in the office of the building official for two weeks after filing. 
(vii)  If a decision of the Building Code Board of Appeal reverses or modifies a refusal order or disallowance of the building official, or varies the application of any provision of this Code, the building official shall take action immediately in accordance with such decision. 
112.9 Appeals from decisions of the building code board of appeal. 
    A person aggrieved by a decision of said board, whether previously a party to the proceeding or not, or an officer or board, may, within 15 days after the filing of the decision in the office of the building official and service by mail of the parties of record, appeal to the Board of Trustees. 
(f)  Section 3001.2 shall be deleted and replaced with as follows: 
Section 3001.2. The installation, repair and alteration of elevators, escalators and similar conveyances and their components shall comply with the standards set forth in section 8-382 of this Code. 
(g)  Section 1612.3 is hereby amended by inserting the words "Cook County, IL" where the words "insert name of jurisdiction" appear and "August 19, 2008" where the words "date of issuance" appears. 
(h)  Section 3002.4 is hereby amended as follows: 
3002.4 Elevators for fire department use. 
    In all new elevator installations in any structure, at least one elevator shall be provided for fire department use. Such elevator car shall be of such size and arrangement to accommodate a 24-inch by 88-inch (610 mm to 2236 mm) ambulance stretcher in the horizontal open position and a 42-inch (1067 mm) side-slide door to allow for turning a wheel chair or accommodating an ambulance stretcher in its horizontal position. 
    For a new elevator serving only two floors, a Limited Use/Limited Access (LULA) Elevator which accommodates a wheelchair shall be acceptable if a minimum five-foot-wide stair is also provided serving the same two floors. 
(i)  Section 3003.2 is deleted and replaced as follows: 
3003.2 Firefighters emergency operation. Elevators shall be provided with Phase 1 emergency recall operation and Phase 2 emergency in car operation in accordance with ASME A17.1 and NFPA72. 
(j)  Section 3006.1, is deleted and replaced as follows: 
3006.1 Access. An approved means of access shall be provided to elevator machine rooms and overhead machinery equipment spaces. This means is not to be used as a passage way through the machine room to other areas of the building or roof. 
(k)  Chapter 32, "Encroachments into the Public right-of-way," is deleted in its entirety. 
(l)  Section 3410.2 is hereby amended by inserting "April 1, 2010" where the words "DATE TO BE INSERTED BY JURISDICTION APPEAR. NOTE: IT IS RECOMMENDED THAT THIS DATE COINCIDE WITH THE EFFECTIVE DATE OF BUILDING CODES WITHIN THE JURISDICTION" appear. 
(m)  Appendix G, "Flood-Resistant Construction," is deleted in its entirety. 
(n)  Appendix H, "Signs," is deleted in its entirety. 
(o)  Appendix J, "Grading," is deleted in its entirety. 
(p)  Appendix K, "ICC Electrical Code," is deleted in its entirety. 
(q)  Section 509.2 Group S-2 enclosed or open parking with Group A, B, M, R or S above, deleted and replaced as follows with section 510.2 from the 2015 International Building Code (2015 IBC). This subparagraph is intended to be applied as in the 2015 IBC: 
    Horizontal building separation allowance. A building shall be considered as separate and distinct buildings for the purpose of determining area limitations, continuity of fire walls, limitation of number of stories and type of construction where all of the following conditions are met: 
a.  The buildings are separated with a horizontal assembly having a fire-resistance rating of not less than three-hour. 
b.  The building below the horizontal assembly is of Type IA construction. 
c.  Shaft, stairway, ramp or escalator enclosures through the horizontal assembly shall have not less than a two-hour fire-resistance rating with opening protectives in accordance with section 715. 
d.  Exception: Where the enclosure walls below the horizontal assembly have not less than a three-hour fire-resistance rating with opening protectives in accordance with Table 715.4, the enclosure walls extending above the horizontal assembly shall be permitted to have a one-hour fire-resistance rating, provided: 
1.  The building above the horizontal assembly is not required to be of Type I construction; 
2.  The enclosure connects fewer than four stories; and 
3.  The enclosure opening protectives above the horizontal assembly have a fire protection rating of not less than one-hour. 
e.  The building or buildings above the horizontal assembly shall be permitted to have multiple Group A occupancy uses, each with an occupant load of less than 300, or Group B, M, R or S occupancies. 
f.  The building below the horizontal assembly shall be protected throughout by an approved automatic sprinkler system in accordance with section 903.3.1.1, and shall be permitted to be any occupancy allowed by this Code except Group H. 
g.  The maximum building height in feet shall not exceed the limits set forth in section 503 for the building having the smaller allowable height as measured from the grade plane. 
(Code 1993, § 9-3.1; Ord. No. 2001-O-5, 2-27-2001; Ord. No. 2010-O-07, 5-11-2010; Ord. No. 2015-O-34, 7-28-2015) 
Sec. 8-105. - One- and two-family residential construction. 
(a)  There is adopted by the village that building code known as the 2006 International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings, except such portions as are hereinafter deleted, modified or amended. Three copies shall be kept on file in the office of the Village Clerk, and the same is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein. The provisions of said building code shall be controlling in the construction of all buildings and other structures therein contained within the corporate limits of the village to the extent hereinafter provided. Wherever the word "municipality" is used in said building code, it shall be held to mean the Village of Wilmette. 
(b)  The term "Village of Wilmette" shall be inserted wherever the words "name of jurisdiction" appears. 
(c)  Section R106.1 is hereby amended by adding the following paragraph to the end of said section: 
At the time of Building Permit application, an Illinois Registered Architect or Structural Engineer must sign and seal two copies of drawing submissions for one- or two-family residential construction where the construction involves structural work or the cost of construction exceeds $25,000.00 with the following types of work exempted: exterior paving, including driveways, walks, and patios; unheated porches; decks; exterior stairs; non-habitable detached garages (unless there is a brick exterior or unsuitable soil conditions), kitchens; baths; exterior windows; and basement remodeling. Technical submissions for exempt projects shall also comply with all standards and codes, but shall not require a design professional's seal. 
(d)  Section R902.2 shall remain and be amended by adding the following: 
Wood shingles. No wood roofing shingles or shakes are permitted to be installed in the village unless they have been treated with a fire-retardant, Class C rating or better. 
(e)  Section R402.1, "Wood Foundations," is hereby deleted. 
(f)  Section R105.2, item 1 shall be deleted and replaced with the following: 
"One-story detached accessory structures used as tool and storage sheds, playhouses and similar uses, provided the floor area does not exceed 100 square feet." 
(g)  Section R105, items 2 through 7 and 9 are hereby deleted. 
(h)  Sections R112.1 through R112.4 are deleted and replaced with the following: 
Section R112.1 General. All appeals are to be made to the Building Code Board of Appeals. 
(i)  An approved automatic fire sprinkler system shall be installed in all new one- and two-family dwellings and townhouses in accordance with section 903.3.1 of the International Building Code, section 903 et seq. of the Fire Prevention Code of the village as adopted and the other applicable standards set forth by the village if light-weight frame construction is used in any portion of the new construction: 
(1)  Light weight frame construction shall be defined as a type of construction when any individual vertical or any individual horizontal structural elements are primarily formed by a system of repetitive wood or cold-formed steel framing members. Light weight frame construction shall also include when the wood elements are comprised of engineered structure elements such as trusses, glue laminated beams, truss-type open-web or perforated floor joists, I-joists, structural composite lumber, structural insulated panels, and wood structural panels. 
(2)  Traditional milled or solid sawn-cut dimensional lumber such as "2x4," "2x6," "2x8," "2x10" and continuing are not considered as light weight frame construction. 
(j)  An approved automatic fire sprinkler system may be installed in all new one- and two-family dwellings and townhouses in accordance with section 903.3.1 of the International Building Code, section 903 et seq. of the Fire Prevention Code of the village as adopted and the other applicable standards set forth by the village for construction not using light-weight frame construction. Where the installation of an automatic fire sprinkler system is not made mandatory by this Code, the voluntary installation of an automatic fire sprinkler system shall nevertheless be in accordance with section 903.3.1 of the International Building Code, section 903 et seq. of the Fire Prevention Code of the village as adopted and the other applicable standards set forth by the village. 
(Code 1993, § 9-3.2; Ord. No. 85-O-7, 4-16-1985; Ord. No. 90-O-86, 12-4-1990; Ord. No. 95-O-88, 11-28-1995; Ord. No. 2002-O-41, 8-27-2002; Ord. No. 2010-O-07, 5-11-2010) 
Sec. 8-106. - Building permit fees. 
(a)  The fees for building and construction permits shall be as follows: 
(1)  Plan examination fees for buildings and structures. 
a.  A non-refundable plan examination fee in the amounts stated below shall be paid prior to any review of building or construction plans. 
b.  In addition to the fees set forth in the schedule below, the applicant and/or property owner shall be responsible for the payment of all costs relating to the review of permit applications and plans by any outside consultant or entity selected by the village for this purpose. These costs shall be paid to the village by the applicant and/or property owner prior to issuance of any permit and, shall be paid regardless of whether the permit application is withdrawn. 
(2)  Building plan examination. 
a.  New construction single-family structures: $202.00. 
b.  New construction to all other structures not single-family: $321.00. 
c.  Additions to single-family structures: $118.00. 
d.  Remodeling of single-family structures: $79.00. 
e.  Additions/remodeling to all other structures not single-family: $202.00. 
f.  Detached garages: $79.00. 
(3)  Fire safety regulations plan examination. 
a.  Multifamily/Commercial structures: $169.00 plus costs. 
b.  Single-family structures: $109.00 plus costs. 
(4)  Engineering and Public Works/Grading Plan examination. 
a.  All structures: $235.00 plus costs. 
b.  Other projects: $120.00 plus costs. 
(5)  Building permit deposit. Prior to any review of building or construction plans, the applicant shall also be required to submit a Building Permit deposit. Said deposit will be deducted, at the time of permit issuance, from the total amount of Building Permit fee due under subsection (a)(5)c of this section. The amount of Building Permit deposit to be provided shall be as follows: 
a.  Single-family residential: 
1.  New construction: $900.00. 
2.  Additions: $591.00. 
3.  Detached garages and remodeling: $118.00. 
b.  All other buildings and structures: 
1.  New construction: $1,182.00. 
2.  Additions: $591.00. 
3.  Remodeling: $236.00. 
c.  The Building Permit deposit shall be forfeited, and no amount shall be refunded, under either of the following circumstances: 
1.  Expiration of the permit application under section 8-110(g). 
2.  Withdrawal of the permit application after completion of plan examination. 
(6)  Building permit fees. For all construction, $20.16 per $1,000.00 valuation. 
(7)  Transportation and inspectional services. 
a.  For new construction of all buildings and structures, except detached garages: $587.00 (based upon a minimum of 15 inspections). 
b.  For remodeling and additions to existing buildings and structures: $391.00 (based upon a minimum of ten inspections). 
c.  For new or replacement detached garages: $79.00. 
d.  Engineering/Grading and Drainage: $117.00 (based upon three inspections). 
e.  For all additional inspections required, or for any re-inspections required as result of work not performed in accordance with approved plans and/or code compliance: $39.00 each. 
(8)  Demolition and removal. 
a.  Demolition of buildings: $4,500.00. 
b.  Demolition of accessory structures: $39.00. 
c.  Removal of underground storage tanks: $39.00. 
(b)  Whenever construction work has commenced prior to an application for a Building Permit, or any other permit required pursuant to this Code, being submitted or before said permit is issued, an additional charge shall be added to the foregoing permit fee in the amount of $153.00 or 50 percent of the ordinary Building Permit fee, whichever is greater. 
(Code 1993, § 9-3.3; Ord. No. 90-O-96, 1-2-1991; Ord. No. 93-O-1, 1-26-1993; Ord. No. 94-O-94, 12-13-1994; Ord. No. 97-O-87, 10-28-1997; Ord. No. 2002-O-100, 12-10-2002; Ord. No. 2003-O-89, 11-24-2003; Ord. No. 2004-O-104, 11-22-2004; Ord. No. 2005-O-104, 11-21-2005; Ord. No. 2006-O-94, 11-28-2006; Ord. No. 2007-O-87, 11-27-2007; Ord. No. 2008-O-88, 12-9-2008; Ord. No. 2009-O-72, 11-24-2009; Ord. No. 2010-O-40, 8-24-2010; Ord. No. 2010-O-71, 11-23-2010; Ord. No. 2011-O-74, 11-22-2011; Ord. No. 2012-O-63, 11-27-2012; Ord. No. 2013-O-71, 11-26-2013; Ord. No. 2015-O-67, 11-24-2015) 
Sec. 8-107. - Fence permits required. 
(a)  It is unlawful to erect or construct a fence, wall or similar structure without first having obtained a permit therefor issued by the Director of Community Development. No permit shall be issued other than in compliance with the regulations contained in section 30-6.4.3 of the Wilmette Zoning Ordinance, appendix A of this Code. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person to construct a fence without a permit, or maintain any fence or post containing or constructed of, in whole or in part, barbed wire or any similar material likely to cause injury to persons coming in contact therewith. It is unlawful to build or maintain any fence or unprotected wire charged with electric current, except that if the fence is more than seven feet high an electrified portion of the fence may be maintained where it protects dangerous material and is more than seven feet above the pavement or ground adjacent. 
(c)  The fee for the permit shall be $39.00. Fence permits shall expire and become invalid six months from the date of issuance. 
(Code 1993, § 9-3.3.1; Ord. No. 81-O-10, 3-17-1981; Ord. No. 2002-O-100, 12-10-2002; Ord. No. 2003-O-89, 11-24-2003; Ord. No. 2004-O-104, 11-22-2004; Ord. No. 2005-O-104, 11-21-2005; Ord. No. 2006-O-94, 11-28-2006; Ord. No. 2007-O-87, 11-27-2007; Ord. No. 2008-O-88, 12-9-2008; Ord. No. 2009-O-72, 11-24-2009; Ord. No. 2010-O-07, 5-11-2010; Ord. No. 2010-O-71, 11-23-2010; Ord. No. 2011-O-74, 11-22-2011; Ord. No. 2012-O-63, 11-27-2012; Ord. No. 2013-O-71, 11-26-2013) 
Sec. 8-108. - Building permit required for satellite dish installations. 
(a)  It is unlawful to erect or construct a satellite dish as defined in appendix A, section 30-6.4.12 of this Code, the Wilmette Zoning Ordinance without first obtaining a permit therefor issued by the Director of Community Development. No permit shall be issued unless the proposed installation is in compliance with the provisions of section 30-6.4.12 of the Zoning Ordinance, appendix A of this Code, and all other applicable village regulations and codes, including, but not limited to, the Electrical Code. Further, no permit shall be issued unless a certificate from a registered structural engineer is obtained which states that the proposed satellite dish installation can withstand wind loads of 95 miles per hour. No permit described in this section shall be required to install a receive-only satellite dish of no more than two meters in diameter which qualifies as a permitted use under appendix A. 
(b)  There shall be no fee for the foregoing permit. 
(Code 1993, § 9-3.3.2; Ord. No. 85-O-50, 11-19-1985; Ord. No. 96-O-51, 10-8-1996) 
Sec. 8-109. - Tent permit fee. 
    When a tent permit is required under the applicable building codes and regulations, there shall be a fee of $79.00. 
(Code 1993, § 9-3.3.3; Ord. No. 2003-O-89, 11-24-2003; Ord. No. 2004-O-104, 11-22-2004; Ord. No. 2005-O-104, 11-21-2005; Ord. No. 2007-O-87, 11-27-2007; Ord. No. 2008-O-88, 12-9-2008; Ord. No. 2009-O-72, 11-24-2009; Ord. No. 2010-O-71, 11-23-2010; Ord. No. 2011-O-74, 11-22-2011; Ord. No. 2012-O-63, 11-27-2012; Ord. No. 2013-O-71, 11-26-2013) 
Sec. 8-110. - Failure to obtain permits; expiration of permits; penalty. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Construction work means and includes all functions performed in connection with the construction, erection, installation, modification, repair or demolition of a building, fence, sign, or other structure, which requires a Building Permit, plumbing permit, electrical permit, fence permit, sign permit, variation, special use permit, Grading and Drainage Permit, Right-of-Way Permit, or other permit required under the Housing and Building Code, the Zoning Ordinance, or any other ordinances of the village. 
    Demolition means and includes all functions performed in connection with the complete or substantial removal or destruction of a structure, building, or accessory structure including either: 
(1)  The demolition of the entire existing structure or building including foundations and mechanical, electrical, and plumbing systems; or 
(2)  The demolition or removal of any accessory structure, including detached garages, underground storage tanks, and in-ground swimming pool and spas, but not including paved surfaces and fences; or 
(3)  The demolition or removal of any accessory structure or building for which there are mechanical, electrical or plumbing systems; or 
(4)  The demolition of 50 percent or more of a principal structure. For the purpose of calculating the percentage of structure to be demolished, the linear feet of the existing foundation, exterior walls, and interior walls, and the square footage of the roof will be compared to the linear feet of the foundation, exterior walls, and interior walls, and the square footage of the roof to be demolished. The foundation shall constitute 15 percent of the structure, exterior walls shall constitute 40 percent of the structure, interior walls shall constitute 30 percent of the structure, and roofs shall constitute 15 percent of the structure. 
a.  For the purpose of this requirement, removal of the finish materials from both sides of a wall will cause that portion of the wall to be considered demolished. Portions of a wall where new openings are cut or where existing openings are enlarged will be considered demolition. The entire width of the new opening will be included in the demolished portion of the wall. Stripping the roof sheathing and finish covering will be enough to consider that portion of the roof demolished. 
b.  The applicant shall provide documentation of these calculations in a form to be determined by the Zoning Administrator. 
    New construction means construction of a principal building or structure; or remodeling of or addition to an existing structure that was 50 percent or more demolished or destroyed as defined in subsection (4) of the definition of the term "demolition." New construction of buildings or structures as defined herein shall be subject to all applicable requirements of this chapter. 
(b)  Contractor's obligation. No person, corporation or other entity shall perform any construction or demolition work within the village without determining that the owner or occupant of the property in question has obtained all necessary permits for such work. 
(c)  Penalty. A person, firm, corporation, or other entity found guilty of a violation of section 8-110(b) shall be subject to a fine of not less than $250.00 nor more than $750.00 for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed to have been committed on each day, beginning with the day when the unlawful construction work was first performed and ending with the day when the construction work is brought into compliance with the ordinances of the village. Such person, firm, corporation, or other entity may request the owner or occupant in writing to apply to the village for the necessary permit or permits and shall not be subject to a fine for any day during the period between the making of such written request and the denial of the application, but shall be subject to a fine for each day on which a violation occurred or continued before the written request was made and, if the application is denied, following its denial and until the construction work is brought into compliance with the ordinances of the village. 
(d)  Liability to owner or occupant. As provided in subsection (c) of this section, a person, firm, corporation or other entity which violates subsection (b) of this section may request the owner or occupant to apply to the village for the necessary permit or permits. If such permit or permits are denied, then such person, firm, corporation or other entity shall, at its own expense and at the option of the owner or occupant, promptly either restore the property to its former condition or revise the construction work so as to be in compliance with the ordinances of the village. If such person, firm, corporation or other entity fails to take such remedial action, then the owner or occupant may make other arrangements for such remedial action, and such person, firm, corporation or other entity shall be liable to the owner or occupant for the reasonable cost thereof of the remedial action. 
(e)  Owner or occupant refusal. If the owner or occupant refuses to apply to the village for the necessary permit or permits under subsections (c) and (d) of this section, or if the owner or occupant refuses to allow a person, firm, corporation, or other entity which violates subsection (b) of this section to take remedial action, as provided for in subsection (d) of this section, such person, firm, corporation, or other entity shall not be subject to a fine under subsection (c) of this section for any day following such refusal and shall not be liable to the owner or occupant under subsection (d) of this section. 
(f)  Expiration after issuance. Building and construction permits for residential structures shall expire and become invalid 12 months from the date of issuance, after which time the permittee shall pay a renewal fee equal to 1/12 of the original permit fee for every 30 days after the expiration of the original permit until a certificate of occupancy or a final construction inspection is approved. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued or final inspections conducted until after any additional permit extension fee is paid. Any permit issued shall become invalid if the authorized work is not commenced within six months after the issuance of the permit, or if the authorized work is not substantially progressing toward completion for a period of six months after the time the work has commenced. 
(g)  Expiration prior to issuance. Applicants seeking any permit under the Housing and Building Code, the Zoning Ordinance, or any other ordinances of the village shall have a duty to timely supply any additional or supplemental information necessary to complete the application review process. An applicant shall have 45 days from the date of written notification by the village to submit any information requested. To the extent an applicant does not comply with the information request within 45 days of written notification, then the permit application shall be null and void. In all cases, permit applications shall expire 45 days after written notification that the permit is ready for issuance. Upon a showing of good cause to the Director of Community Development, the Director of Community Development shall have the discretion, but not obligation, to extend the deadlines stated herein. 
(Code 1993, § 9-3.3.4; Ord. No. 87-O-29, 6-2-1987; Ord. No. 90-O-96, 1-2-1991; Ord. No. 96-O-11, 4-9-1996; Ord. No. 2001-O-59, 9-11-2001; Ord. No. 2003-O-89, 11-24-2003; Ord. No. 2004-O-50, 5-25-2004; Ord. No. 2006-O-85, 11-14-2006; Ord. No. 2010-O-07, 5-11-2010; Ord. No. 2016-O-75, 12-13-2016) 
Secs. 8-111-8-133. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - REGULATION OF LAND-DISTURBING ACTIVITIES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 8-134. - Preamble and general provisions. 
(a)  Preamble. The purpose of this section is to protect existing land grades, contours, drainage patterns and water quality from adverse consequences caused by land-disturbing activities, such as digging, excavating, grading and filling, as well as from alteration of existing vegetation. This section sets forth the procedures for the issuance, implementation and enforcement of Grading and Drainage Permits. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Applicant means any person, corporation, partnership, association of any type, public agency or any other legal entity that submits an application to the village for a Grading and Drainage Permit pursuant to this section. 
    As-graded means the surface conditions upon completion of grading activities. 
    Civil engineer means a licensed engineer registered in the State to practice in the field of civil engineering. 
    Department of Engineering Standards Handbook means the village's engineering construction and detail standards document as provided by the village. 
    Earth material means any rock, soil, fill and/or combination thereof. 
    Erosion means the wearing away of the ground surface as a result of the movement of wind, water and/or ice. 
    Grade means the vertical location of the ground surface. 
Existing grade. The grade prior to any land-disturbing activities governed by the section. 
Rough grade. The stage at which the grade conforms within plus or minus three inches of the approved plan. 
Finish grade. The final grade of the site which conforms to the approved plan. 
    Grading and Drainage Permit means that permit required for any land-disturbing activity as defined herein. 
    IEPA means Illinois Environmental Protection Agency. 
    Land-disturbing activity means any activity that alters the existing drainage flow, including, but not limited to, grading, filling, digging or excavating earth material, construction or demolition of buildings and structures, as well as alteration to, or removal of, existing vegetation, including, but not limited to, trees. 
    Permittee means the applicant in whose name a Grading and Drainage Permit is issued pursuant to this section, and his agents, employees and others acting under his direction. 
    Site means the parcels, or portions thereof, of real property upon which land-disturbing activities are to be conducted. 
    Site Grading Plan means the delineation of best management practices or equivalent measures designed to protect existing land grades, contours, drainage patterns and water quality from adverse consequences caused by land-disturbing activities. 
    Soil means naturally occurring deposits overlying bedrock. 
    Stormwater Management Plan means the delineation of best management practices or equivalent measures designed to manage and control stormwater and to prevent soil erosion during all aspects and times while construction work is proceeding. 
    Village means the Village of Wilmette, Cook County, State of Illinois. 
    Village Engineer means the Village Engineer of the village, and duly authorized designees, responsible for the administration and control of grading activities in the village. 
(Code 1993, § 9-3.4.1; Ord. No. 2003-O-81, 11-11-2003; Ord. No. 2006-O-85, 11-14-2006) 
Secs. 8-135-8-151. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - STATUTORY CONSTRUCTION 

Sec. 8-152. - Other laws. 
    Neither this section, nor any administrative decision made pursuant hereto, shall be construed to: 
(1)  Exempt the site owner or permittee from procuring or complying with any other required permit; 
(2)  Relieve the site owner or permittee from legal responsibility for any damage, loss or injury caused as a result of any land-disturbing activity, whether permitted or not, under this section; or 
(3)  Limit the right of any person to initiate any action, at law or in equity, for redress, relief or damages caused by activities regulated by this chapter. 
(Code 1993, § 9-3.4.2.1; Ord. No. 2006-O-85, 11-14-2006) 
Sec. 8-153. - Cumulative enforcement procedures. 
    The procedures for enforcement of the requirements and regulations, as set forth in this section, are cumulative and not exclusive. 
(Code 1993, § 9-3.4.2.3; Ord. No. 2003-O-81, 11-11-2003; Ord. No. 2006-O-85, 11-14-2006) 
Secs. 8-154-8-174. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - GRADING AND DRAINAGE PERMITS 

Sec. 8-175. - General requirement. 
    No person may fill, store or dispose of earth materials; alter an existing land grade, contour or drainage pattern; or perform any other land-disturbing activity, without first obtaining a Grading and Drainage Permit pursuant to this section. 
(Code 1993, § 9-3.4.3.1; Ord. No. 2003-O-81, 11-11-2003; Ord. No. 2006-O-85, 11-14-2006; Ord. No. 2007-O-34, 4-24-2007) 
Sec. 8-176. - Specific projects requiring a Grading and Drainage Permit. 
    Projects that require a Grading and Drainage Permit include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Construction of new homes or buildings; 
(2)  Construction of new garages or auxiliary structures; 
(3)  Installation of underground swimming pools; 
(4)  Construction of an addition to an existing structure; 
(5)  Landscaping that changes the grade of the site such that existing drainage flows will be altered; 
(6)  Any project that includes the creation of a foundation; 
(7)  Land-disturbing activity proposed in a floodplain as established by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA); and 
(8)  Any land-disturbing activity equal to or greater to than one acre in area; and 
(9)  Demolition of any building or structure. 
(Code 1993, § 9-3.4.3.2; Ord. No. 2003-O-81, 11-11-2003; Ord. No. 2006-O-85, 11-14-2006; Ord. No. 2007-O-34, 4-24-2007) 
Sec. 8-177. - Exemptions from Grading and Drainage Permits. 
    Projects that, in the determination of the Village Engineer, do not alter an existing grade, contour or drainage flow will not be subject to the permitting requirements herein, including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Raised decks; 
(2)  Patios built at grade; 
(3)  Fences; 
(4)  Tree removal and planting; and 
(5)  The maintenance of private lakefront beaches, provided that the following conditions are met: 
a.  The purpose of the grading is to level existing sand and other beach material and not to excavate or alter the existing character of the beach; 
b.  The addition or removal of sand dunes shall not be considered "maintenance" for the purposes of this section; 
c.  Quantities of sand or other beach material shall not be added to or removed from the site; 
d.  The leveling of sand and other beach material shall not be conducted in a manner that alters, reverses or redirects the natural flow of water; and 
e.  The site to be graded is not located in a designated floodway which is subject to article XXIX of this chapter. 
(Code 1993, § 9-3.4.3.3; Ord. No. 2003-O-81, 11-11-2003; Ord. No. 2006-O-85, 11-14-2006; Ord. No. 2007-O-34, 4-24-2007; Ord. No. 2011-O-41, 6-12-2011) 
Secs. 8-178-8-207. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - PERMIT APPLICATION PROCEDURES 

Sec. 8-208. - Information required. 
(a)  No request for a Grading and Drainage Permit shall be reviewed until the following items have been submitted to the village: 
(1)  Application form; 
(2)  Permit fee; 
(3)  If required, two copies of the proposed Site Grading Plan; and 
(4)  Proof of notice to adjacent property owners. 
(b)  For land-disturbing activities over one acre in area, the applicant must also obtain and satisfy the requirements of any applicable NPDES IEPA construction permit. 
(Code 1993, § 9-3.4.4.1; Ord. No. 2003-O-81, 11-11-2003; Ord. No. 2006-O-85, 11-14-2006; Ord. No. 2007-O-34, 4-24-2007) 
Sec. 8-209. - Grading and Drainage Permit application form. 
(a)  The applicant shall submit the Grading and Drainage Permit application form supplied by the village and provide the following information: 
(1)  Address and permanent index number (PIN) of the site; 
(2)  Name, address and telephone number of the applicants; 
(3)  Name, address and telephone number of all contractors, subcontractors or other persons performing the activities at the site; 
(4)  Description and schematic depiction of the project; and 
(5)  Signatures of the owners of the site. 
(b)  In the case of projects requiring a Grading and Drainage Permit under sections 8-176(2) and 16-176(4), which are also determined not to require a Site Grading Plan under section 8-210 but which will result in an increase of 50 percent or more of lot coverage (as defined in section 30-2.1.3 of appendix A of this Code) on the subject property, the Grading and Drainage Permit application shall be supplemented to disclose whether any tree or trees will be removed as part of the project that require a Tree Removal Permit pursuant to article IX of this chapter. If one or more such trees will be removed as part of the project, then the applicant shall also submit additional materials to show that either: 
(1)  After the trees are removed, the property will have a minimum canopy coverage of at least 35 percent of the total lot area, as described in section 8-210(c)(2); 
(2)  That the tree removed will be replaced with another tree of at least two inches caliper and also of the same Canopy Size Category as set out in the Species and Mature Canopy Area Table provided for in in section 8-210(c)(2); 
(3)  The provisions of this subsection (b) shall apply only to projects not covered by the requirements of section 8-210. 
(Code 1993, § 9-3.4.4.2; Ord. No. 2003-O-81, 11-11-2003; Ord. No. 2006-O-85, 11-14-2006; Ord. No. 2007-O-34, 4-24-2007) 
Sec. 8-210. - Site Grading Plan. 
(a)  Application review. Upon submittal of a complete application form and Grading and Drainage Permit fee, the Village Engineer will determine whether a Site Grading Plan will be necessary and, if so, the level of plan detail that will be required. 
(b)  Plan detail. The Site Grading Plan may include: 
(1)  Name, address and telephone number of the civil engineers responsible for the preparation of the Site Grading Plan; 
(2)  Legend; 
(3)  Scale of drawing; 
(4)  Site address; 
(5)  Existing and proposed topography of the entire site taken at one-foot contour intervals; 
(6)  Contour intervals that extend a minimum of 25 feet off-site, or sufficient enough to show on- and off-site drainage and spot elevations as may be appropriate; 
(7)  Site property lines and all drainage and utility easements on, under or across thereto; 
(8)  Location and representation of all existing natural drainage and run-off patterns, swales and flows, as well as manmade drainage facilities, and all proposed natural and manmade drainage facilities, including all surface and subsurface drainage devices, walls, cribbing and dams on or within 50 feet of the site; 
(9)  Delineation of the drainage area and the drainage area served by all existing and proposed downspouts, footing drains and sump pump discharges, and the disposition of discharge therefrom; 
(10)  Location of the proposed areas of excavation, fill, storage and disposal of earth materials, including the method of soil protection such as seeding, burlap, or hay bales; 
(11)  Location and identification of existing vegetation, proposed vegetation to be placed on the site, and vegetation to be removed from the site, specifically including the location, species and size in diameter breast height (DBH) stated in inches and measured at 41/2 feet above the existing grade at the base of every existing tree located on the subject property; 
(12)  Location of any existing and proposed buildings and structures, including top of foundation, garage slab, and elevations of proposed finished grade at all significant points around the proposed building or structure, including window wells, patios and swimming pools; 
(13)  Impervious surface area calculation; 
(14)  Delineation of the measures that will be used to control surface erosion and run-off from the site after all buildings, structures and permanent improvements have been erected on the site; 
(15)  Elevation and descriptions of the benchmark utilized for the Site Grading Plan. The FEMA datum should be used for all properties located either entirely or partially in the regulatory floodplain; 
(16)  Three to five representative cross-sections for each side yard between another residence. Cross-sections shall extend between the top of foundation (T/F) of the proposed residence to the T/F of the existing residence; 
(17)  Locations of all manholes, utility structures, fire hydrants, street lights, curbs, sidewalks, transformers, junction boxes and pads/pedestals located in the public right-of-way, or in any easements on the subject property; 
(18)  To the extent the Site Grading Plan includes a connection to a village storm sewer, provide the size and location of all sanitary and storm sewers, water mains, and open ditches located in the public right-of-way or in any easement. The rim and invert elevation shall be provided for all storm and sanitary structures within or near the vicinity of the subject property. The direction of flow for all storm and sanitary sewers and open ditches must also be provided, as well as the methods to be used to protect them; 
(19)  Location of stone haul road; 
(20)  Certification. Certification that the proposed project will not result in drainage, erosion or run-off which adversely impacts adjacent properties or public rights-of-way; and 
(21)  Location of soil storage. 
(c)  Submittal of Site Grading Plan. 
(1)  The Site Grading Plan shall be prepared and stamped by a licensed Professional Engineer, and drawn to a scale of one inch equals 20 feet. The plan shall be submitted on paper measuring 11 inches by 17 inches. With the prior approval of the Village Engineer, for certain large or multi-parcel projects, the plan may be on paper measuring 24 inches by 36 inches. Two copies of the Site Grading Plan shall be submitted to the Village Engineer. 
(2)  If the Site Grading Plan is submitted in connection with demolition or construction of a principal building or structure on a lot zoned R, R1 or R2, then the Site Grading Plan shall additionally show that, upon completion of the permitted work, the site will meet the minimum canopy coverage requirement of this subsection. 
a.  The minimum canopy coverage shall be no less than 35 percent of the total lot area. For the purposes of this section, the term "canopy coverage" means the percentage of the total lot area of the subject property, expressed in square feet, covered or delimited by the drip line of: 
1.  All existing trees on the subject property proposed to be retained, and for which the applicant will provide such tree protection as is necessary to protect and retain said trees; 
2.  All existing trees on adjacent property or adjacent public right-of-way whose canopies extend into total lot area of the subject property; 
3.  All proposed new trees to be planted on the subject property, projected at maturity, in accordance with the Species and Mature Canopy Area Table. If the permit applicant intends to satisfy the canopy coverage requirements of this section by planting trees of a species not referenced in the Species and Mature Canopy Area Table, then the projected mature canopy coverage shall be as reasonably determined by the Village Engineer. All new trees planted under this subsection shall be credited toward the required minimum canopy coverage based on 100 percent of their projected canopy at maturity, regardless of whether that projected canopy at maturity would extend over adjoining property; 
4.  For the purposes of this section, the term "total lot area" shall not include any portion of the lot subject to public right-of-way, utility easements or right-of-way, vehicular easements or pedestrian easements; 
5.  For the purposes of this section, the Species and Mature Canopy Area Table shall consist of a reference table published, and amended from time to time, by the village and approved by Resolution of the President and Board of Trustees, said table to set forth descriptions of various species and cultivars of trees, their mature canopy area, canopy size category, and such other data as may be necessary and appropriate under the provisions of this section. 
b.  In calculating the canopy coverage of the subject property, each tree on the subject property that will be retained under subsection (c)(2)a.1 of this section shall have its canopy coverage multiplied by 1.5 if such tree is one of the following species and of the size indicated in diameter breast height (DBH): 
Species (all cultivars) Minimum Size (in DBH) Oak 24 inches Hickory 16 inches American Elm 30 inches  
e.  If the minimum tree coverage requirement set forth in this subsection (c)(2) is to be accomplished, in whole or in part through the planting of new trees, then the Site Grading Plan shall show the location, species and size of such new trees as are reasonably approved by the village. 
f.  If the minimum tree coverage requirement set forth in this subsection (c)(2) is to be accomplished, in whole or in part, through the preservation of existing trees on the subject property, then the Site Grading Plan shall show the location, species and size of each such tree and the protection measures that shall be installed and maintained throughout the course of construction in order to prevent damage to the tree or compaction of its Critical Root Zone, in conformance with the requirements of article XII of this chapter. 
g.  If the Site Grading Plan identifies any trees on adjacent property or public right-of-way the canopy coverage of which extends over the subject property as described in subsection (c)(2)a.2 of this section, then the Site Grading Plan shall show the location, species and size of each such tree and the protection measures that shall be installed and maintained throughout the course of construction in order to prevent damage to the tree or compaction of its Critical Root Zone, in conformance with the requirements of article XII of this chapter. 
(d)  Notice to adjacent property owners. The applicant shall provide notice of the land-disturbing activities to any adjacent property owner, in the form to be provided by the village. Proof of said notice, by means of a signed affidavit form, shall be submitted at the time the application is filed. 
(e)  Submission of additional data. 
(1)  The Village Engineer shall review all documentation submitted pursuant to this section and, if deemed necessary to evaluate potential adverse consequences from the proposed land-disturbing activity, the Village Engineer has the authority to request additional data, clarification or correction of data already submitted, and the authority to require additional or alternate measures based upon site conditions. 
(2)  Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the Village Engineer may require the applicant to submit additional information concerning excavation plans proposed methods and techniques for same, as will enable the Village Engineer to determine whether the proposed land disturbing activity will adversely impact existing trees proposed to be retained on the subject property under the Site Grading Plan, or will adversely impact existing trees on adjacent property. 
(3)  The Village Engineer may impose reasonable conditions on, or modifications to, the methods or techniques of any proposed excavation, trenching, foundation construction or other land disturbing activities in order to prevent or mitigate such adverse impact on trees, and any such restrictions shall be incorporated into the requirements of the Grading and Drainage Permit. Such conditions may include, but are not limited to, prohibiting excessive over-digging, requiring shoring, requiring directional boring instead of open trenching, or prescribing the methods of excavation, trenching or directional boring. 
(Code 1993, § 9-3.4.4.3; Ord. No. 2003-O-81, 11-11-2003; Ord. No. 2006-O-85, 11-14-2006; Ord. No. 2007-O-34, 4-24-2007; Ord. No. 2008-O-53, 8-26-2008) 
Sec. 8-211. - Stormwater Management Plan. 
(a)  The applicant shall also submit a separate plan labeled Stormwater Management Plan which identifies the methods to be used to control run-off, erosion, sedimentation and drainage expected to occur while the project is ongoing, and before final grading, that may adversely impact adjacent properties or public rights-of-way. The Stormwater Management Plan shall also include: 
(1)  Detail regarding the intended interim on-site storage, placement, fill and disposal of earth materials; and 
(2)  A specific plan to eliminate the adverse impacts from stormwater runoff, including, but not limited to, interim soil stabilization devices and proposed measures for erosion and sedimentation control for all times during construction work and specifically during demolition; between completion of demolition and the commencement of construction work; and continuing through the construction work, until final grading. All such proposed measures shall be based upon the standards and requirements contained in the latest edition of the Illinois Urban Manual, compiled by the IEPA and Department of Agriculture. 
(b)  Final grading. To the extent the Village Engineer determines that the proposed final grade, land contour or drainage pattern may, upon project completion, adversely impact adjacent properties or public rights-of-way, the Site Grading Plan shall also include: 
(1)  Data regarding the classification, distribution, strength and erodability of existing soils; 
(2)  Data regarding the nature, distribution, strength and erodability of earth materials, if any are to be placed on the site; 
(3)  Level of water table; 
(4)  Plans for permanent soil stabilization upon project completion; 
(5)  Design criteria for corrective measures, when necessary; and 
(6)  An alternate proposal for final grading that will eliminate the identified adverse impacts. 
(c)  As-graded. Upon final completion of the work, the Village Engineer may require an as-graded plan which would include the following: 
(1)  Approved Site Grading Plan; 
(2)  Ground surface elevations; 
(3)  As-graded ground surface elevations; 
(4)  Lot drainage patterns; 
(5)  Locations and elevations of all surface and subsurface drainage facilities; 
(6)  Location, species and size in DBH of each existing tree retained on the subject property and each new tree proposed to be added to the subject property. 
(Code 1993, § 9-3.4.4.4; Ord. No. 2003-O-81, 11-11-2003; Ord. No. 2006-O-85, 11-14-2006; Ord. No. 2007-O-34, 4-24-2007) 
Sec. 8-212. - Grading and Drainage Permit fees. 
    All Grading and Drainage Permit fees shall be in an amount provided in section 8-106(a). 
(Code 1993, § 9-3.4.5; Ord. No. 2003-O-81, 11-11-2003; Ord. No. 2004-O-104, 11-22-2004; Ord. No. 2005-O-104, 11-21-2005; Ord. No. 2006-O-85, 11-14-2006; Ord. No. 2006-O-94, 11-28-2006; Ord. No. 2007-O-34, 4-24-2007; Ord. No. 2007-O- 87, 11-27-2007; Ord. No. 2008-O-88, 12-9-2008; Ord. No. 2009-O-72, 11-24-2009; Ord. No. 2010-O-40, 8-24-2010) 
Sec. 8-213. - Permit duration. 
(a)  Grading and Drainage Permits shall be valid until such time as there has been inspection and approval of final grading; or up to 18 months, whichever is shorter. 
(b)  Any request for an extension of a Grading and Drainage Permit must be submitted in writing to the Village Engineer, and must detail the reasons for said request. Upon good cause shown, the Village Engineer has the discretion to grant an extension. 
(c)  An additional fee of $68.00 shall be paid prior to the extension of any Grading and Drainage Permit. 
(Code 1993, § 9-3.4.6; Ord. No. 2003-O-81, 11-11-2003; Ord. No. 2004-O-104, 11-22-2004; Ord. No. 2005-O-104, 11-21-2005; Ord. No. 2006-O-85, 11-14-2006; Ord. No. 2006-O-94, 11-28-2006; Ord. No. 2009-O-72, 11-24-2009; Ord. No. 2010-O-71, 11-23-2010; Ord. No. 2011-O-74, 11-22-2011; Ord. No. 2012-O-63, 11-27-2012; Ord. No. 2013-O-71, 11-26-2013) 
Sec. 8-214. - Permit denial. 
(a)  Standard. If, in the determination of the Village Engineer, the proposed work will unreasonably divert or detain surface water onto adjacent properties or public rights-of-way; alter existing drainage patterns so as to adversely impact adjacent properties or public rights-of-way; increase or concentrate run-off of stormwater onto adjacent properties or the public rights-of-way; or cause some similar adverse impact; and the applicant fails to submit proposed measures that would eliminate the identified adverse impacts, then the request for a Grading and Drainage Permit shall be denied. 
(b)  Right to appeal. To the extent a Grading and Drainage Permit is denied pursuant to this section, or an extension is denied pursuant to section 8-213(b), the applicant may, no later than 30 days from the date of said denial, appeal the decision to the Municipal Services Committee. 
(c)  Appeal to Municipal Services Committee. 
(1)  The Grading and Drainage Permit appeal shall be heard at the earliest available scheduled Municipal Services Committee meeting. Notice of the hearing date to all entitled under this Code shall be provided by the village. 
(2)  In reviewing the permit denial, the committee shall consider all written documentation submitted by the applicant in conjunction with the request for a Grading and Drainage Permit. The committee shall apply the standard stated in subsection (a) of this section, in determining whether to affirm or reverse, in whole or in part, the denial of the Grading and Drainage Permit. 
(d)  Appeal to Board of Trustees. 
(1)  An appeal to the Board of Trustees from any decision of the Municipal Services Committee made pursuant to this section may be initiated by one or more persons or entities, including a unit of local government, aggrieved by the decision or determination of the Municipal Services Committee. 
(2)  An appeal shall be filed no later than 30 days after the date of the contested decision. Failure to file a timely appeal shall be ineffective to initiate any appeal pursuant to this section. The request for an appeal shall be filed in writing with the Village Engineer. The appeal shall state with particularity the following: 
a.  The name of the party requesting the appeal and its interest in the appeal; 
b.  The common address of the subject property; 
c.  A statement setting forth the reasons for the appeal; and 
d.  The specific relief being sought. 
(3)  Upon the timely filing of an appeal, the Village Engineer shall transmit to the Board of Trustees all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. 
(4)  After all due notice has been provided, the Board of Trustees shall consider the appeal at a regular meeting. The hearing by the Board of Trustees shall be a proceeding of record, and an official court reporter shall take a verbatim transcript of the proceeding. The Board shall, by resolution, reverse, affirm or modify the decision. 
(5)  The decision of the Municipal Services Committee shall not be modified, unless the Board finds by clear and convincing evidence that the Municipal Services Committee made an error its interpretation of the terms of this section, or of other related policies adopted by the village, and the burden of proof for demonstrating same shall be on the party requesting said appeal. The contested action shall not be reversed or modified except by a majority vote of the members of the Board present and voting. 
(Code 1993, § 9-3.4.7; Ord. No. 2003-O-81, 11-11-2003; Ord. No. 2006-O-85, 11-14-2006) 
Sec. 8-215. - Assignment of permit. 
    A Grading and Drainage Permit issued pursuant to this section may be assigned under the following conditions: 
(1)  Prior to the assignment, the permittee notifies the Village Engineer of the proposed assignment; and 
(2)  The proposed assignee: 
a.  Submits a new application form; 
b.  Agrees to all conditions and duties imposed by the existing Grading and Drainage Permit and Site Grading Plan, including any modifications thereto; and 
c.  Assumes full legal responsibility for all work performed prior to the date of the assignment. 
(Code 1993, § 9-3.4.8; Ord. No. 2003-O-81, 11-11-2003; Ord. No. 2006-O-85, 11-14-2006) 
Secs. 8-216-8-238. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - IMPLEMENTATION OF SITE GRADING PLAN AND GRADING AND DRAINAGE PERMIT 

Sec. 8-239. - Permittee's duties. 
(a)  Upon the issuance of a Grading and Drainage Permit, the permittee shall: 
(1)  Maintain a copy of the Grading and Drainage Permit, Stormwater Management Plan, and Site Grading Plan at the site and available for public inspection during working hours; and 
(2)  Post the Grading and Drainage Permit placard at the site at least 48 hours prior to the initiation of any land-disturbing activity. 
(b)  At all times during the implementation of the Site Grading Plan and the Stormwater Management Plan, the permittee shall: 
(1)  Be in conformity with the Grading and Drainage Permit, and all other applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules, regulations, and the Department of Engineering Standards Handbook. 
(2)  Notify the Village Engineer within 48 hours of: 
a.  The initiation of the work at the site; 
b.  The installation of all erosion control devices; and 
c.  The readiness of the site for final inspection, including, but not limited to, finished grading, installation of drainage devices and final erosion control measures. 
(c)  Permittee shall stop work immediately and notify the Village Engineer, if site conditions arise that preclude conformance of the work to the approved Site Grading Plan or Stormwater Management Plan. 
(1)  Said notice shall identify the site conditions that preclude compliance with the Site Grading Plan, and delineate any and all revisions, modifications and/or additions thereby required to the Site Grading Plan or Stormwater Management Plan. 
(2)  The Village Engineer shall review all documentation submitted pursuant to subsection (c)(1) of this section, and may require permittee to further clarify, revise or supplement the proposed plan modifications prior to resuming any work at the site. 
(Code 1993, § 9-3.4.9.1; Ord. No. 2003-O-81, 11-11-2003; Ord. No. 2006-O-85, 11-14-2006) 
Sec. 8-240. - Site inspections and plan modifications. 
(a)  Site inspections. The Village Engineer may inspect a site as necessary to determine compliance with, and to effectuate the purposes of, this section, including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Upon receipt of notice given pursuant to section 8-241; 
(2)  To verify completion of any modifications required as a result of changed site conditions; 
(3)  During and following any rainfall; and 
(4)  Upon receipt of notice that site conditions pose a health or safety risk. 
(b)  Plan modifications. The Village Engineer shall have the authority to require modifications to the Grading and Stormwater Management Plans based upon site conditions existing or encountered at the site after the initiation of construction activity. 
(Code 1993, § 9-3.4.9.2; Ord. No. 2003-O-81, 11-11-2003; Ord. No. 2006-O-85, 11-14-2006) 
Sec. 8-241. - Suspension or revocation of permit. 
(a)  The Village Engineer shall issue a stop work order and suspend the Grading and Drainage Permit when: 
(1)  It is determined that the Grading and Drainage Permit was issued in error, on the basis of incorrect information supplied, or in violation of any ordinance, regulation or provision of this Code; 
(2)  Permittee fails to comply with any of the duties set forth in this section; or 
(3)  Inspection by the Village Engineer reveals that the work is not in conformance with the Site Grading Plan, or Stormwater Management Plan, or any required modifications thereto. 
(b)  The Village Engineer may revoke any Grading and Drainage Permit if the permittee fails or refuses, after suspension of the Grading and Drainage Permit and receipt of a stop work order, to cease work at the site. 
(Code 1993, § 9-3.4.10; Ord. No. 2003-O-81, 11-11-2003; Ord. No. 2006-O-85, 11-14-2006) 
Sec. 8-242. - Hazards. 
(a)  Contractor shall be solely responsible for the determinations and implementation of the means and methods of construction, as well as compliance with all applicable work place safety rules, regulations, or guidelines. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any permitting under this section, whenever the Village Engineer determines that any existing excavation, embankment, fill, or land contour on private property is a health hazard or adversely affects the safety, use or stability of a public way or drainage channel, the owner of said property shall, upon receipt of written notice from the Village Engineer and within the period specified therein, abate or eliminate any such hazard as requested by the Village Engineer. 
(c)  As set forth in section 8-413, the village shall have the right to abate any hazard related to the activities regulated by this article and further subsections herein. 
(Code 1993, § 9-3.4.11; Ord. No. 2003-O-81, 11-11-2003; Ord. No. 2006-O-85, 11-14-2006) 
Sec. 8-243. - Violations. 
(a)  Failure to obtain a permit. It shall be unlawful for any person to initiate or engage in any land-disturbing activity prior to obtaining a Grading and Drainage Permit as required herein. 
(b)  Refusal to comply. It shall unlawful for any permittee to continue work on a site, after suspension or revocation of the Grading and Drainage Permit, or after receipt of a stop work order otherwise issued by the village. 
(c)  Fines and penalties. Any person who violates the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a violation punishable by a fine of not less than $250.00 and not more than $750.00 for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed for each day that an offense continues. 
(Code 1993, § 9-3.4.12; Ord. No. 2003-O-81, 11-11-2003; Ord. No. 2006-O-85, 11-14-2006) 
Secs. 8-244-8-264. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - FOUNDATION CERTIFICATE 

Sec. 8-265. - Foundation certificate required. 
    Every contractor and/or developer building a new structure, except a detached garage, shall apply to the Village Engineer for a foundation certificate prior to placement of any footing or foundation wall concrete. 
(Code 1993, § 9-3.5.1; Ord. No. 2006-O-85, 11-14-2006) 
Sec. 8-266. - Issuance of foundation certificate. 
    The Village Engineer shall be responsible for the issuance of the foundation certificate. The Village Engineer shall determine the adjacent existing grade on all properties contiguous to the property being certified, and shall approve the top of the foundation for all new structures prior to issuing a certificate. 
(Code 1993, § 9-3.5.2; Ord. No. 2006-O-85, 11-14-2006) 
Secs. 8-267-8-295. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - FOUNDATION CONSTRUCTION 

Sec. 8-296. - Hand excavation required. 
    For one- and two-family construction, the excavation of the foundation of the principal structure may be no closer than two feet to any lot line. The excavation of any foundation element that is permitted to encroach less than five feet from a lot line shall be excavated by hand. This includes, but is not limited to, window wells and chimneys. Proper stabilization of the excavation shall be required. 
(Code 1993, § 9-3.5.3.1; Ord. No. 2006-O-85, 11-14-2006) 
Sec. 8-297. - Spot survey required. 
    Every contractor and/or developer building a new principal structure shall provide the Community Development Department with a spot survey of the foundation prior to framing the structure. The spot survey shall be prepared by a licensed surveyor and shall include the length of all foundation walls and setbacks from the walls, concrete window wells, and chimney footings to the lot lines. Further construction of the structure, including framing, shall not proceed until a spot survey has been submitted and approved. 
(Code 1993, § 9-3.5.4.1; Ord. No. 2006-O-85, 11-14-2006) 
Sec. 8-298. - Spot survey approval. 
    The Director of Community Development shall be responsible for the issuance of spot survey approval. No spot survey approval shall be issued until the Director of Community Development has determined that the size of the structure and the setbacks to the structure are in conformance with the requirements of appendix A, the Zoning Ordinance. 
(Code 1993, § 9-3.5.4.2; Ord. No. 2006-O-85, 11-14-2006) 
Sec. 8-299. - Elevation survey required. 
    Every contractor and/or developer building a new principal structure shall provide the Community Development Department with an elevation survey. The elevation survey shall be prepared by a licensed surveyor and shall include the height of top of the framed first floor from grade, as defined in appendix A, the Zoning Ordinance. Further construction of the structure, including rough electrical and plumbing work, shall not proceed until an elevation survey has been submitted and approved. 
(Code 1993, § 9-3.5.5.1; Ord. No. 2006-O-110, 1-9-2007) 
Sec. 8-300. - Elevation survey approval. 
    The Director of Community Development shall be responsible for the issuance of elevation survey approval. No elevation survey approval shall be issued until the Director of Community Development has determined that the height of the first floor is in conformance with the requirements of appendix A, the Zoning Ordinance. 
(Code 1993, § 9-3.5.5.2; Ord. No. 2006-O-110, 1-9-2007) 
Sec. 8-301. - Debris Dumpster Permits required. 
    Before depositing a debris dumpster larger than ten cubic yards on any private or public property, the owner of the dumpster shall secure a Dumpster Permit from the Village Engineer. The Director of Engineering and Public Works shall furnish Dumpster Permit forms to be completed by the owner for approval by the village. 
(Code 1993, § 9-3.6.1; Ord. No. 2006-O-85, 11-14-2006) 
Sec. 8-302. - Permit fee. 
    The cost for each Dumpster Permit shall be $45.00. 
(Code 1993, § 9-3.6.2; Ord. No. 96-O-51, 10-8-1996; Ord. No. 98-O-99, 12-8-1998; Ord. No. 2002-O-100, 12-10-2002; Ord. No. 2003-O-89, 11-24-2003; Ord. No. 2004-O-104, 11-22-2004; Ord. No. 2005-O-104, 11-21-2005; Ord. No. 2006-O-85, 11-14-2006; Ord. No. 2006-O-94, 11-28-2006; Ord. No. 2007-O-87, 11-27-2007; Ord. No. 2008-O-88, 12-9-2008; Ord. No. 2009-O-72, 11-24-2009; Ord. No. 2010-O-71, 11-23-2010; Ord. No. 2011-O-74, 11-22-2011; Ord. No. 2012-O-63, 11-27-2012; Ord. No. 2013-O-71, 11-26-2013) 
Sec. 8-303. - Damage to public property. 
(a)  Permittees shall not damage public property or the public right-of-way. Prior to the removal of a dumpster from public property or public right-of-way, the permittee shall notify the Department of Engineering and Public Works. Upon discovery of any damage, the Village Engineer shall notify the permittee and the property owner of the total cost to repair the damaged public property. The permittee and property owner shall not be able to obtain future village permits until: 
(1)  The permittee or property owner repair or restore the damaged area to a condition acceptable to the Director of Engineering and Public Works; or 
(2)  The Director of Engineering and Public Works repairs or has repaired the damage and the permittee or property owner has reimbursed the village; or 
(3)  The Director of Engineering and Public Works gives written authorization, based upon the specific circumstances, that another permit should be issued in order to promote the health, safety, and welfare of the public. 
(b)  Failure to comply with the prompt repair to public property shall be a violation of this Code. 
(Code 1993, § 9-3.6.3; Ord. No. 2006-O-85, 11-14-2006) 
Secs. 8-304-8-324. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - SITE PLAN REVIEW COMMITTEE 

Sec. 8-325. - Creation. 
    There is hereby created a Site Plan Review Committee consisting of the Director of Community Development, the Village Engineer, and the Fire Chief. Each member of the committee shall appoint a member of his department to act for the committee member on those occasions when the committee member is unable to attend a meeting of the committee. The committee shall adopt its own rules and regulations and shall select its Chairperson. All meetings of the committee shall be called by the Chairperson as needed. A quorum shall consist of three members of the committee (or their appointed substitute). 
(Code 1993, § 9-3.7.1; Ord. No. 2006-O-85, 11-14-2006) 
Sec. 8-326. - Status of Building Permit applications. 
(a)  Except for those noted below, every application for a construction permit, including building, driveway, electrical and plumbing, for new construction, exterior modification, building addition, driveway construction, or parking lot construction or modification, shall be promptly forwarded by the Director of Community Development, or the Village Engineer, as the case may be, to the Site Plan Review Committee for the committee's review. Such review must be completed within 20 business days of the receipt by the village of a complete permit application. Application for Building Permits for construction or remodeling of detached single family residential structures or structures accessory thereto, or driveway permits for driveways serving single family residential structures shall not be subject to review by the Site Plan Review Committee. 
(b)  Where an application subject to Site Plan Review seeks a permit for a new driveway onto a public street, the applicant shall, in addition to any other required notice, be required to send notice, in a form approved by the Director of Community Development, by first class U.S. mail, postage pre-paid, to all occupants and owners of properties within 250 linear feet of the subject property on both sides of the street in the block where the proposed driveway is to be located. Said notice shall advise the owner or occupant, as the case may be, of the pending application, the location of the proposed driveway, and that the owner or occupant has 15 business days from the date of sending of the notice to submit written comments to the Director of Community Development, so that said comments may be reviewed by the Site Plan Review Committee prior to its decision to approve or deny Site Plan approval. 
(c)  If, in the committee's judgment, the construction permit application does not contain sufficient information to enable the committee to properly discharge its responsibilities, the committee may request additional information from the applicant. In that event, the 15 business day period referred to in subsection (a) of this section shall be suspended pending the receipt of all information requested by the committee. 
(d)  No construction permit shall be issued by the Director of Community Development or the Village Engineer until Site Plan approval has been granted, either by the committee or by the Board of Trustees, as provided in this article. 
(e)  Where the modification of an existing parking lot, as referenced in subsection (a) of this section is limited to, re-striping of parking spaces, repainting a portion of the surface, or seal-coating of the surface, then the scope of a Site Plan review shall be limited to, evaluating whether the plan provides for adequate screening of dumpsters and adequate numbers and sizes of parking spaces for the disabled. 
(Code 1993, § 9-3.7.2; Ord. No. 83-O-67, 11-1-1983; Ord. No. 96-O-51, 10-8-1996; Ord. No. 97-O-75, 10-14-1997; Ord. No. 2006-O-85, 11-14-2006) 
Sec. 8-327. - Scope of Site Plan review. 
    The Site Plan Review Committee, when evaluating Site Plans, will review: 
(1)  Traffic and parking layout so as to: 
a.  Minimize dangerous traffic movements; 
b.  Achieve efficient traffic flow in accordance with the standards in the Institute of Traffic Engineers' "Transportation and Traffic Engineering Handbook"; and the "Village Guidelines for Traffic Studies"; 
c.  Provide for the optimum number of parking spaces, while maintaining village design standards; and 
d.  Provide for the appropriate vehicular ingress and egress, including the establishment and location of driveways, provided, however, that the Site Plan Review Committee s determination of where a driveway should be established and/or located shall be governed by the standards of review set forth in section 20-126(a)(1) and (2). 
(2)  Landscaping, so as to: 
a.  Maintain compliance with all applicable village tree removal, tree protection, and tree coverage requirements; 
b.  Buffer adjacent incompatible uses; 
c.  Screen unsightly activities from public view; 
d.  Break up large expanses of asphalt with plant material; 
e.  Provide an aesthetically pleasing landscaping design; and 
f.  Provide plant materials and landscaping designs that can withstand Wilmette's climate, and the microclimate on the property. 
(3)  Location of principal structures, accessory structures and free-standing signs, so that the location of accessory structures and free-standing signs does not impede safe and efficient traffic flow. 
(4)  Public comments concerning proposed driveways received pursuant to section 8-326(a). 
(Code 1993, § 9-3.7.3; Ord. No. 97-O-75, 10-14-1997; Ord. No. 2006-O-85, 11-14-2006) 
Sec. 8-328. - Site Plan approval. 
(a)  If the Site Plan Review Committee approves a Site Plan, a Building Permit or a driveway permit may then be issued, provided that all other requirements of all other applicable village codes and ordinances are satisfied. 
(b)  If the Site Plan Review Committee does not approve a Site Plan, the applicant may appeal the committee's decision to the Village Board of Trustees. A notice of appeal must be filed with the Director of Community Development no later than 15 days after receipt by the applicant of the decision of the Site Plan Review Committee. Failure by an applicant to file an appeal in accordance with the foregoing provisions shall be deemed to constitute a withdrawal by the applicant of the application for a Building Permit. 
(c)  The Board of Trustees shall act as promptly as practicable on any appeal taken in connection with the proposed Site Plan. The Board of Trustees shall approve or disapprove the Site Plan by action taken by a majority of the Board of Trustees present at any meeting at which a quorum is present. If the Board of Trustees approves the Site Plan, a Building Permit or a driveway permit may then be issued, provided that all other requirements of all other applicable village codes and ordinances are satisfied. 
(Code 1993, § 9-3.7.4; Ord. No. 97-O-75, 10-14-1997; Ord. No. 2006-O-85, 11-14-2006) 
Sec. 8-329. - Relationship of Site Plan review to the Zoning Ordinance. 
    The procedures prescribed by this article are not intended to be a substitute for any procedures required under appendix A, the Zoning Ordinance. If a proposed Site Plan involves the granting of a special use permit or a variation from the requirements of appendix A, the Zoning Ordinance, the Site Plan Review Committee may review the plan in advance of the zoning proceedings and may make findings on the assumption that the special use permit or variation will be granted. However, such findings shall not constitute a position by the village or by any employee of the village in support of the petitioner's application for a special use permit or a variation in any proceedings before the Zoning Board of Appeals. The report of the Site Plan Review Committee in such cases shall be submitted to the Board of Trustees concurrent with the report of the Zoning Board of Appeals. 
(Code 1993, § 9-3.7.5; Ord. No. 81-O-40, 12-1-1981; Ord. No. 83-O-67, 11-1-1983; Ord. No. 2006-O-85, 11-14-2006) 
Secs. 8-330-8-346. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - TREE REMOVAL PERMITS 

Sec. 8-347. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Diameter breast height or DBH means the diameter of a tree stated in inches and measured at 41/2 feet above the existing grade at the base of the tree. 
    Remove or removal means the felling, destruction or actual physical removal of a tree. 
    Tree means a self-supporting, woody plant, together with its root system, having a well-defined stem or trunk or a multi-stemmed trunk system, a more or less well-defined crown, and a mature height of at least eight feet. The term "tree" does not include trees in containers or nursery stock trees kept or maintained for resale. 
    Tree permit means a permit issued by the Director of Community Development authorizing the removal of a tree pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1993, § 9-3.8.1; Ord. No. 2005-O-118, 12-13-2005; Ord. No. 2006-O-109, 1-9-2007) 
Sec. 8-348. - Tree Removal Permits required; tree emergency exception. 
(a)  No person shall remove a tree having a DBH equal or greater than ten inches without first obtaining a Tree Removal Permit issued by the Director of Community Development. 
(b)  The provisions of this article shall not apply to the following persons or entities: 
(1)  A unit of federal, state or local government. 
(2)  An electric utility, natural gas utility, cable television or telecommunications franchisee performing tree trimming or removal work that is regulated by state or federal law or regulation, franchise agreement, or other applicable agreement or regulation approved by the village. 
(3)  A railroad, or its designee, performing tree trimming or removal work that is regulated by state or federal law or regulation, or other applicable agreement or regulation approved by the village. 
(4)  A person removing a tree pursuant to the provisions of chapter 16 concerning abatement of nuisances or the removal of dying, dead, or diseased trees. 
(c)  Tree emergency exception. 
(1)  A tree emergency shall be deemed to exist when: 
a.  A tree has become an imminent danger or hazard to persons or property as a result of fire, motor vehicle accident, or natural occurrence such as lightning, windstorm, ice storm, flood, or other similar event; or 
b.  A tree must be removed in order to perform emergency repair or replacement of public or private water, sewer, electric, gas, or telecommunications utilities. 
(2)  In the case of a tree emergency, the Director of Community Development is hereby authorized to: 
a.  Issue a Tree Removal Permit without an application; 
b.  Waive the requirement for a Tree Removal Permit set forth in this article; or 
c.  Waive any of the other regulations of this article. 
(3)  Notwithstanding any other regulations of this article, a person otherwise required to obtain a tree permit may take any reasonable action necessary to avoid or eliminate the immediate danger or hazard, or conduct emergency repair or replacement of the public or private utility. The person taking such action shall file an application for a Tree Removal Permit within 72 hours after a tree is removed in a tree emergency. 
(Code 1993, § 9-3.8.2; Ord. No. 2005-O-118, 12-13-2005; Ord. No. 2006-O-109, 1-9-2007) 
Sec. 8-349. - Application for Tree Removal Permit. 
(a)  Contents of application. 
(1)  A Tree Removal Permit application shall be submitted on a form approved by the Director of Community Development, which may include without limitation, stating the following information: 
a.  Applicant's name, address and telephone number. 
b.  The address of the property where the trees is/are to be removed and legal owner of such property, if different than the information required in subsection (a) of this section. 
c.  Name, address, phone number and business license number (if applicable) of the person or business that will remove the trees. 
d.  The size in DBH and type/species of trees to be removed. 
e.  The location on the property of the trees to be removed. 
f.  The reason for removal of the protected trees. 
g.  A drawing or diagram showing the location of the trees to be removed. 
h.  Plans, if any, for planting replacement trees. 
i.  Tree permit fee as provided in subsection (b) of this section. 
(2)  An application to remove any ash tree (Fraxinus sp.), including any genus, species, varieties and cultivars thereof, located in an Emerald Ash Borer quarantine zone or area established either by the United States Department of Agriculture or the Illinois Department of Agriculture, shall additionally require a copy of a signed Compliance Agreement between the applicant, or the applicant's tree removal contractor, and the Illinois Department of Agriculture governing the removal and disposal of ash trees in an Emerald Ash Borer quarantine zone. 
(b)  The fee for a Tree Removal Permit shall be $29.00 for each tree over ten inches DBH to be removed, provided that said permit fee is waived for the removal of any ash tree subject to the requirements of subsection (a)(2) of this section. 
(c)  The Tree Removal Permit shall be issued by the Director of Community Development upon determination that the application form has been properly completed, that a business removing the tree is properly licensed in the village, and that the applicable permit fee has been paid. 
(Code 1993, § 9-3.8.3; Ord. No. 2005-O-118, 12-13-2005; Ord. No. 2006-O-109, 1-9-2007; Ord. No. 2007-O-87, 11-27-2007; Ord. No. 2008-O-88, 12-9-2008; Ord. No. 2009-O-72, 11-24-2009; Ord. No. 2010-O-71, 11-23-2010; Ord. No. 2011-O-74, 11-22-2011; Ord. No. 2012-O-63, 11-27-2012; Ord. No. 2013-O-71, 11-26-2013) 
Sec. 8-350. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  It shall be an offense for any person to remove a tree without having first obtained a tree permit, if so required under the provisions of this article. It shall be an offense for a property owner to employ, authorize or direct any third person or entity to remove a tree without having first obtained a Tree Permit, if so required under the provisions of this article. 
(b)  It shall be an offense for any person or entity to remove any ash tree (Fraxinus sp.) including any genus, species, varieties and cultivars thereof, without such person or entity having first entered into, or being covered by, a Compliance Agreement with the Illinois Department of Agriculture governing the removal and disposal of ash trees in the Emerald Ash Borer quarantine zone. 
(c)  A separate offense shall be deemed to have been committed for each tree removed without a Tree Removal Permit in violation of the provisions of this article. 
(d)  Each offense under this article shall be punishable by a fine in the amount of not less than $250.00 and not more than $1,500.00 for each offense. 
(Code 1993, § 9-3.8.4; Ord. No. 2005-O-118, 12-13-2005; Ord. No. 2006-O-109, 1-9-2007) 
Sec. 8-351. - Construction with other laws and ordinances. 
(a)  Nothing in this article, or any subsection thereof, or any decision made pursuant thereto, shall be construed to exempt or relieve any person receiving a permit under said article or engaging in activities regulated under said article from compliance with any other applicable codes, ordinances or regulations of the village, or any other applicable statute, law or regulation. 
(b)  Nothing in this article, or any subsection thereof, or any decision made pursuant thereto, shall be construed to limit the right of any person to initiate any action, at law or in equity, for redress, relief or damages against persons receiving permits or engaging in activities regulated by this section for redress, relief or damages for any injury or loss occasioned by such regulated activities, or to exempt or relieve from liability to another otherwise occasioned under applicable statutory or common law any person receiving a permit under this article or engaging in activities regulated under this article. 
(Code 1993, § 9-3.8.5; Ord. No. 2005-O-118, 12-13-2005; Ord. No. 2006-O-109, 1-9-2007) 
Secs. 8-352-8-375. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - PORTABLE STORAGE CONTAINERS 

Sec. 8-376. - Portable storage container defined. 
    For the purposes of this article, and further subsections thereof, the term "portable storage container" shall mean any temporary, transportable, movable or portable container, which is delivered to and placed outdoors on private property for storage purposes. A portable storage container does not include any of the following: 
(1)  A debris dumpster subject to obtaining a permit under the provisions of sections 8-301 through 8-303. 
(2)  A temporary construction trailer or other trailer subject to a temporary use permit issued under article 6, part 5 (Temporary Uses) of the Zoning Ordinance, appendix A of this Code. 
(Code 1993, § 9-3.9.1; Ord. No. 2008-O-47, 7-22-2008) 
Sec. 8-377. - Permit required; offenses. 
(a)  It shall be an offense for any occupant or owner of property to place, or cause to have placed on that occupant's or owner's property, a portable storage container without having first obtained a Portable Storage Container Permit from the Department of Engineering and Public Works. 
(b)  It shall be an offense for any occupant or owner of property to fail to remove a portable storage container from their property upon the expiration of the time authorized under a Portable Storage Container Permit. 
(c)  It shall be an offense for any recipient of a Portable Storage Container Permit to violate any of the regulations concerning use of same, as set forth in this article. 
(d)  It shall be an offense for a Portable Storage Container Permit holder to fail to remedy any damage done to public right-of-way, public property or public utilities as required in section 8-379, or to fail to reimburse the village for any costs of remedying such damage incurred by the village that exceeds the amount of the permit holder's security deposit. 
(e)  It shall be an offense for any occupant or owner of property to submit any false or misleading information in an application for a Portable Storage Container Permit. 
(Code 1993, § 9-3.9.2; Ord. No. 2008-O-47, 7-22-2008) 
Sec. 8-378. - Permit application; required contents; fee. 
(a)  Application for a Portable Storage Container Permit shall be made to the Department of Engineering and Public Works on a form approved by the Village Engineer. Such form shall require such information the following information: 
(1)  The name, address, telephone number and signature of the applicant. 
(2)  The name, address and telephone number of the property owner, if different than the applicant. 
(3)  The address of the property on which the portable storage containers will be located. 
(4)  The name, address and telephone number of the business that will deliver and remove the portable storage containers. 
(5)  The dimensions of the portable storage containers that will be placed on the subject property. 
(6)  The date on which the portable storage containers will first be delivered to the subject property. 
(7)  The date on which the portable storage containers are anticipated to be removed from the subject property, which shall be no more than 30 days after the first date of delivery to the subject property. 
(b)  Applications for a Portable Storage Container Permit shall be accompanied by a non-refundable fee of $45.00. 
(Code 1993, § 9-3.9.3; Ord. No. 2008-O-47, 7-22-2008; Ord. No. 2009-O-72, 11-24-2009; Ord. No. 2010-O-71, 11-23-2010; Ord. No. 2011-O-74, 11-22-2011; Ord. No. 2012-O-63, 11-27-2012; Ord. No. 2013-O-71, 11-26-2013) 
Sec. 8-379. - Protection of public property. 
(a)  Permittees shall not damage public property or the public right-of-way. Prior to the removal of a portable storage container from public property or public right-of-way, the permittee shall notify the Department of Engineering and Public Works. Upon discovery of any damage, the Village Engineer shall notify the permittee and the property owner of the total cost to repair the damaged public property. The portable storage owner and property owner shall not be able to obtain future village permits until: 
(1)  The permittee or property owner repair or restore the damaged area to a condition acceptable to the Director of Engineering and Public Works; or 
(2)  The Director of Engineering and Public Works repairs or has repaired the damage and the permittee or property owner has reimbursed the village; or 
(3)  The Director of Engineering and Public Works gives written authorization, based upon the specific circumstances, that a second or subsequent dumpster is needed to promote the health, safety, and welfare of the public. 
(b)  Failure to comply with the prompt repair to public property shall be a violation of this Code. 
(Code 1993, § 9-3.9.4; Ord. No. 2008-O-47, 7-22-2008) 
Sec. 8-380. - Limitations of permit; expiration of permit. 
(a)  A Portable Storage Container Permit shall expire 30 days after its date of issuance. 
(b)  No more than two Portable Storage Container Permits shall be issued for the same property in any 12-month period. 
(Code 1993, § 9-3.9.5; Ord. No. 2008-O-47, 7-22-2008) 
Sec. 8-381. - Maximum size and number; permitted use; other regulations. 
(a)  Only one portable storage container greater than eight feet in length, or two portable storage containers of eight feet or less in length, shall be located on a permit holder's property at any time. No portable storage container greater than 16 feet in length shall be allowed. At no time shall the aggregate length of any combination of portable storage containers on the subject property exceed 16 feet. 
(b)  Portable storage containers shall be utilized only for the storage, loading, and unloading of personal property belonging to the permit holder. 
(c)  No construction equipment, building materials, hazardous or flammable substances may be stored inside any portable storage container. 
(d)  Portable storage containers shall not be utilized for the purpose of storing materials, equipment or merchandise related to a home occupation, or otherwise used for commercial purposes. 
(e)  No portable storage container shall be located on public right-of-way or public property, unless the permit holder is the public entity on whose property or right-of-way the portable storage container will be located. 
(f)  Portable storage containers shall be located at least five feet from any lot line, the public right-of-way and any public sidewalk. A portable storage container shall not be placed in any location defined as a "required unobstructed area" as provided in sections 20-96 through 20-99. 
(Code 1993, § 9-3.9.6; Ord. No. 2008-O-47, 7-22-2008) 
Sec. 8-382. - Elevator and escalator codes. 
    For the purpose of establishing rules and regulations for the installation, repair and alteration of elevator, escalators, and similar conveyances, the village incorporates by reference as if fully set forth herein the Safety Code for Elevators and Escalators (ASME A17.1-2007), A17.1(a)-2007, and A17.1(s)-2007, Guide for Inspection of Elevators, Escalators, and Moving Walks (ASME 17.2-2004), Safety Code for Existing Elevators and Escalators (ASME A17.3-2005), Safety Standard for Platform Lifts and Stairway Chairlifts (ASME A18.1-2005), Standard for the Qualification of Elevator Inspectors (ASME QEI-1-2004), Safety Requirements for Personal Hoists and Employee Elevators (ANSI A10.4-2004), and Automated People Mover Standards (ASCE 21-2000), three copies of which shall be kept on file in the office of the Village Clerk. The provisions of said elevator codes shall be controlling in the construction, repair and alteration of all elevators, escalators, and similar conveyances therein contained within the corporate limits of the village. Whenever the terms "authority having jurisdiction for enforcing the Code," "governmental bodies exercising legal jurisdiction over electrical installations," "administrative authority," or similar terms are used in said elevator and escalator codes, they shall be held to mean the village. 
(Code 1993, § 9-3.10; Ord. No. 2008-O-50, 7-22-2008; Ord. No. 2010-O-7, 5-11-2010) 
Secs. 8-383-8-407. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - SITE DEVELOPMENT AND MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 8-408. - Definitions and applicability. 
(a)  Definition. The term "construction site" shall include that lot for which a permit has been issued and any adjacent public rights-of-way or public properties. 
(b)  Except as expressly provided, the provisions of this article shall not be construed to waive, revoke, or otherwise render inapplicable the requirements set forth in the Wilmette Housing and Building Codes, as adopted. 
(c)  The provisions of this article shall not apply to any request for permit, license or other authorization made by the village, the United States of America, the State and any agency thereof, or any "local public entity," as that term is defined in 745 ILCS 10/1-206. 
(Code 1993, § 9-4.1; Ord. No. 2001-O-59, 9-11-2001; Ord. No. 2006-O-85, 11-14-2006; Ord. No. 2011-O-07, 5-11-2010) 
Sec. 8-409. - Plans required with permit applications. 
    No building or demolition permit shall be issued until all applicable plans required under this chapter are submitted by the applicant and approved by the village. Said plans shall include: 
(1)  Site Development Plan, pursuant to section 8-410; 
(2)  Site Grading Plan, pursuant to section 8-210; and 
(3)  Stormwater Management Plan, pursuant to section 8-211. 
(Code 1993, § 9-4.2; Ord. No. 2006-O-85, 11-14-2006) 
Sec. 8-410. - Site development plan. 
(a)  Applicability. Except as provided herein, every applicant seeking a permit for any land-disturbing activity with excavation in excess of 100 square feet, or to a depth of three feet, shall submit a Site Development Plan drawn to scale setting forth those items stated in subsection (b) of this section. No Site Development Plan shall be required for permits governing utility repairs, fences, patios, sidewalks, driveway, or landscaping. 
(b)  Contents of Site Development Plan. Each Site Development Plan shall be acknowledged and signed by the contractor and shall identify and include the following: 
(1)  The location of the six foot chain link fence around the perimeter of site, disturbed areas, excavation, and stockpiles; 
(2)  Tree protection measures for all parkway trees, and any applicable measures for trees located on private property; 
(3)  The location of demolition or construction sign; 
(4)  Source and location of construction electricity and water, including water meter, as well as the location of any generator and/or compressor equipment; 
(5)  The location of portable toilets, if required; 
(6)  The location of school walking route, if applicable; 
(7)  Routes of access for ingress and egress to the construction site, which will provide protection to pedestrians and minimize disruption of traffic and damage to the public rights-of-way. If the right-of-way is to be obstructed, then an alternate pedestrian traffic plan must also be identified; and 
(8)  The proposed location for storage of materials and spoils on the subject property. 
(c)  Submission of additional data. The Director of Community Development shall review all documentation submitted pursuant to this section and, if deemed necessary, has the authority to request additional data, clarification, or correction of data already submitted. 
(d)  Commencement of construction. Prior to the commencement of any other construction activity, the construction site shall be prepared and readied with all applicable requirements stated in subsection (b) of this section. 
(e)  Plan modifications. Construction work shall be conducted in accordance with the approved Site Development Plan. Any changes or modifications by the contractor shall be done only with the prior approval of the Director of Community Development. The Director of Community Development shall have the authority to require additional or alternate site development requirements based upon ongoing site conditions. 
(Code 1993, § 9-4.2.1; Ord. No. 2006-O-85, 11-14-2006) 
Sec. 8-411. - Site maintenance and repair requirements. 
(a)  All construction sites shall be maintained in a good, clean and safe condition, including, but not limited to, the following minimum requirements: 
(1)  Handling of debris. Accumulated construction debris shall be hauled away and disposed of in accordance with all applicable laws, on a regular basis, but no less than one time per week. Any debris temporarily stored on site must be stored and secured so as to prevent a safety risk or danger. In addition to any applicable dumpster requirements set forth sections 8-301 through 8-303, dumpsters shall be emptied or removed when full. Debris from construction sites shall not be disposed of in dumpsters located at any other construction site within the village without the prior approval of the Director of Community Development. 
(2)  Storage of construction materials. Construction materials shall be stored, maintained and secured so as to prevent safety risk or danger. Except as otherwise provided herein, construction materials shall not be stored in the public right-of-way. 
(3)  Grading requirements. Any land disturbance or landfill shall be done in accordance with any and all applicable village grading requirements as set forth in article V, division 4 of this chapter. 
(4)  Fencing. 
a.  Every lot for which a construction permit has been issued for exterior demolition or construction, or lesser part of the lot at the discretion of the Director of Community Development, shall be enclosed by a six-foot chain link fence or barrier. The fence or barrier shall remain in place until such time as the Director of Community Development has determined that the property is sufficiently secured so as to prevent a health or safety risk or danger. The Director of Community Development has the discretion and authority to modify these requirements, including, but not limited to, requiring fencing of a different material, height or configuration if it is deemed necessary for the protection of public health and safety. 
b.  "No Trespassing" signs shall be mounted on the fencing in conspicuous locations around the site until construction is completed and approved. 
c.  Any gate in a perimeter fence shall be adequately hinged to prevent entry, except to allow ingress and egress to and from the site. Such gate must be locked at all times, other than permitted hours of construction. 
(5)  Demolition and construction notice. 
a.  General requirements. The form and content of the notice of demolition and/or construction shall be as required by the Director of Community Development. The notice shall set forth the name and contact information, including telephone number, of the general contractor. The notice shall also state that the rules and regulations applicable to demolition and/or construction work are available at the Community Development Department. The notice shall identify the week that demolition and/or construction are expected to commence and said notice shall be posted not less than seven days in advance of such commencement. Notice shall be maintained on the subject property until demolition and/or construction has been completed and approved, or until removal of the notice is approved by the Director of Community Development. 
b.  Demolition notice. In addition the requirements set forth in subsection (a) of this section, at least 24 hours in advance of demolition, specific notice of the exact date upon which demolition is to occur shall be provided to such nearby residents in the manner and method designated by the Director of Community Development. 
(6)  Site cleanliness. All mud, dirt or debris deposited on any street, alley, crosswalk, sidewalk or other public property as a result of demolition, excavation or construction shall be removed and cleaned on a regular basis, and at all times when a nuisance has been created by said debris. In addition, such areas shall be broom cleaned to the extent possible at the end of each day that construction work has occurred. Debris shall be disposed of in accordance with all applicable laws. 
(7)  Approval for blocked public right-of-way. Except while delivery or removal of materials to and from the construction site is occurring, to the extent any sidewalk, street or other public right-of-way shall be blocked, closed or otherwise rendered impassable, approval of the Village Engineer must be obtained and appropriate signage, cones and/or construction horses must be used to ensure public safety. 
(8)  Portable toilets. A portable toilet shall be provided at every construction site of a new principal structure, or addition thereto, prior to the commencement of construction, unless an existing facility is available on the site. Portable toilets shall be located to have the least possible impact on adjacent properties and should be located, to the extent possible, at the rear of the construction site and out of plain view of any public right-of-way. Portable toilets shall be serviced no less than once a week. 
(9)  Ingress and egress. Routes of access for ingress and egress to the construction site, which will provide protection to pedestrians and minimize disruption of traffic and damage to the public rights-of-way, shall be followed. The village reserves the right to designate certain prescribed routes of access for construction traffic. 
(10)  Parking. The parking of construction personnel vehicles shall not occur in any manner so as to block access to or through any public alley, sidewalk, or street. The village may restrict construction-related parking in any particular location on a public right-of-way if the village determines that such parking has a significant adverse impact on neighboring property or traffic control. All uses of vehicles shall also comply with applicable regulations related to parking and time of operation of vehicles. 
(11)  Oversized construction vehicles. Oversized construction vehicles will be allowed only on those streets or rights-of-way as designated by the Village Engineer. 
(12)  Tree protection measures. All trees and other vegetation on the public right-of-way shall be protected from damage by means of appropriate fencing. Fencing around trees on the public right-of-way shall be placed so as to protect the critical root zone, which is that circular area under the tree as determined by a one-foot radius for each one-inch in diameter. All tree protection measures set forth in any approved Tree Protection Plan must also be followed. 
(13)  Airborne particulates. Airborne particulate shall be controlled at the construction site at all times during work. This may be accomplished by means of a water truck and spraying equipment or other water source capable of spraying and thoroughly saturating all portions of the work, or by such other means capable of thoroughly controlling the creation and migration of airborne particles, including, but not limited to, dust, from the construction site. 
(14)  Gravel mat. When determined by the Village Engineer to be appropriate and practicable, the applicant shall cause a gravel mat to be installed at the construction site, of a size and in a location sufficient to wash down and cause dirt and mud to be removed from the tires of vehicles used at the site. The gravel mat shall be located so as not to interfere with the use of any public right-of-way or to cause any nuisance or inconvenience to adjacent public or private properties. 
(15)  Permit time limits. All applicable permit time limits with respect to demolition and construction must be followed. 
(16)  Noise. The making of, continuing, or causing to be made or continued any excessive and unnecessary loud and raucous sound or noise or any unnecessary sound or noise which because of its volume, duration or character annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, health, or safety of reasonable persons of ordinary sensibilities shall not be allowed. 
(17)  Discharge of wastewater. No person shall undertake any work pursuant to a permit issued under this chapter, from which the discharge of any wastewater will be caused or associated, without prior approval of the Village Engineer. It shall be the duty of the person undertaking any such work to direct all wastewater flow to the particular location designated by the Engineering and Public Works Department. 
(18)  Stormwater management. Stormwater shall be managed during all phases of demolition and construction so as not to impact adjacent properties and/or any public right-of-way and in accordance with any approved Grading and Stormwater Management Plans submitted as part of the permitting process. 
(19)  Hours of construction. Hours of construction shall be in accordance with section 16-112. 
(20)  Construction work near school walking routes. 
a.  Permittee and contractor shall be required to sign a form supplied and approved by the Village Engineer acknowledging that they have read and agree to comply with the requirements governing construction work on or adjacent to a designated school route as set forth below. 
b.  Notwithstanding any permitted right to use any public right-of-way, the following requirements shall apply: 
1.  There shall be no construction activity within the right-of-way at least one-half hour before school starts in the morning and one half hour after school ends in the afternoon. This includes accepting deliveries of material or equipment and removal or delivery of dumpsters. 
2.  The sidewalks, crosswalks, and roadways shall be free from debris, construction material and equipment. 
3.  There shall be no open holes within any sidewalk, crosswalk, or roadway. 
4.  Open holes in the vicinity of school walking routes shall be protected with backfill material, construction fencing, or well-barricaded and protected with yellow caution tape. 
5.  Walking surfaces that are backfilled with stone shall be graded such that the surface is level and does not pose a safety hazard. 
(21)  Entry onto adjacent properties. No permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall authorize, or be construed to authorize, any entry onto adjoining property or any work for which entry onto adjoining property is or may be necessary, unless a proper right of entry has been secured from the owner of such adjoining property. To the extent that access to the construction site requires access through or over an adjacent or neighboring property, the applicant must provide a Site Plan showing the approved access routes. The access plan must be signed and notarized by both the applicant and property owner from whom access has been granted. 
(22)  Utilities and on-site equipment. On-site electricity is required for construction-related work as soon as is practicable. The proposed locations of any generator and/or compressor shall be depicted on the Site Development Plan submitted at the time of application for the review and approval of the Engineering and Public Works Department, and shall be located so as to have the least possible impact on adjacent properties, preferably at the rear of the property. 
(23)  Environmental laws. All applicable federal and state environmental laws and soil testing requirements shall be complied with. No soil or fill from the construction site shall be used or relocated on the site unless such soil or fill meets all applicable federal or state environmental laws and regulations. 
(24)  Delay in construction. To the extent any existing structure is to be demolished and replaced with new construction, no permit for demolition shall be issued until a complete Building Permit application is submitted to the Community Development Department. If construction does not commence within 60 days after demolition has occurred at the site, or within 30 days after the issuance of a Building Permit, whichever is less, then, weather permitting, the construction site must be properly graded and sodded until such time as construction commences. 
(25)  Use of public property. No loading, unloading, or storage of demolition debris, spoil or construction materials shall be permitted within any right-of-way, on any public property or within ten feet of any right-of-way adjacent to public or private property, unless specifically approved by the village and shown on an approved Site Development Plan, if applicable. 
(b)  Failure to comply with the requirements of this article shall subject the contractor, property owner and/or permittee to the actions and penalties set forth in section 8-414. 
(c)  Damage to public property and required deposit. 
(1)  Every construction site shall be maintained in a manner so as to avoid damage to the public right-of-way, infrastructure or other public property, including, but not limited to, the village curbs, alleys, streets, crosswalks, sidewalks, alleys, signs, street lights, sprinkler systems, sewers or other public utilities. The Village Engineer shall have the discretion to televise, videotape, or otherwise record conditions prior to construction for the purpose of determining restoration obligations and compliance with this section. The permittee, or representative thereof, shall be given notice and an opportunity to be present during any such videotaping or televising. 
(2)  Any and all damage to the public right-of-way, infrastructure or other public property caused during the construction activities by the property owner, its contractors or agents shall be repaired, replaced or otherwise remedied by, and at the sole expense of, the property owner. 
(3)  A deposit in the amount of $1,000.00 shall be filed with the Village Engineer prior to the issuance of any Building Permit under this chapter, and shall be held for the repair of any damage to the public right-of-way caused by the construction work and not otherwise repaired, replaced or remedied by the property owner or permittee. 
(4)  To the extent the property owner or permittee does not properly repair any damage to the public right-of-way, the Village Engineer shall have the right to cause said damage to be repaired and to deduct the cost of repair from the deposit submitted pursuant to this section. Should the cost of repair exceed any amounts deposited, the property owner shall reimburse the village for all costs incurred pursuant to this section within ten days after demand for payment has been made. Upon the failure of the permittee or property owner to reimburse the village, the village shall have the right to place a lien on the subject property for all costs incurred pursuant to this section. 
(d)  Unlawful disposal. It shall be unlawful to be place, deposit, or otherwise dispose of construction debris in any public sewer, or to cause or allow any cement, mortar, paint, or other particulate to be discharged onto any public property or into any catch basin or other public sewer facility. 
(Code 1993, § 9-4.2.2; Ord. No. 2001-O-59, 9-11-2001; Ord. No. 2006-O-85, 11-14-2006) 
Sec. 8-412. - Letter of credit and entry authorization. 
(a)  Every applicant seeking a permit for new construction shall be required to submit an authorization by the property owner, made on a form to be provided by the Director of Community Development, granting the village, or any contractor or other party working at the discretion of the village, permission to enter the construction site and to take such remedial action deemed necessary, upon the failure of the property owner, its contractor or agents to comply with any of the terms of section 8-409, or upon the determination that an emergency situation exists, as set forth in section 8-413(b). 
(b)  In addition to the requirements set forth in section 8-414(a), every applicant seeking a permit for new construction (excluding new construction of single family and two-unit residences) shall submit to the Director of Community Development an irrevocable letter of credit in favor of the village which can be drawn upon by the Village Treasurer in order to reimburse the village for any and all costs and expenses, including legal fees and administrative costs, incurred by the village in the course of exercising its rights pursuant to section 8-414(a); or incurred in repairing or restoring damage to the public right-of-way or other public property. 
(c)  Terms of the letter of credit. 
(1)  The amount of the letter of credit shall be equal to 110 percent of the estimated cost of repair and/or replacement of any infrastructure damaged during construction. The Director of Community Development in conjunction with the Village Engineer will determine the exact amount of the letter of credit. 
(2)  The principal amount of the letter of credit shall not be reduced unless the Director of Community Development approves such reduction. 
(3)  The letter of credit shall extend for a minimum of two years. In no event shall the letter of credit be cancelled or allowed to expire except upon prior written notice to, and approval of, the village. The letter of credit shall provide that the village shall have the right to draw down the face amount of the letter of credit 30 days prior to the expiration, termination or non-renewal thereof. 
(4)  The letter of credit shall be in a form satisfactory to the Corporation Counsel and shall be from a financial institution that has an office or branch in the Chicago Metropolitan Area and is insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. 
(5)  The letter of credit may be drawn upon based upon the certification of the Village Manager that the property owner, its contractor or agents have failed to satisfy its obligations under this article. The consent of the property owner or developer is not necessary prior to the call and draw down by the village. 
(6)  For commercial construction projects, to the extent the letter of credit is drawn down by more than 50 percent prior to substantial completion, the village may in its discretion require that the letter of credit be increased to the full original amount. 
(Code 1993, § 9-4.3; Ord. No. 2001-O-59, 9-11-2001; Ord. No. 2006-O-85, 11-14-2006) 
Sec. 8-413. - Notice of violation. 
(a)  Upon the determination of the village that a construction site is in violation of with any of the terms of this article, or that a construction site poses a health or safety risk, the village shall provide notice to the property owner, its contractor or agents of the violation. Upon due notice, the construction site shall be brought into compliance within the time directed by the village, but in no event more than 24 hours from the time of notice. If the violation is not corrected within the time directed, the village shall have the right, but not the obligation, to correct the violation and charge all costs and fees to the permittee or property owner. Upon the failure of the permittee or property owner to reimburse the village within ten days after demand for payment has been made, the village shall have the right to place a lien on the subject property for all costs incurred pursuant to this section. 
(b)  If at any time the village determines that an emergency situation exists endangering the public health, safety, or welfare; creating a potential liability for the village; or endangering the village streets, utilities or other public property, and if the timing or nature of the situation precludes advance notification as provided in subsection (a) of this section, the village shall have the right to enter the construction site and take all necessary actions to minimize or prevent the effects of the emergency. Any and all loss, damage, costs and expenses, including legal fees and administrative costs, incurred by the village in the course of exercising its rights pursuant to this section, or incurred in repairing or restoring damage to the public right-of-way or other public property shall be reimbursed by the property owner. The village shall not be responsible for any loss or damage incurred as a result of exercising its rights under the section. Upon the failure of the permittee or property owner to reimburse the village within ten days after demand for payment has been made, the village shall have the right to place a lien on the subject property for all costs incurred pursuant to this section. 
(Code 1993, § 9-4.4; Ord. No. 2001-O-59, 9-11-2001; Ord. No. 2006-O-85, 11-14-2006) 
Sec. 8-414. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  It shall be an offense for any person to engage in construction work in violation of the provisions of this article, any permit condition, or, of any plan approved for construction at the site. Each contractor, property owner and permittee shall be responsible for the acts or omissions of their agents, employees, contractors, subcontractors or others working on their behalf with respect to the construction work. 
(b)  In addition to the authority stated in section 8-413, upon determination of the village that there has been a violation of any of the provisions of this article, the village shall have the authority and discretion, depending upon the nature and circumstances of the violation, to issue a written warning of violation, a local ordinance citation, and/or a stop work order with respect to any or all offenses committed. 
(c)  Any violation for which a written warning has been issued within the previous 180 days shall result in the issuance of a local ordinance citation. 
(d)  The Director of Community Development shall have the authority to issue a stop work order under the following circumstances: 
(1)  The condition of the construction site is such that it poses a potential hazard and endangers the public health, safety, or welfare of those on the site as well as adjacent thereto; 
(2)  The construction site has been the subject of enforcement six times, within an 180-day period, either by way of the issuance of written warnings and/or local ordinance citations. 
(e)  Should a stop work order be issued under this article, the permittee and contractor shall be entitled to meet, within two business days of the alleged violation, with the Director of Community Development, or designee, and present evidence as to the violation. If the Director of Community Development determines that there is good cause to believe that there was a violation as alleged, the permittee shall be required to submit a plan of compliance setting forth in detail the methods and controls to be used at the site to ensure future compliance with all applicable code provisions. Upon the approval of the plan of compliance by the Director of Community Development and the payment to the village by the permittee of a $1,000.00 stop work order administrative fee, permittee shall be allowed to resume construction at the site. 
(f)  The Director of Community Development shall have the authority to revoke a previously issued building or demolition permit when: 
(1)  It is determined that the building or demolition permit was issued in error, on the basis of incorrect information supplied, or in violation of any ordinance, regulation or provision of this Code. 
(2)  The permittee or property owner fail or refuse, after receipt of a stop work order, to cease work at the site. Permits revoked under this section may be reinstated upon the determination of the Director of Community Development that the site has been brought into compliance. In addition, a $1,000.00 reinstatement fee shall be paid to the village by the permittee or property owner before any such permit is reinstated. 
(g)  Each day that any construction site remains in violation of any of the requirements of this article, shall be deemed a separate offense. Each offense for which a citation has been issued under this article shall be punishable by a fine in an amount not less than $75.00 for the first offense; not less than $100.00 for any second offense; and not less than $250.00 for any subsequent offense. The maximum fine to be imposed under this section shall be $1,500.00 for each offense. 
(h)  Any person, firm or corporation convicted of a violation of section 8-411(d) shall be guilty of an ordinance violation, punishable by a fine of not less than $250.00 for the first offense and not less than $500.00 for any subsequent offense. The maximum fine shall be $1,500.00 for each offense. 
(i)  No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any construction undertaken pursuant to the provisions of this chapter until such time as all penalties and fines have been resolved to the satisfaction of the Director of Community Development. 
(Code 1993, § 9-4.4.1; Ord. No. 2006-O-85, 11-14-2006) 
Secs. 8-415-8-441. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - TREE PROTECTION DURING CONSTRUCTION 

Sec. 8-442. - General regulation. 
    Except as otherwise provided or as authorized by the Director of Community Development, all protected trees located on private property, where construction work is occurring pursuant to a Building Permit issued under this chapter, shall be protected from damage by means of the requirements stated herein. 
(Code 1993, § 9-4.5.1; Ord. No. 2003-O-63, 10-14-2003; Ord. No. 2006-O-85, 11-14-2006) 
Sec. 8-443. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Critical root zone means that circular area under a tree as determined by a one-foot radius for each one inch in DBH. 
    Diameter breast height or DBH means the diameter of a tree measured at 41/2 feet above the existing grade at the base of the tree. 
    Protected tree means any tree on private property that is ten inches or greater in DBH. 
(Code 1993, § 9-4.5.2; Ord. No. 2003-O-63, 10-14-2003; Ord. No. 2006-O-85, 11-14-2006) 
Sec. 8-444. - Tree protection requirements. 
(a)  All protected trees on private property shall be protected with temporary fencing placed along the critical root zone. The temporary fencing shall be made of plastic, wood or metal, and shall be secured with metal posts set no farther apart than three feet on center. Where the property owner has demonstrated to the village that it is not reasonably practical to install a temporary fence along the entire critical root zone, the Director of Engineering and Public Works shall have the authority and discretion to modify the requirements stated herein, including requiring that a surface barrier such as mulch or plywood be placed on those areas unprotected by fencing. 
(b)  Construction materials shall not be stored within that area protected by fencing, and shall not be stored on the construction site so as to cause the natural drainage flow to be diverted toward the protected trees. 
(c)  Upon a showing of good cause by the property owner, the Director of Engineering and Public Works shall have the authority and discretion to modify the requirements stated herein. 
(Code 1993, § 9-4.5.3; Ord. No. 2003-O-63, 10-14-2003; Ord. No. 2006-O-85, 11-14-2006) 
Sec. 8-445. - Notification to adjacent property owners. 
(a)  Prior to the issuance of any Building Permit for construction work which would change the footprint of the structure, the property owner shall provide written notice of the intended construction work, in a form to be provided by the village, to any adjacent property owner whose property contains a trees within 15 feet of the property line. Proof of notice shall be the submission of an affidavit, signed by the property owner, stating that written notice has been served and received by all adjacent property owners. No Building Permit shall be issued until five business days after receipt of notice by the adjacent property owners. 
(b)  Nothing in this subsection, nor any decision made pursuant hereto, shall be construed to limit the right of any person to initiate any action, at law or in equity, for redress, relief or damages caused by activities regulated by this subsection. 
(Code 1993, § 9-4.5.4; Ord. No. 2003-O-63, 10-14-2003; Ord. No. 2006-O-85, 11-14-2006) 
Sec. 8-446. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, partially remove, or fail to maintain any tree protection required under this article, and further provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article, and further provisions of this chapter, shall be guilty of a violation punishable by a fine of not less than $150.00 and not more than $750.00 for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed for each day that an offense continues. 
(Code 1993, § 9-4.5.5; Ord. No. 2003-O-63, 10-14-2003; Ord. No. 2006-O-85, 11-14-2006) 
Secs. 8-447-8-475. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIII. - ELECTRICAL CODE 

Sec. 8-476. - Adopted. 
    The National Electrical Code, 2005 Edition, shall be and the same hereby is adopted by reference as The Electrical Code of the village, as fully as if set out at length herein, save and except the following deletions, modifications or amendments thereto. Three copies are filed in the office of the Village Clerk, and the same are hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein. The provisions of said electrical code shall be controlling in the construction, repair and alteration of all buildings and other structures therein contained within the corporate limits of the village. Whenever the terms "authority having jurisdiction for enforcing the Code," "governmental bodies exercising legal jurisdiction over electrical installations," "administrative authority," or similar terms are used in said electrical code, they shall be held to mean the village. 
(Code 1993, § 9-5, ¶ 1; Ord. No. 83-O-16, 4-19-1983; Ord. No. 90-O-86, 12-4-1990; Ord. No. 95-O-88, 11-28-1995; Ord. No. 2010-O-07, 5-11-2010) 
Sec. 8-477. - Additional requirements. 
    The electrical code of the village is supplemented with the following additional requirements: 
(1)  All electrical service connections shall have a minimum capacity of 100 amps and shall utilize a 20-circuit plug fuse box or circuit breaker with 100 amp main fuse or circuit breaker disconnect of a type having Underwriters Laboratory approval. All circuits shall be contained in one cabinet. If a plug fuse box is used, only fusetat fuses shall be used. Minimum wire size #3 copper and #1 aluminum shall be used. Mini-breakers are not permitted. 
(2)  All service entrance conductors shall enter the building in rigid conduit with no reduction in size of neutral wire. Eye bolt or mast is required for all service installations. Roof plate devices are not acceptable. 
(3)  The wiring method employed in all electrical installation, within the buildings in the village, shall be in rigid conduit or electric metallic tubing except as hereinafter provided. Where necessary to pass wire through existing partitions, BX or flexible conduit may be used, not to extend more than three feet beyond said partitions. 
(4)  All underground service connections shall have a minimum capacity of 200 amps terminating in an approved 200 amp meter cabinet, with a minimum 40 circuit breaker panel. For 200 amp service, only 000 copper or 0000 aluminum wire is permitted. 
(5)  All Commonwealth Edison Company electric meters must be installed on the outside of single-family, duplex, two-flat or town house buildings. 
(6)  All clothes closet lights must be recessed fixtures or glass-enclosed fixtures with mounted switches. Pull switches are prohibited. 
(7)  All installations of heating cable used for gutter thawing must be approved by the Village Electrical Inspector. 
(8)  A grounding bond will be required at water meters, split connections on sump pump discharge pipes and around any dielectric couplings or connectors in water system. It is required to have service panel grounding to the street side of the water meter. 
(9)  A minimum of 100 amp electrical service is required for the installation of central air-conditioning units in existing residential single-family, two-family and town house dwellings. 
a.  Where a central system air-conditioning, ventilation and heating are installed in buildings other than single-family residences, the requirements set forth in the following codes shall be met: 
1.  Controls: NFPA 70-2006. 
2.  Smoke detectors: NFPA 70-2006. 
(10)  No electrical utility service connection shall be installed or revised in any building or premises without the prior approval of the Village Electrical Inspector. 
(11)  Stand-by power generator systems (other than those of article 700, emergency systems of the NFPA No. 70-2006), must meet the following requirements: 
a.  All generator systems must have a double-throw safety switch. It shall be installed in order to connect the owner's load to his emergency supply from the generator and to isolate such load from the electric company supply. 
b.  Generators being installed in the building shall be only of natural gas to supply the prime mover and must be vented, unless approval has been granted by the Director of Community Development to utilize another fuel supply. 
c.  Generators being installed outside of the building may be gasoline operated. The storage of gasoline for a generator shall not exceed ten gallons. 
d.  Gasoline or diesel powered generators, installed outside, shall not be located or installed within five feet of any building opening (doors, windows, escapes). 
(12)  Exterior disconnects shall be required on all services except back to back installations and all piping between service meter and panels and all subpanels must be in rigid pipe. 
(13)  A main breaker shall be required in all main panels and subpanels. 
(14)  Low voltage stand-alone hard-wired smoke detector and carbon monoxide detector systems are allowed provided they meet the following: 
a.  The system must comply with NFPA 72 National Fire Alarm Code. 
b.  The contractor installing the system must be licensed and certified by the State in the installation of fire alarm systems. 
c.  A separate permit shall be required for all low voltage fire alarm work. 
d.  The entire system shall be required to be in red metal pipe. 
e.  An acceptance test by Fire Department personnel shall be required. 
f.  The power source shall be from a commercial source; however, when primary power is interrupted, the power source shall be a battery. The circuit panel shall provide 115 volts at a locked dedicated breaker for the fire detection system. 
g.  The system must stand alone and shall not rely on a privately-maintained security/fire alarm system. The system must respond regardless of the inactivation of a security/fire alarm system. 
(Code 1993, § 9-5, ¶ 2; Ord. No. 73-O-11, 3-20-1973; Ord. No. 83-O-16, 4-19-1983; Ord. No. 98-O-99, 12-8-1998; Ord. No. 2007-O-90, 12-11-2007; Ord. No. 2010-O-07, 5-11-2010) 
Sec. 8-478. - Building permit subject to correction of existing violations. 
    No Building Permit shall be issued for remodeling, additions or accessory structures in the village until the owner has agreed to correct all existing electrical violations, if any. 
(Code 1993, § 9-5.1; Ord. No. 67-O-34, 1-2-1968) 
Sec. 8-479. - Artificial lighting requirements. 
(a)  Every attached garage, detached garage and every room or space in a building shall be provided with an electrical light source meeting the requirements of the electrical code. 
(b)  All electrical service to a detached accessory structure must be underground at a depth of 12 inches minimum. Service must be grounded. 
(c)  A minimum of one lighting outlet shall be installed in all accessible attic and crawl spaces, said light to be switched at entrance to the area, if the light is more than three feet from the entrance. 
(Code 1993, § 9-5.2) 
Sec. 8-480. - Inspection and permit fees. 
    The schedule of fees for electrical permits and inspections shall be as follows: 
(1)  For the issuance of an electrical permit: $45.00. 
(2)  Plus service installations of: 
a.  100 amp: $34.00. 
b.  200 amp: $45.00. 
c.  400 amp: $62.00. 
d.  Per hundred amp over 400 amps add $ 45.00. 
(3)  Plus. 
a.  For each ceiling outlet, side outlet, switch or receptacle, an additional $1.15. 
b.  For each air conditioner condenser unit, an additional $39.00. 
(4)  For each required scheduled inspection, or any reinspection deemed necessary as a result of work not performed in accordance with approved plans and/or code compliance: $39.00. 
(5)  Elevator permit fees. 
a.  Plan examination: $135.00. 
b.  For all construction of elevators, escalators dumbwaiters, dock lifts, wheelchair lifts, and the like: $20.16 per $1,000.00 valuation. 
c.  For each required scheduled inspection, or any reinspection deemed necessary as a result of work not performed in accordance with approved plans and/or code compliance: $79.00. 
(Code 1993, § 9-5.3; Ord. No. 71-O-32, 12-7-1971; Ord. No. 83-O-33, 7-5-1983; Ord. No. 91-O-37, 5-21-1991; Ord. No. 2002-O-100, 12-10-2002; Ord. No. 2003-O-89, 11-24-2003; Ord. No. 2004-O-104, 11-22-2004; Ord. No. 2005-O-104, 11-21-2005; Ord. No. 2006-0-94, 11-28-2006; Ord. No. 2007-O-87, 11-27-2007; Ord. No. 2008-O-88, 12-9-2008; Ord. No. 2009-O-72, 11-24-2009; Ord. No. 2010-O-71, 11-23-2010; Ord. No. 2011-O-74, 11-22-2011; Ord. No. 2012-O-63, 11-27-2012; Ord. No. 2013-O-71, 11-26-2013) 
Secs. 8-481-8-498. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIV. - PLUMBING CODE 

Sec. 8-499. - Plumbing Code adopted. 
(a)  The Illinois Plumbing Code, 77 Ill. Admin. Code 890 et seq., shall be and the same hereby is adopted by reference as The Plumbing Code of the village, as fully as if set out at length herein, save and except the following deletions, modifications or amendments thereto. Three copies are filed in the office of the Village Clerk, and the same are hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein. 
(b)  The Plumbing Code of the village is supplemented with the following additional requirements: Fees for permits for connection with sewer and water mains and inspection fees of water heater and fixtures shall be as set forth in section 26-107. 
(1)  Public systems available. A public water supply system and sewer system shall be deemed available to premises used for human occupancy anywhere within the corporate limits of the village, and connections to the public water supply and sewer system conforming with the standards set forth in this Code may be made thereto. 
(2)  Fee schedule. The permit fees for construction, reconstruction, alteration and installation shall be those established from time to time by the village. 
(3)  Unlawful continuance. Any person who violates a provision of this Code, or fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof shall be subject to penalty as provided in subsection (b)(7) of this section. Any person who shall continue any plumbing work in or about the structure after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe conditions, shall be subject to penalty as provided in subsection (b)(7) of this section. 
(4)  Freezing. Water service piping and sewers shall be installed below recorded frost penetration, but not less than five feet below grade for water piping and four feet below grade for sewers. 
(5)  Overhead plumbing. All new buildings and newly constructed additions with basements, floors, rooms or occupancy areas below ground level at the building site shall have overhead plumbing. No Building Permit application will be accepted nor any permits issued for construction of any structure in a new building unless plans and specifications therefor provided for overhead plumbing in accordance with this section. 
(6)  WaterSense fixtures. Subject to other provisions of the Illinois Plumbing Code, 77 Ill. Admin. Code 890 et seq., and the Law Irrigation Contractor and Law Sprinkler System Registration Code, 77 Ill. Admin. Code 892 et seq., from and after September 30, 2015, all replacement plumbing fixtures and new plumbing fixtures and irrigation controllers installed on properties connected to the village water supply system shall bear the WaterSense label (as designated by the United States Environmental Protection Agency WaterSense Program), when such labeled fixtures and controllers are available. 
(7)  Penalty. Any person who violates this section shall be guilty of violation punishable by a fine of not less than $200.00 and no more than $750.00 for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed for each day that an offense continues. 
(8)  Application. The provisions of said plumbing code, together with the aforesaid amendments thereto, shall apply to the construction of all buildings and structures within the corporate limits of the village. Wherever in said code the term "city" is used, it shall be held to mean the village. 
(Code 1993, § 9-6.1; Ord. No. 85-O-7, 4-16-1985; Ord. No. 90-O-86, 12-4-1990; Ord. No. 95-O-88, 11-28-1995; 2000-O-11, 4-25-2000; Ord. No. 2010-O-07, 5-11-2010; Ord. No. 2015-O-51, 6-14-2016) 
Sec. 8-500. - Use of groundwater as potable water supply prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to use or attempt to use as a potable water supply groundwater from anywhere within the corporate limits of the village, whether by the installation or drilling of wells or by any other method. This prohibition expressly applies to the Village of Wilmette. 
(b)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Person means any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, limited liability company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, political subdivision or unit of local government, or any other legal entity, or its legal representative, agent or assign. 
    Potable water means any water used or intended to be used for human or domestic consumption or use, including, but not limited to, water used for such purposes as drinking, bathing, swimming, washing dishes or eating utensils or preparing of food for human consumption, or the watering of animals ultimately intended for human consumption. The term "potable water" does not include water used solely for irrigation purposes unless said water is used to irrigate agricultural products ultimately intended for animal or human consumption. 
(c)  Any person in violation of this subsection shall be subject to prosecution by the village and a fine or other relief as provided for in the general penalty provisions of chapter 1, article II. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-08, § 2, 2-13-2018) 
Secs. 8-501-8-523. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XV. - FIRE PREVENTION 

Sec. 8-524. - Fire Prevention Code adopted. 
(a)  The 2006 International Fire Code, and subsequent amendments thereto, three copies of which shall be kept on file with the Village Clerk, shall be and the same is hereby adopted by reference as the Fire Prevention Code of the village, as fully as if set out at length herein, save and except the following deletions, modifications or amendments thereto: 
(b)  The term "Village of Wilmette" shall be inserted wherever the words "name of jurisdiction" appears. 
(c)  Section 104.3 is hereby deleted and replaced with the following: 
"Section 104.3, Right of entry. The Fire Chief, Fire Prevention Bureau, Village Manager or their duly authorized representatives are hereby authorized to make inspections of all buildings, structures, and premises located within the village to determine their compliance with the provisions of this Code. For the purpose of making such inspection, the Fire Chief or the Fire Prevention Bureau and their authorized representatives are hereby authorized to examine and survey all buildings, structures, and premises within the village. Such inspections shall be made between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. on any days except Sunday, or as otherwise deemed necessary, subject to the following standards and conditions: 
(1)  Such inspection may take place only if a complaint respecting said premises has been received by the Fire Chief or the Fire Prevention Bureau, and such complaint, in the opinion of said Fire Chief, provides reasonable grounds for belief that a violation exists, or such inspection is undertaken as part of a regular inspection program whereby certain areas of the village are being inspected in their entirety at the direction of the Fire Chief, the Fire Prevention Bureau, or the Village Manager. 
(2)  Any person making such inspection shall furnish to the owner or occupant of the structure sought to be inspected, sufficient identification and information to enable the owner or occupant to determine that heis a representative of the village, and to determine the purpose of said inspection. 
(3)  The Fire Chief, the Fire Prevention Bureau, the Village Manager, or any duly authorized representative at the direction of any of said officers, may apply to any court of competent jurisdiction for an administrative search warrant or other legal process for the purpose of securing entry to any premises, if the owner shall refuse to grant entry. 
(d)  The fees for permits and licenses required by the fire prevention code shall be fixed by the Board of Trustees. The general penalty provisions of chapter 1, article II shall apply. 
(e)  Where any provisions of such fire prevention code are in conflict with other laws, then the provisions of this municipal code or other ordinances of the village, state law, the provisions of the Village Code and such village ordinances shall prevail. 
(f)  Section 105.6.31 is deleted and replaced with the following: 
105.6.31, Open flames and torches. An operational permit is required from the Fire Department to use a torch or open flame device in a hazardous fire area; or to use open flame devices in assembly areas, dining areas of restaurants or drinking establishments. Removal of paint with any open flame device from any wood surface (including all Class A combustible surfaces), whether located on the interior or exterior of a building, is prohibited. 
(g)  Section 106.1 is hereby deleted. 
(h)  Section 108 is deleted and replaced with the following: 
108, Appeals. All appeals shall be made to the Fire Chief, as described under sections 8-526 and 8-527 of the village Fire Prevention Code. An applicant may appeal a decision of the Fire Chief to the Board of Trustees as described under section 8-526. 
(i)  Section 109.3 shall be amended as follows: insert the term "violation," where the term "SPECIFY VIOLATION" appears; insert the number "$750.00" where the word "AMOUNT" appears; remove "or by imprisonment not exceeding [NUMBER OF DAYS] or both such fine and imprisonment." 
(j)  Section 111.4 shall be amended by removing "of not less than [amount] dollars or more than [amount] dollars" and by adding "as set forth in chapter 1, article II." 
(k)  Section 307.4.1 is amended to read "Bon fires are prohibited." 
(l)  Section 307.4.2 is amended to read "Recreational fires are prohibited." 
(m)  Section 506, Key Boxes, is deleted and replaced by a new section 506: 
(1)  506.1 General. Every structure, except One- and two-family dwellings and townhouses, that is protected by an automatic fire alarm system and/or an automatic fire sprinkler system, and access to, or within a structure, or an area of the premises, is unduly difficult because of secured openings, and where immediate access is necessary for life-saving or firefighting purposes, the Fire Chief may require a key box to be installed in an approved location. The key box shall be a type approved by the Fire Chief. 
(2)  506.2 Key Box Maintenance. The operator of the building shall immediately notify the Code official and provide the new key, when a lock is changed or re-keyed. The key to such lock shall be secured in the key box. 
(3)  506.3 Contents. The key box shall contain: 
(n)  Keys to locked points of ingress, whether on the interior or exterior of such buildings. 
(o)  Keys to locked mechanical equipment rooms. 
(p)  Keys to locked electrical rooms. 
(q)  Keys to other areas, as directed by the Fire Chief. 
(r)  Section 902.1, definition of Fire Area is deleted and replaced as follows: 
Fire Area: the aggregate floor area bounded by the exterior walls of a building; regardless of fire walls, fire barriers, or fire resistance-rated horizontal assemblies. 
(s)  903.2.1 through 903.2.10.3 are deleted and replaced as follows: 
    All buildings of all use groups, regardless of square footage, shall be protected with an automatic fire sprinkler system installed per NFPA 13.13 R or 13D. Provide all spec warehouse buildings (use groups S or F) with a ceiling roof height of 25 feet or greater to be protected with an ESFR fire sprinkler system or a hydraulically calculated system for class IV commodities with rack storage calculated to the greatest storage height. All sprinkler systems, in all buildings and structures, except One- and two-family dwellings and townhouses, shall be electronically supervised by a fire alarm system. 
    Exceptions: The following shall not require the installation of an automatic fire sprinkler system: (1) one- and two-family dwellings and townhouses where installation of an automatic fire sprinkler system is not mandatory as set forth in section 8-105; (2), structures accessory to one- and two-family dwellings and townhouses which are exempt as set forth in this section; (3) detached garages, sheds, accessory or out buildings that are less than 100 square feet and ten feet or more away from a principal structure of one and two family dwellings and townhouses or in residential zoned districts. 
(t)  Section 903.3.5 shall be amended to read as follows: 
"Water supplies. Water supplies for automatic sprinkler systems shall comply with this section and the standards referenced in section 903.3.1. The potable water supply shall be Illinois State Plumbing Code. Hydrant water flow data used for the design of any sprinkler system shall be obtained with approval of the Fire Department by the contractor and shall be no more than one year old." 
(u)  Sections 903.3.8 through 903.3.8.11 shall be created as a new section titled "Additional Village Requirements" as follows: 
903.3.8 "Additional Village Requirements" 
903.3.8.1  "Provide a minimum ten percent minimum safety factor in the fire protection system hydraulic calculation. The system demand shall be five psi minimum below the seasonal low water flow test supply." 
903.3.8.2  "Provide an outside audio/visual device over the fire department connection." 
903.3.8.3  "Alarm indicating appliances audio/visual devices: Shall be provided, seen and heard in all areas of every building per NFPA 72. All sprinklered buildings shall be provided with occupant notification devices. This will provide full building notification per NFPA 72." 
903.3.8.4  "Fire sprinkler system inspectors text valves shall be accessible at all times and located no more than six feet above the finished floor. On multiple riser systems test valves shall be marked as to which riser and area it tests." 
903.3.8.5  "In multiple story buildings, provide floor control valves with water flow switches for each floor or each fire zone." 
903.3.8.6  "Where automatic sprinklers provide protection to an area with an approved flow switch interconnected to the fire alarm system, and the area is easily identifiable as to the location of the activation, additional automatic detectors are not required. When a building has numerous rooms protected by the zoned sprinkler system, the fire department may require additional smoke detectors for a more rapid means to identify the location of smoke or fire." 
903.3.8.7  "All references to NFPA standards are to be considered part of this Code." 
903.3.8.8  "Fire Sprinkler System; Fire pump test header. 
a.  Add "Provide an OS&Y control valve on all fire pump test headers." 
b.  Add "Provide an outside test header on fire pump installations." 
903.3.8.9  "Fire hydrants shall be provided around the perimeter of a building in 300-foot increments. Also a fire hydrant shall be located within 100 feet of the fire department connection on the fire protection water supply to the building." 
903.3.8.10  "Provide an outside access door to the sprinkler riser valve room and fire pump room." 
903.3.8.11  "Provide a minimum one hour separation of sprinkler valve room and/or fire pump room." 
(v)  Section 905.11 is deleted and replaced as follows: 
905.11  Standpipes required. All buildings or structures, or portions thereof exceeding two stories above grade, regardless of area per floor or use group, except one or two family residences, must have standpipes. 
(w)  Section 907.1.2 is amended to read: 
"Equipment. Systems and their components shall be listed and approved for the purpose for which they are installed. All fire alarm systems shall be of the addressable type and shall be installed per NFPA 72." 
(x)  Section 907.2 is deleted and replaced with: 
907.2 Where required.  An approved manual, automatic or manual and automatic fire alarm system shall be provided in all Use Groups. 
    The specific requirements in the 2006 International Building Code/International Fire Code section 907.2.6 for Use Group I shall remain. 
    Exception: One- and two-family dwellings and townhouses. 
    An approved automatic fire detection system shall be installed in all Use Groups, not provided with an automatic sprinkler system, and in accordance with NFPA 72. Devices, combination of devices, appliances, and equipment shall comply with section 907.1.2. The automatic fire detectors shall be smoke detectors, except that an approved alternative type of detector shall be installed in spaces such as boiler rooms where during normal operation products of combustion are presenting sufficient quantity to activate a smoke detector." 
    All fire alarm control panels or full function annunciator panels shall be installed within ten feet of the main entrance, or in a location approved by the Fire Department. 
    The standards provided for in the 2006 International Residential Code as well as those standards provided by the Smoke Detector Act, 425 ILCS 60/1 et. seq. shall be the applicable standards for the installation, placement, operation and maintenance for smoke detectors, alarms and the like, in all one- and two-family dwellings and townhouses located within the Village, when such standards conflict with or are otherwise more restrictive than the standards provided for in Chapter 11 of NFPA 72. 
(y)  Section 907.10.1 shall be amended by adding the following: 
"Multi-tenant Use Group M buildings will be "ring by tenant" activated by the fire, a fire sprinkler system flow switch for that space or automatic fire detection and shall include a weatherproof clear outside strobe over the entrance to each tenant space as directed by the fire department. All outside strobes shall be 75 candela minimum." 
(z)  Section 912.1.1 shall be created as a new section as follows: 
912.1.1  All fire department connections shall be a five-inch Storz connection with 30 degree downturn (Storz only). 
(aa)  Section 1006.3.1 shall be created as a new section as follows: 
1006.3.1  All rooms containing the building fire sprinkler risers, fire pumps, and fire alarm control panels shall be provided with approved emergency lighting. 
(bb)  Section 3404.2.9 is deleted and replaced as follows: 
Section 3404.2.9, Above-Ground Storage Tanks, General:  Combustible liquid storage tanks of any capacity installed above ground shall comply with this chapter. No flammable or Class 1 liquids are allowed to be stored in above-ground tanks. 
(cc)  Chapter 38 is deleted and replaced as follows: 
Chapter 38 Liquefied Petroleum Gases.  The bulk storage of liquified petroleum gases is prohibited in the village. 
(dd)  Section 3801 shall be created as a new section as follows: 
Section 3801, Liquefied Petroleum Gas Motor Fuel.  The storage, handling and dispensing of LP Gas as a motor fuel is strictly prohibited. 
(ee)  Appendix B, Fire-flow Requirements for Buildings, is adopted. 
(ff)  The following NFPA standards, as published by the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA), 1 Batterymarch Park, Quincy, Massachusetts 02269-9101, shall be adopted by reference as code for the village: 
(1)  NFPA 14, Standpipe and hose systems, 2007 Edition. 
(2)  NFPA 20, Installation of Stationary Pumps for Fire Protection, 2007 Edition. 
(3)  NFPA 25, Inspection, Testing and Maintenance of Water Based Fire Protection Systems, 2008 Edition. 
(4)  NFPA 96, Standard for Ventilation Control and Fire Protection of Commercial Cooking Operations, 2004 Edition. 
(5)  NFPA 231, General Storage, 1998 Edition. 
(6)  NFPA 231C, Rack Storage, 1998 Edition. 
(7)  NFPA 231D, Storage of Rubber Tires, 1998 Edition. 
(8)  NFPA 30B, Manufacturer and Storage of Aerosol Products, 2002 Edition. 
(Code 1993, § 9-7.1; Ord. No. 85-O-7, 4-16-1985; Ord. No. 90-O-86, 12-4-1990; Ord. No. 95-O-88, 11-28-1995; Ord. No. 2003-O-73, 10-28-2003; Ord. No. 2007-O-18, 2-13-2007; Ord. No. 2008-O-70, 10-28-2008; Ord. No. 2010-O-11, 5-11-2010) 
Sec. 8-525. - Fire Prevention Bureau. 
(a)  The Fire Prevention Code of the village, as adopted herein shall be enforced by the Fire Prevention Bureau in the Fire Department of the village, which bureau is hereby established and shall be operated under the supervision of the Fire Chief, who shall be head of the bureau. The Fire Prevention Bureau shall consist of the Fire Chief, the Deputy Fire Chief, the Battalion Chiefs of the Fire Department, the Assistant to the Fire Chief, and such other Fire Department personnel as may be so designated by the Fire Chief. 
(b)  The Fire Chief may detail such members of the Fire Department as inspectors as shall from time to time be necessary. 
(Code 1993, § 9-7.2; Ord. No. 98-O-99, 12-8-1998; Ord. No. 2010-O-11, 5-11-2010) 
Sec. 8-526. - Modifications of code. 
    The Fire Chief shall have the power to modify any of the provisions of the Fire Prevention Code of the village, as adopted, adopted by this chapter, upon application in writing by the owner or lessee, or his duly authorized agent, when there are practical difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the Fire Prevention Code of the village, as adopted; provided that the spirit of the Fire Prevention Code of the village, as adopted shall be observed, public safety secured and substantial justice done. The particulars of such modification when granted or allowed and the decision of the Fire Chief thereon shall be entered upon the records of the department, and a signed copy shall be furnished the applicant. 
(Code 1993, § 9-7.3; Ord. No. 2010-O-11, 5-11-2010) 
Sec. 8-527. - Appeals. 
    Whenever the Fire Chief shall disapprove an application or refuse to grant a license or permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions of the fire prevention code, adopted by this chapter, do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of the fire prevention code have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal from the decision of the Fire Chief to the Board of Trustees within 30 days from the date of the decision of the appeal. 
(Code 1993, § 9-7.4) 
Sec. 8-528. - New materials, processes or occupancies requiring permits. 
    The Village Manager, the Director of Community Development, and the Fire Chief shall act as a committee to determine and specify, after giving affected persons an opportunity to be heard, any new materials, processes or occupancies, which shall require permits, in addition to those now enumerated in the fire prevention code. The Fire Chief shall post such list in a conspicuous place in his office, and distribute copies thereof to interested persons. 
(Code 1993, § 9-7.5; Ord. No. 68-O-18, 4-16-1968; Ord. No. 72-O-3, 1-18-1972) 
Sec. 8-529. - Life Safety Code. 
    The NFPA 101 Life Safety Code, 2006 Edition, and subsequent amendments thereto, shall be and the same is hereby adopted by reference as the Life Safety Code of the village, as fully as if set out at length herein, three copies of which shall be kept on file with the Village Clerk. 
(1)  Section 24.3.5 is hereby deleted in its entirety. 
(2)  Section 24.3.5.1 is hereby deleted in its entirety. 
(3)  Section 24.3.5.2 is hereby deleted in its entirety. 
(4)  An approved automatic fire sprinkler system shall be installed in all new one- and two-family dwellings and townhouses in accordance with section 903.3.1 of the International Building Code, section 903 et seq. of the Fire Prevention Code of the village as adopted and the other applicable standards set forth by the village if light-weight frame construction is used in any portion of the new construction. 
(5)  Light weight frame construction shall have the same meaning and application as provided for in section 8-105. 
(6)  An approved automatic fire sprinkler system may be installed in all new one- and two-family dwellings and townhouses in accordance with section 903.3.1 of the International Building Code, section 903 et seq. of the Fire Prevention Code of the village as adopted and the other applicable standards set forth by the village for construction not using light-weight frame construction. 
(7)  Where the installation of an automatic fire sprinkler system is not made mandatory by this Code, the voluntary installation of an automatic fire sprinkler system must still be in accordance with section 903.3.1 of the International Building Code, section 903 et seq. of the Fire Prevention Code of the village as adopted and the other applicable standards set forth by the village. 
(Code 1993, § 9-7.6; Ord. No. 85-O-7, 4-16-1985; Ord. No. 90-O-86, 12-4-1990; Ord. No. 95-O-88, 11-28-1995; Ord. No. 97-O-100, 11-11-1997; Ord. No. 2003-O-73, 10-28-2003; Ord. No. 2010-O-11, 5-11-2010) 
Sec. 8-530. - Mechanical Code. 
    The 2006 International Mechanical Code, and subsequent amendments thereto shall be and the same is hereby adopted by reference as the Mechanical Code of the village, as if fully set forth herein, three copies of which shall be kept on file with the Village Clerk. 
(1)  The term "village" shall be inserted wherever the words "name of jurisdiction" appears. 
(2)  Section 106.5.2 is hereby amended in its entirety as follows: The fees for any permit associated with any mechanical work, as required by this Code, shall be as indicated by the Village Code of Wilmette. 
(3)  Section 106.5.3 is hereby repealed. 
(4)  Section 108.4 shall be amended by inserting the term "violation," where the term "SPECIFY VIOLATION" appears; insert the number "$750.00" where the term "AMOUNT" appears; and removing "or by imprisonment not exceeding [NUMBER OF DAYS], or both such fine and imprisonment." 
(5)  Section 108.5 shall be amended by removing "of not less than [amount] dollars or more than [amount] dollars" and by adding "as set forth in chapter 1, article II." 
(6)  Section 121 "Means of Appeals" is deleted and replaced as follows: 
Section 121 Appeals.  All appeals are to be made to the Building Code Board of Appeals. 
(Code 1993, § 9-7.7; Ord. No. 90-O-86, 12-4-1990; Ord. No. 95-O-88, 11-28-1995; Ord. No. 2010-O-11, 5-11-2010) 
Sec. 8-531. - Inspection and permit fees. 
    The schedule of fees for mechanical permits and inspections shall be as follows: 
(1)  For the issuance of a mechanical permit: $45.00. 
(2)  For each air conditioner condenser unit, an additional $39.00. 
(3)  For each required scheduled inspection: $39.00. 
(Code 1993, § 9-7.7.1; Ord. No. 2011-O-74, 11-22-2011; Ord. No. 2012-O-63, 11-27-2012; Ord. No. 2013-O-71, 11-26-2013) 
Sec. 8-532. - Accessibility Code. 
    The Illinois Accessibility Code (for the handicapped), April 24, 1997 Edition, shall be and the same is hereby adopted by reference as the Accessibility Code of the village as if fully set forth herein, three copies of which shall be kept on file with the Village Clerk. 
(Code 1993, § 9-7.8; Ord. No. 90-O-86, 12-4-1990; Ord. No. 2010-O-11, 5-11-2010) 
Sec. 8-533. - Energy Conservation Code. 
    The 2009 International Energy Conservation Code, and subsequent amendments thereto shall be and the same is hereby adopted by reference as Energy Conservation Code of the village, as if fully set forth herein, three copies of which shall be kept on file with the Village Clerk. 
(1)  The term "Village of Wilmette" shall be inserted wherever the term "name of jurisdiction" appears. 
(2)  Section 107.2 is hereby amended in its entirety as follows: The fees for any permit associated with any energy conservation work, as required by this Code, shall be as indicated by the Village Code of Wilmette. 
(3)  Section 108.4 Insert the number "$50.00" and "$750.00" respectively where the term "AMOUNT" appears. 
(Code 1993, § 9-7.9; Ord. No. 2010-O-11, 5-11-2010) 
Secs. 8-534-8-559. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XVI. - ROOFING PERMITS 

Sec. 8-560. - Roofing Permits required. 
    It shall be unlawful to reshingle, retile or replace more than 100 square feet of any roof in the village without having first obtained a permit therefor issued by the Director of Community Development. 
(Code 1993, § 9-8.1) 
Sec. 8-561. - Permit requirements. 
(a)  Permits shall be issued only to those persons, firms, or corporations licensed by the State under the provisions of the Roofing Industry Licensing Act (ILCS ch. 225, act 335, § 1), except that a permit may be issued to a homeowner, provided there is compliance with all other requirements of this article. 
(b)  A complete description of the proposed work shall be provided by the contractor or owner including specifications of all new materials, the methods of installation, and the number of previous roofing applications presently in place. Not more than one previous roofing application shall be permitted to remain in place, except on flat roofs where not more than two previous roofing applications shall be permitted to remain in place. 
(c)  A sketch plan shall be submitted showing the total area of the work, together with an estimated value of construction work. 
(d)  A description will be submitted stating whether any disposal chutes are required in the public right-of-way and details for a temporary fence, if required for security of the disposal or staging area. 
(e)  A description will be submitted of any scaffolds that will be required. 
(f)  A Dumpster Permit and a security deposit for restoring public property damaged by contract operations are required. 
(g)  No roofing matter shall be stored in the public right-of-way. 
(Code 1993, § 9-8.2) 
Sec. 8-562. - Inspections. 
    Authorized representatives of the village may inspect the site to verify safety measures at any time during the progress of the work. 
(Code 1993, § 9-8.3) 
Sec. 8-563. - Fees; expiration after issuance. 
    The fee for a Roofing Permit shall be $39.00. Roofing Permits shall expire and become invalid six months from the date of issuance. 
(Code 1993, § 9-8.4; Ord. No. 92-O-16, 3-3-1992; Ord. No. 2002-O-100, 12-10-2002; Ord. No. 2003-O-89, 11-24-2003; Ord. No. 2004-O-104, 11-22-2004; Ord. No. 2005-O-104, 11-21-2005; Ord. No. 2006-O-94, 11-28-2006; Ord. No. 2007-O-87, 11-27-2007; Ord. No. 2008-O-88, 12-9-2008; Ord. No. 2009-O-72, 11-24-2009; Ord. No. 2010-O-07, 5-11-2010; Ord. No. 2010-O-71, 11-23-2010; Ord. No. 2011-O-74, 11-22-2011; Ord. No. 2012-O-63, 11-27-2012; Ord. No. 2013-O-71, 11-26-2013) 
Secs. 8-564-8-589. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XVII. - SWIMMING POOLS 

Sec. 8-590. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Private swimming pool means a manmade rigid or semi-rigid receptacle for water having a depth at any point greater than 18 inches, used or intended to be used for swimming or bathing and constructed, installed or maintained in or above ground, and which is used exclusively by the owner or occupant of the property on which it is located, his family and his guests. 
(Code 1993, § 9-9.1) 
Sec. 8-591. - Permit required; application. 
    No person shall construct or cause to be constructed a private swimming pool with capacity of 2,500 gallons or more without first obtaining a permit from the Director of Community Development. A written application for such permit shall be filed with the Director of Community Development and shall be accompanied by plans and specifications sufficiently detailed to enable determination of compliance with the requirements of this chapter. 
(Code 1993, § 9-9.2; Ord. No. 68-O-18, 4-16-1968; Ord. No. 72-O-2, 1-18-1972) 
Sec. 8-592. - Permit fee. 
    The fee for a permit to construct a private swimming pool with a capacity of 2,500 gallons or more shall be $20.16 per $1,000.00 estimated valuation. 
(Code 1993, § 9-9.3; Ord. No. 2002-O-100, 12-10-2002; Ord. No. 2004-O-104, 11-22-2004; Ord. No. 2007-O-87, 11-27-2007; Ord. No. 2008-O-88, 12-9-2008; Ord. No. 2009-O-72, 11-24-2009; Ord. No. 2010-O-07, 5-11-2010; Ord. No. 2010-O-71, 11-23-2010; Ord. No. 2011-O-74, 11-22-2011; Ord. No. 2012-O-63, 11-27-2012; Ord. No. 2013-O-71, 11-26-2013) 
Sec. 8-593. - Enclosure required. 
    Every owner, purchaser under contract, lessee, tenant or licensee of land within the village upon which is situated a private swimming pool, shall at all times maintain, on the lot or premises upon which such private swimming pool is located, a fence or other structure completely surrounding such pool, not less than four feet in height, with no gaps or apertures greater than four inches, other than doors or gates. All gates or doors opening through such fence or enclosure shall be equipped with self-closing and self-latching devices placed at the top of such gates or doors and made inaccessible to small children. Such devices shall be so designed as to be capable of keeping such doors or gates securely closed at all times when not in actual use, provided however, that the door of any dwelling forming a part of the enclosure need not be so equipped. 
(Code 1993, § 9-9.4) 
Sec. 8-594. - Walks. 
    A walk area not less than four feet wide shall be installed entirely around a pool except in the case of a portable above ground installation. The walk shall be of impervious materials and shall have a definite pitch away from the pool of at least one-half inch to the foot. 
(Code 1993, § 9-9.5) 
Sec. 8-595. - Water supply. 
    Every person in possession of land on which a private swimming pool is located shall have such pool conform with the following regulations: 
(1)  The water supply shall be from a connection to a public water supply and shall consist of a permanent rigid system of piping having an air-gap delivery connection located not less than six inches vertically above the flood rim of the pool. 
(2)  No private swimming pool in excess of 5,000 gallons capacity shall be installed or used without a recirculating and filtering system having a minimum hourly capacity equal to the pool volume divided by ten. Sufficient filter area shall be provided to filter the entire pool volume in 18 hours at a rate not exceeding three gallons per square foot of filter area per minute. 
(3)  No water from any swimming pool shall be discharged directly into the sanitary or storm sewer system, or onto adjoining properties. 
(Code 1993, § 9-9.6) 
Sec. 8-596. - Electrical requirements. 
(a)  No current carrying electrical conductors shall cross private residential swimming pools, either overhead or underground or within ten feet of such pools. 
(b)  All metal fences, enclosures or railings or lighting fixtures near or adjacent to private residential swimming pools, which might become electrically alive as a result of contact with broken conductors or from any other cause, shall be effectively grounded. 
(Code 1993, § 9-9.7; Ord. No. 73-0-21, 5-15-1973) 
Sec. 8-597. - Sanitation. 
    Every private swimming pool shall be so designed and constructed as to facilitate cleaning and shall be maintained and operated in such a manner as to be clean and sanitary at all times. 
(Code 1993, § 9-9.8) 
Sec. 8-598. - Enforcement; right to inspect. 
    The Director of Community Development is hereby charged with the duty of enforcing these regulations. For this purpose he and his inspectors are hereby authorized to enter any premises in the village to inspect any private swimming pool at any reasonable hour. 
(Code 1993, § 9-9.9; Ord. No. 68-O-18, 4-16-1968; Ord. No. 72-O-3, 1-18-1972) 
Secs. 8-599-8-629. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XVIII. - PRIVATE SPAS AND HOT TUBS 

Sec. 8-630. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Private spa or hot tub means a manmade rigid or semi-rigid receptacle for water having a depth at any one point greater than 12 inches, but less than three feet, or having a volume greater than 80 gallons, but less than 2,500 gallons, used or intended to be used for bathing, wading, floating, or soaking, and constructed, installed or maintained in or above ground, and which is used exclusively by the owner or occupant of the property on which it is located, his family and his guests. 
(Code 1993, § 9-10.1) 
Sec. 8-631. - Permit required; application. 
    No person shall construct or cause to be constructed a private spa or hot tub without first obtaining a permit from the Director of Community Development. A written application for such permit shall be filed with the Director of Community Development and shall be accompanied by plans and specifications sufficiently detailed to enable determination of compliance with the requirements of this article. 
(Code 1993, § 9-10.2) 
Sec. 8-632. - Permit fee. 
    The fee for the permit to construct a private spa or hot tub shall be $20.16 per $1,000.00 of estimated valuation. 
(Code 1993, § 9-10.3; Ord. No. 2002-O-100, 12-10-2002; Ord. No. 2004-O-104, 11-22-2004; Ord. No. 2007-O-87, 11-27-2007; Ord. No. 2008-O-88, 12-9-2008; Ord. No. 2009-O-72, 11-24-2009; Ord. No. 2010-O-07, 5-11-2010; Ord. No. 2010-O-71, 11-23-2010; Ord. No. 2011-O-74, 11-22-2011; Ord. No. 2012-O-63, 11-27-2012; Ord. No. 2013-O-71, 11-26-2013) 
Sec. 8-633. - Enclosure required. 
    Every owner, purchaser under contract, lessee, tenant or licensee of land within the village upon which is situated a private spa or hot tub, shall at all times maintain, on the lot or premises upon which such private spa or hot tub is located, a fence or other structure completely surrounding such spa or hot tub, not less than four feet in height, with no gaps, other than doors or gates, greater than four inches. All gates or doors opening through such fence or enclosure shall be equipped with self-closing and self-latching devices placed at the top of such gates or doors and made inaccessible to small children. Such devices shall be so designed as to be capable of keeping such doors and gates securely closed at all times when the spa or hot tub is not in actual use; provided, however, that the door of any dwelling forming a part of the enclosure need not be so equipped. Spas or hot tubs which are placed at grade level and are higher than 48 inches above grade and do not have any adjacent stairs for access, need not have the above specified enclosures. 
(Code 1993, § 9-10.4) 
Sec. 8-634. - Exceptions. 
    The enclosure provisions of section 8-633 shall not apply to a spa or hot tub which is located completely within an enclosed building or which is completely covered by a rigid wood or metal lid, sufficient to withstand 100 pounds of weight, with a locking device. The lid shall be closed and locked at all times when the spa or hot tub is not in actual use. 
(Code 1993, § 9-10.5) 
Sec. 8-635. - Electrical requirements. 
(a)  No current carrying electrical conductors shall cross private residential spas or hot tubs, either overhead or underground or within ten feet of such spa or hot tub. 
(b)  All metal fences, enclosures or railings or lighting fixtures near or adjacent to private residential spas or hot tubs, which might become electrically alive as a result of contact with broken conductors or from any other cause, shall be effectively grounded. 
(Code 1993, § 9-10.6) 
Sec. 8-636. - Sanitation. 
    Every private spa or hot tub shall be so designed and constructed as to facilitate cleaning and shall be so maintained and operated in such a manner as to be clean and sanitary at all times. 
(Code 1993, § 9-10.7) 
Secs. 8-637-8-660. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIX. - FENCES IN DISREPAIR 

Sec. 8-661. - Fences in disrepair. 
    Fences in disrepair, because of their proximity to property lines, have a special potential for being safety hazards and for adversely affecting property values in the neighborhood. Accordingly, the village has an interest in requiring that fences be kept in good repair. The term "fence in disrepair" means a fence: 
(1)  Which has totally or partially collapsed so that it no longer stands in a substantially vertical plane; or 
(2)  Which has, to a material extent, missing or loose supports, slats, sections, pickets or other components. 
(Code 1993, § 9-11.1) 
Sec. 8-662. - Unlawful to maintain. 
    The owner of record of a lot shall maintain the fence on that lot, which is in conformance with the Wilmette Zoning Ordinance, in good repair, and shall be in violation of this ordinance if any of those fences on such lot continues to be in disrepair following the notice period provided in section 8-663. Fences which do not conform to the Wilmette Zoning Ordinance shall be removed following the notice period in section 8-663. 
(Code 1993, § 9-11.2) 
Sec. 8-663. - Notice to repair. 
(a)  When the Director of Community Development determines a fence is in disrepair, the Director will give the owner of record 30 days' notice (measured from the date of mailing or posting, as set forth below) to effect necessary repairs. If the owner of record fails to make the necessary repairs within such 30 days or such additional period as may be allowed by the Director of Community Development, the owner of record shall be considered to be in violation of section 8-662. 
(b)  The notice provided for will be given either by certified mail to the owner at the address in question or by posting at a conspicuous place on the fence in question. 
(Code 1993, § 9-11.3) 
Sec. 8-664. - Penalty for violations. 
    An owner of record found guilty of a violation of this article by a court of competent jurisdiction shall be subject to a fine of $100.00 for each ten-day period, or portion thereof, for which the violation continues after the expiration of the notice period, provided for in section 8-663. 
(Code 1993, § 9-11.4) 
Sec. 8-665. - Village to repair; cost as lien. 
    If an owner of record fails to effect the necessary repairs promptly after having been adjudged by a court of competent jurisdiction to be in violation of section 8-662, the village at its option may either remove or repair the fence in disrepair. The cost of such removal or repair shall be charged to the owner of record, and if not paid within 30 days, shall become a lien on the property. 
(Code 1993, § 9-11.5; Ord. No. 88-O-12, 3-1-1988) 
Secs. 8-666-8-688. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XX. - REMOVAL OF EXISTING DRIVEWAYS AND DETACHED GARAGES 

Sec. 8-689. - Removal required of existing driveways and detached garages. 
(a)  Where plans are submitted to the Director of Community of Community Development for the construction of a new detached garage which show the demolition and removal of an existing detached garage, prior to the issuance of any permit or authorization under this Code: 
(1)  The existing detached garage shall be demolished and removed; or 
(2)  The applicant seeking said permit or authorization shall submit a bond and entry authorization described in section 8-712. 
(b)  Where plans are submitted to the Director of Community of Community Development for the construction of a new driveway which show the demolition and removal of an existing driveway or other impervious surface, prior to the issuance of any permit or authorization under this Code: 
(1)  The existing driveway or other impervious surface shall be demolished and removed; or 
(2)  The applicant seeking said permit or authorization shall submit a bond and entry authorization described in section 8-712. 
(Code 1993, § 9-12.1) 
Sec. 8-690. - Bond and entry authorization. 
(a)  Pursuant to section 8-689(a)(2) and (b)(2), the applicant seeking said permit shall submit to the Director of Community Development: 
(1)  A bond, to be deposited with the Village Treasurer and not to earn interest, equal to the estimated cost of removal of the driveway or other nonpermeable surface and/or detached garage as evidenced by a written estimate submitted by the applicant's contractor; and 
(2)  An authorization, made on a form to be provided by the Director of Community Development, by the property owner granting the village, or any contractor or other party working at the direction of the village, upon the failure of the property owner to demolish and remove the preexisting detached garage, driveway, other impervious surface, permission to enter the property after completion of the construction of any new detached garage, driveway, or other impervious surface and demolish and remove any preexisting detached garage, driveway, or other impervious surface at the property owner's expense, and apply any bond on deposit to the cost of said demolition and removal. 
(b)  In the case of the submission of plans calling for both the removal of an existing detached garage and driveway, only one bond described in subsection (a)(1) of this section shall be required to be posted. 
(c)  In the event of a property owner's failure to demolish and remove a preexisting detached garage, driveway, or other impervious surface, the village may confiscate the bond described in subsection (a)(1) of this section and, using the proceeds thereof, exercise its rights as described in subsection (a)(2) of this section. 
(d)  In the event that the village shall incur reasonable expenses exceeding the amount of a bond described in subsection (a)(1) of this section in the course of exercising the rights authorized by the property owner pursuant to subsection (a)(2) of this section, the property owner shall be liable to the village for such additional expense. 
(e)  Nothing herein shall affect or preempt the village's ability to enforce its ordinances through citation or any other means provided for in this Code. 
(Code 1993, § 9-12.2) 
Sec. 8-691. - Applicability. 
(a)  The provisions of sections 8-689 and 8-690 shall not apply to any request for permit, license, or other authorization made by the village, the United States of America, the State and any agency thereof, or any "local public entity," as that term is defined in ILCS ch. 745, act 10, § 1-206. 
(b)  The provisions of sections 8-689 and 16-690 shall not apply to any request for permit, license, or other authorization made by a property owner where the amount of any bond which would be required to be posted pursuant to section 8-690(a)(1) would be less than $1,000.00. 
(Code 1993, § 9-12.3; Ord. No. 93-O-26, 4-27-1993) 
Secs. 8-692-8-710. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XXI. - COMPLIANCE WITH LANDSCAPE REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 8-711. - Security for landscape installation. 
    Where plans are submitted to the Director of Community of Community Development in support of the issuance of any permit, license, or authorization required by any provision of the Village Code which show any plans for landscaping required by any provision of the Village Code, the applicant seeking said permit or authorization shall submit a bond and entry authorization described in section 8-712. 
(Code 1993, § 9-13.1) 
Sec. 8-712. - Bond and entry authorization. 
(a)  Pursuant to section 8-703, the applicant seeking said permit shall submit to the Director of Community Development: 
(1)  A bond, to be deposited with the Village Treasurer and not to earn interest, equal to the estimated cost of the landscape installation described in the plans submitted to the Director of Community Development as evidenced by a written estimate submitted by the applicant's contractor; and 
(2)  An authorization, made on a form to be provided by the Director of Community Development, by the property owner granting the village, or any contractor or other party working at the direction of the village, upon the failure of the applicant to complete the landscape installation described in the plans submitted to the Director of Community Development, permission to enter the property upon said failure and complete the landscape installation described in the plans submitted to the Director of Community Development at the applicant's expense, and apply any bond on deposit to the cost of said completion. 
(b)  In the event of an applicant's failure to complete the landscape installation described in the plans submitted to the Director of Community Development, the village may confiscate the bond described in subsection (a)(1) of this section and, using the proceeds thereof, exercise its rights as described in subsection (a)(2) of this section. 
(c)  In the event that the village shall incur reasonable expenses exceeding the amount of a bond described in subsection (a)(1) of this section in the course of exercising the rights authorized by the applicant pursuant to subsection (a)(2) of this section, the applicant shall be liable to the village for such additional expense. 
(d)  Nothing herein shall affect or preempt the village's ability to enforce its ordinances through citation or any other means provided for in this Code. 
(Code 1993, § 9-13.2) 
Sec. 8-713. - Applicability. 
(a)  The provisions of sections 8-711 and 8-712 shall not apply to any request for permit, license, or other authorization made by the village, the United States of America, the State and any agency thereof, or any "local public entity," as that term is defined in ILCS ch. 745, act 10, § 1-206. 
(b)  The provisions of sections 8-711 and 8-712 shall not apply to any request for permit, license, or other authorization made by an applicant where the amount of any bond which would be required to be posted pursuant to section 8-712(a)(1) would be less than $500.00. 
(Code 1993, § 9-13.3) 
Sec. 8-714. - Landscaping and grading prior to completion. 
    When construction work to a residential building or structure is not completed within 14 months, and the exterior work is substantially completed, the Director of Community Development may require that the premises be properly graded and that sod be laid by a date certain, not less than 14 days following written notice to the permittee, provided however, that if the 14-month period would expire during a time when weather conditions prevent sodding, the Director may extend the time required for compliance until such time as it is reasonably practical to do so. Grading shall be done in accordance with an approved Site Grading Plan. 
(Code 1993, § 9-13.4; Ord. No. 2001-O-59, 9-11-2001) 
Secs. 8-715-8-741. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XXII. - DISCRIMINATION IN REAL ESTATE TRANSACTIONS 

Sec. 8-742. - Declaration of policy. 
    It is hereby declared to be the policy of the village, in the exercise of its police power for the protection of the public safety, public health, public morals and public welfare, and its powers to license and regulate real estate brokers, and for the promotion of equal opportunity to all persons to live in decent facilities, regardless of the actual or perceived status, practice or expression of that person's race, color, religion, age, or national origin, or ancestry, sex, age, disability, sexual orientation, marital status, parental status, military discharge status, source of income, or housing status, or the actual or perceived association with such a person, to prohibit discrimination in housing and real estate transactions. 
(Code 1993, § 9-14.1) 
Sec. 8-743. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Age means chronological age of not less than 40 years. 
    Disability means: 
(1)  A physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more of the major life activities of any individual; or 
(2)  A record of such an impairment; or 
(3)  Being regarded as having such an impairment. 
Excluded from this definition is an impairment relating to the illegal use, possession or distribution of "controlled substances" as defined in schedules I through V of the Controlled Substances Act (21 USC 812). 
    Housing status means: 
(1)  The type of housing in which an individual resides, whether publicly or privately owned; or 
(2)  An individual's ownership status with respect to the individual's residence. 
    Military discharge status means the fact of having been discharged from the Armed Forces of the United States, their Reserve components or any National Guard or Naval Militia other than by a dishonorable discharge. 
    National origin means the place in which an individual or one of his ancestors was born. 
    Parental status means the status of living with one or more dependent minors or disabled children. 
    Person means one or more individuals, partnerships, associations or organizations, corporations, recipients of government funds, legal representatives, trusts, trustees in bankruptcy, or receivers; state governments other than that of Illinois, or commercial operations or entities controlled by governments other than those of Illinois, or of the United States, that is also an owner, lessor, sublessor, assignor, managing agent, or other individual, firm, or corporation having the right to sell, rent, lease, or sublease any housing unit within the village, or any agent, broker, or other individual working on behalf of any such individual, firm, or corporation. 
    Real estate means any building, structure or portion thereof in the village which is used or occupied as a home, residence or dwelling place of one or more persons. 
    Religion means all aspects of religious observance and practice, as well as belief, or the actual identification with or perceived identification with a religion. 
    Sexual orientation means the status or expression, whether actual or perceived, of heterosexuality, homosexuality, or bisexuality, or gender-related identity, whether or not traditionally associated with the person's designated sex at birth. Sexual orientation does not include a physical or sexual attraction to a minor by an adult. 
    Source of income means the lawful manner by which an individual supports himself and his dependents. 
    Unlawful discrimination means discrimination against a person because of the actual or perceived status, practice, or expression of that person's race, color, sex, age, religion, disability, national origin, ancestry, sexual orientation, marital status, parental status, military discharge status, source of income, or housing status; or the actual or perceived association with such a person. 
(Code 1993, § 9-14.2; Ord. No. 2006-O-4, 1-24-2006) 
Secs. 8-744-8-769. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XXIII. - REAL ESTATE LICENSING 

Sec. 8-770. - Licenses. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to act as a real estate broker in the village without first obtaining a license as provided in articles I through IV of chapter 24, and the Illinois Real Estate License Act of 1983, ILCS ch. 225, act 455, § 1 et seq. 
(Code 1993, § 9-14.3) 
Sec. 8-771. - Prohibited acts. 
    No person shall engage in any discriminatory real estate practice. A discriminatory real estate practice occurs upon the violation of any one or more of the following prohibitions: 
(1)  Terms and conditions. No person shall make any distinction, discrimination, or restriction in the price, terms, conditions, or privileges of any real estate transaction, including the decision to engage in or renew any real estate transaction, on the basis of unlawful discrimination. 
(2)  Discriminatory communications. No person shall publish, circulate, issue, or display, or cause to be published, circulated, issued, or displayed, any communication, notice, advertisement, sign or other writing of any kind relating to a real estate transaction which will indicate or express any unlawful limitation or discrimination on the basis of unlawful discrimination. 
(3)  Listings. No person shall deliberately and knowingly refuse examination of any listing of residential real property within the village to any individual because of unlawful discrimination. 
(4)  Representations. No person shall deliberately and knowingly represent to an individual that residential real property is not available for inspection, sale, rental, or lease in the village when in fact it is available, or fail to bring a residential real estate listing in the village to an individual's attention, or refuse to permit a person to inspect residential real property in the village because of unlawful discrimination. 
(5)  Blockbusting. No person shall solicit, for sale, lease, or listing for sale or lease, residential real property within the village on the grounds of loss of value due to the present or prospective entry into any neighborhood of any individual or individuals of any particular race, color, sex, age, religion, disability, national origin, ancestry, sexual orientation, marital status, parental status, military discharge status, source of income, or housing status. 
(6)  Encouragement of blockbusting. No person shall distribute or cause to be distributed written material or statements designed to induce any owner of residential real property in the village to sell or lease his, her, or its property because of any prospective change in the race, color, sex, age, religion, disability, national origin, ancestry, sexual orientation, marital status, parental status, discharge status, source of income, or housing status of individuals in the neighborhood. 
(7)  Creating alarm. No person shall intentionally create alarm among residents of any community within the village by transmitting communication in any manner, including a telephone call whether or not conversation thereby ensues, with a design to induce any person within the village to sell or lease his residential real property within the village because of the present or prospective entry into the vicinity of the property of any individual or individuals of any particular race, color, sex, age, religion, disability, national origin, ancestry, sexual orientation, marital status, parental status, military discharge status, source of income, or housing status. 
(8)  Notice of fair housing ordinance. No person shall show real property located in the village, which is offered to the public for sale or lease, without notifying the prospective purchaser or lessee in writing (in 12-point type or larger) that, "Wilmette prohibits discrimination in real estate transactions based on race, color, age, religion, disability, national origin, ancestry, sexual orientation, marital status, parental status, military discharge status, source of income or housing status (article XXII of this chapter). Feel free to contact the village's Corporation Counsel by calling (847) 251-2700 [TDD No. (847) 853-7634] to make a complaint or to request further information." This requirement shall not apply to any property or rental unit offered for sale or lease, respectively, which is exempted, pursuant to section 8-772(7), from the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1993, § 9-14.4; Ord. No. 96-O-26, 6-11-1996) 
Sec. 8-772. - Exemptions. 
    The prohibitions in section 8-771 shall not apply to any of the following: 
(1)  Age. Restricting rental or sale of housing accommodation to an individual of a certain age group: 
a.  When such housing accommodation is authorized, approved, financed, or subsidized in whole or in part for the benefit of that age group by a unit of state, local, or federal government; or 
b.  When the duly recorded initial declaration of a condominium or community association limits such housing accommodations to individuals 50 years of age or older, provided that an individual or members of the household of an individual owning or renting a unit in such housing accommodation prior to the recording of the initial declaration shall not be deemed to be in violation of the age restriction as long as the individual or household member continues to own or reside in the housing accommodation. 
(2)  Religion. Limitation, by a religious organization, association, or society, or any not-for-profit institution or organization operated, supervised, or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization, association, or society, of the sale, rental, or occupancy of a dwelling which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose to individuals of the same religion, or from giving preference to such individuals. 
(3)  Single sex. Restricting the rental of rooms in a housing accommodation to individuals of one sex. 
(4)  Private rooms. Rental of a room or rooms in a private home by an owner if heor a member of his family resides therein or, while absent for a period of not more than 12 months, if he or a member of his family intends to return to reside therein. 
(5)  Section 8 Housing. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this article, nothing contained in this article shall require any person who does not participate in the Federal Section 8 Housing Assistance Program (42 USC 1437f) to accept any subsidy, payment assistance, voucher, or contribution under or in connection with such program or to lease or rent to any tenant or prospective tenant who is relying on such a subsidy, payment assistance, contribution, or voucher for payment of part of the rent for such housing accommodation. 
(6)  Public offering. Nothing in this article shall require an owner to offer property to the public at-large before selling or renting it, nor shall this section be deemed to prohibit owners from giving preference to prospective tenant or buyers for any reason other than unlawful discrimination. 
(7)  Owner-occupied dwellings. Nothing in this article shall apply to the listing of rooms to roomers in a dwelling unit occupied by the owner or lessee of the entire premises as a family household having not more than two roomers exclusive of domestic servants, or to owner occupied dwellings involving less than six units. 
(8)  Good faith negotiation. Nothing in this article shall require a person to offer property for sale or lease or rental to any person if the owner has any reason to believe that such a person is not negotiating for the purchase, lease, or rental thereof in good faith. 
(Code 1993, § 9-14.5; Ord. No. 89-O-68, 12-5-1989; Ord. No. 94-O-90, 11-8-1994) 
Secs. 8-773-8-797. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XXIV. - PROCEDURES FOR ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 8-798. - Complaint. 
    Any person who claims to have been injured by an unfair real estate practice or believes that he will be irrevocably injured by an unfair real estate practice that is about to occur (hereafter called "person aggrieved") may file a complaint within 30 days of the alleged violation, with the Corporation Counsel. The complaint shall be in writing, under oath, and shall contain such information and be in such form as the Corporation Counsel requires. Upon receipt of such a complaint the Corporation Counsel shall furnish a copy of the same to the person or persons who allegedly committed or are about to commit the alleged unfair real estate practice. 
(Code 1993, § 9-14.6.1) 
Sec. 8-799. - Conciliation. 
    The Corporation Counsel shall proceed to investigate said complaint, try to eliminate or correct the alleged unfair real estate practice by voluntary and informal methods of conference, conciliation and persuasion. Nothing said or done in the course of such informal endeavors may be made public or used as evidence in a subsequent proceeding under this section without the written consent of the persons concerned. 
(Code 1993, § 9-14.6.2) 
Secs. 8-800-8-821. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XXV. - CIRCUIT COURT COMPLAINTS 

Sec. 8-822. - Village complaint. 
    If, within 30 days after the initial complaint is filed, the Corporation Counsel has been unable to obtain voluntary compliance with this section, the Corporation Counsel may file the said complaint with the appropriate division of the Circuit Court of Cook County in the manner provided for the filing of ordinance violation complaints in the name of the village. If, during the course of the proceeding, compliance with this section is obtained or the person aggrieved desires to withdraw his complaint, the Corporation Counsel may non-suit or otherwise dismiss the complaint. 
(Code 1993, § 9-14.6.3.1) 
Sec. 8-823. - Direct complaint. 
    Nothing contained herein shall bar the person aggrieved from filing a complaint directly with the Circuit Court of Cook County. 
(Code 1993, § 9-14.6.3.2) 
Sec. 8-824. - Penalties. 
    Any person, firm or corporation upon conviction of a violation of this article shall be fined not less than $100.00 or more than $750.00. Any person, firm or corporation upon a second conviction of a violation of this section shall be fined not less than $250.00 or more than $750.00 and the fine for a third or subsequent conviction shall be $750.00. 
(Code 1993, § 9-14.7; Ord. No. 96-O-11, 4-9-1996) 
Sec. 8-825. - Notification of conviction. 
    If any person, firm or corporation convicted of a violation of this article, other than a violation of section 8-771(8), holds any license issued by a Department or Agency of the State, the Corporation Counsel is hereby directed to notify said Department or Agency of such conviction. 
(Code 1993, § 9-14.8; Ord. No. 68-O-29, 7-2-1968; Ord. No. 96-O-26, 6-11-1996) 
Secs. 8-826-8-843. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XXVI. - REAL ESTATE TRANSFER TAX 

Sec. 8-844. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Person means any natural person, receiver, administrator, executor, conservator, assignee, trust in perpetuity, trust, estate, firm, co-partnership, joint venture, club, company, joint stock company, business trust, municipal corporation, political subdivision of the State, domestic or foreign corporation, association, syndicate, society, or any group of individuals acting as a unit, whether mutual, cooperative, fraternal, nonprofit, or otherwise, and the United States or any instrumentality thereof. Whenever the term "person" is used in any clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the term as applied to associations shall mean the owners or part-owners thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers thereof. 
    Recordation means the recording of deeds with the Office of Recorder of Deeds or the Registration of Deeds with the Registrar of Titles of Cook County, Illinois. 
    Value means the amount of the full actual consideration for any transfer covered hereunder, including the amount of any mortgage or other lien to which the sale is subject or the amount of any mortgage or other lien assumed by the grantee or purchaser. 
(Code 1993, § 9-15.1) 
Sec. 8-845. - Imposition of tax. 
(a)  A tax is imposed on the transfer of title to real estate located in the village as evidenced by the recordation of a deed by any person or by the delivery of any deed or assignment of interest of said real property, whether investing the owner with the beneficial interest in or legal title to said property or merely the possession or use thereof for any purpose or to secure future payment of money or the future transfer of any such real property. 
(b)  The tax imposed shall be $3.00 for every $1,000.00 value or fraction thereof as stated in the declaration. 
(Code 1993, § 9-15.2) 
Sec. 8-846. - Primary liability for tax. 
    The primary liability for payment of said tax shall be borne by the grantee or purchaser involved in any such transaction; and it shall be unlawful for the grantee or purchaser to accept a conveyance if the transfer tax has not been paid. If the tax has not been paid and the stamps affixed to the deed, then the grantee's title shall be subject to the lien provided in section 8-854, and the grantee or purchaser shall be liable for payment of the tax. The tax herein levied shall be in addition to any and all other taxes. 
(Code 1993, § 9-15.3) 
Sec. 8-847. - Declaration forms. 
    At the time the tax is paid, there shall also be presented to the Director of Finance on a form prescribed by him, a declaration signed by at least one of the sellers or grantors and also signed by at least one of the purchasers or grantees involved in the transaction, or by their attorneys or agents, or by a licensed real estate salesperson or broker having knowledge of the terms of the transaction, which declaration shall state the full consideration for the property so transferred and shall be deemed a confidential record by the Village Clerk. Where the declaration is signed by an attorney, agent, licensed real estate salesperson or broker, on behalf of sellers or buyers who have the power of direction to deal with the title to the real estate under a land trust agreement, the trustees being the mere repository of record legal title with a duty of conveying the real estate only when and if directed in writing by the beneficiary or beneficiaries having the power of direction, said attorney, licensed real estate sales person, or broker need only identify the land trust which is the repository of record legal title and not the beneficiary or beneficiaries having the power of direction under the land trust agreement. 
(Code 1993, § 9-15.4) 
Sec. 8-848. - Deeds. 
    Every deed shall show the date of the transaction which it evidences, the names of the grantor and grantee, and a legal description of the property to which it relates. 
(Code 1993, § 9-15.5) 
Sec. 8-849. - Exempt transactions. 
    The tax imposed by this chapter shall not apply to the following transactions, provided said transaction in each case is accompanied by a certificate setting forth the facts or such other certificate of record as the Finance Director may require: 
(1)  Transactions involving property acquired by or from any governmental body, or any transaction involving property acquired by and from corporations, societies, associations, foundations or institutions organized and operated exclusively for charitable, religious or educational purposes ("charitable organizations"). The latter transaction is exempt only when one charitable organization conveys property to another charitable organization; 
(2)  Transactions in which the deeds secure debt or other obligations; 
(3)  Transactions in which the deeds, without additional consideration, confirm, correct, modify or supplement deeds previously recorded; 
(4)  Transactions in which the actual consideration is less than $500.00; 
(5)  Transactions in which the deeds are tax deeds; 
(6)  Transactions in which the deeds are releases of property which is security for a debt or other obligation; 
(7)  Transactions in which the deeds are pursuant to a court decree; 
(8)  Transactions made pursuant to mergers, consolidations, or transfers or sales of substantially all of the assets of a corporation pursuant to plans of reorganization; 
(9)  Transactions between subsidiary corporations and their parents for no consideration other than the cancellation or surrender of the subsidiary corporation's stock; 
(10)  Transactions wherein there is an actual exchange of real property except that the money difference or money's worth paid from one or the other shall not be exempt from the tax; 
(11)  Transactions representing transfers subject to the imposition of a documentary stamp tax imposed by the government of the United States; 
(12)  A transfer by lease. 
(Code 1993, § 9-15.6) 
Sec. 8-850. - Exemptions. 
    The taxes imposed by this chapter shall not be imposed on or transferred by an executor or administrator to a legatee, heir or distributee when that transfer is being made pursuant to will or by intestacy. The tax provided by this chapter additionally shall not be imposed where the transaction is affected by operation of law or upon delivery or transfer in the following instances: 
(1)  From a decedent to his executor or administrator; 
(2)  From a minor to his guardian or from a guardian to his ward upon attaining majority; 
(3)  From an incompetent to his conservator, or similar legal representative, or from a conservator or similar legal representative to a former incompetent upon removal of disability; 
(4)  From a bank, trust company, financial institution, insurance company or other similar entity, or nominee, custodian, or trustee therefor, to a public officer or commission, or person designated by such officer or commission or by a court, in the taking over of its assets, in whole or in part, under state or federal law regulating or supervising such institutions, nor upon redelivery or retransfer by any such transferee or successor thereto; 
(5)  From a bankrupt or person in receivership due to insolvency to the trustee in bankruptcy or receiver, from such receiver to such trustee or from such trustee to such receiver, nor upon redelivery or retransfer by any such transferee or successor thereto; 
(6)  From a transferee under subsections (1) through (5) of this section, inclusive, to his successor acting in the same capacity, or from one such successor to another; 
(7)  From a foreign country or national thereof to the United States or any agency thereof, or to the government of any foreign country directed pursuant to the authority vested in the President of the United States by section 5(b) of the Trading with the Enemy Act (40 stat. 415), as amended, by the First War Powers Act (55 stat. 839); 
(8)  From trustees to surviving, substitute, succeeding or additional trustees of the same trust; 
(9)  Upon the death of a joint tenant or tenant by the entirety to the survivor or survivors; 
(10)  From a transferee who is a participant in the H.O.M.E. (Home Ownership Made Easy) program of the State. 
(Code 1993, § 9-15.7; Ord. No. 92-O-3, 1-21-1992) 
Sec. 8-851. - Revenue stamps required. 
(a)  The tax herein levied and imposed shall be collected by the Director of Finance for the village through the sale of revenue stamps, which shall be caused to be prepared by said Director of Finance in such quantities as said Director of Finance may from time to time prescribe. Such revenue stamps shall be in the denomination of $1.00, $2.00, $3.00, $4.00, $5.00, $6.00, $7.00, $8.00, $9.00, $10.00, $20.00, $25.00, $30.00, $40.00, $50.00, $60.00, $70.00, $80.00, $90.00, $100.00, $200.00, $300.00, $400.00, $500.00, and $1,000.00, $5,000.00, $10,000.00, $50,000.00 and $100,000.00 and shall be in the following design: Village Real Estate Transfer Tax $0000. 
(b)  Such revenue stamps shall be available for sale at and during the regular business hours of the village offices. Upon payment of the tax herein levied and imposed, the revenue stamps so purchased shall be affixed to the deed or other instrument of conveyance. Any person so using and affixing a revenue stamp or stamps shall cancel it and so deface it as to render it unfit for reuse by marking it with his initials and the day, month and year when the affixing occurs. Such markings shall be made by writing or stamping in indelible ink or by perforating with a machine or punch. However, the revenue stamps shall not be so defaced as to prevent ready determination of the denomination and genuineness. 
(Code 1993, § 9-15.8; Ord. No. 97-O-1, 2-11-1997) 
Sec. 8-852. - Real estate transfer declaration; filing. 
    Assigned copy of the real estate transfer declaration filed pursuant to section 3 of the Real Estate Transfer Act of the State shall be filed with the Village Clerk by the grantee of any deed or assignee of beneficial interest within ten days after delivery of the deed or assignment of beneficial interest, or at the time of payment of the tax herein levied or imposed, whichever first occurs. 
(Code 1993, § 9-15.9) 
Sec. 8-853. - Transfers in trust. 
    No trustee of real estate shall accept an assignment of beneficial interest in real estate located in the village without first obtaining a real estate transfer declaration from the assignor and assignee and unless revenue stamps in the required amount, as set forth in this article have been affixed to the assignment. 
(Code 1993, § 9-15.10) 
Sec. 8-854. - Lien created; enforcement. 
    In the event a deed is filed for recordation or there is an assignment of beneficial interest conveying real estate within the corporate limits of the village without the revenue stamps provided by this section, a lien is declared against said real estate conveyed in the amount of the tax. The fact that the deed or assignment does not contain a Wilmette revenue stamp in an amount equal to three times the amount of county and state transfer taxes shall constitute constructive notice of lien. The lien may be enforced by proceedings to foreclose, as in cases of mortgages or mechanics' liens. Suit to foreclose this lien must be commenced within three years after the date of recording the deed. Nothing herein shall be construed as preventing the village from bringing a civil action to collect the tax imposed by this section from any person who has the ultimate liability for payment of the same, including interest and penalties as hereinbelow provided. 
(Code 1993, § 9-15.11) 
Sec. 8-855. - Enforcement; suit for collection. 
    Whenever any person shall fail to pay any taxes herein provided, or any purchaser or grantee shall accept a conveyance where the tax has not been paid, the Corporation Counsel shall, upon request of the Village Manager, bring or cause to be brought an action to enforce the payment of said tax, including interest and penalties as hereinbelow provided on behalf of the village in any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Code 1993, § 9-15.12) 
Sec. 8-856. - Interest and penalties. 
    In the event of failure by any person or entity to collect and pay to the Director of Finance the tax required hereunder when the same shall be due, interest and a late payment penalty shall also be imposed and be due and owing to the village. The amount of interest and late payment penalty shall be determined and collected as provided in article XVIII of chapter 6. 
(Code 1993, § 9-15.13; Ord. No. 2001-O-24, 4-10-2001) 
Sec. 8-857. - Proceeds of tax. 
    All proceeds resulting from the imposition of the tax under this article, including interest and penalties, shall be paid into the Treasury of the village and shall be credited to and deposited in the general fund of the village. 
(Code 1993, § 9-15.14) 
Sec. 8-858. - Penalty for violation. 
    In addition to the remaining provisions of this section, any person found guilty in a court of competent jurisdiction of violating, disobeying, omitting, neglecting or refusing to comply with or resisting or opposing the enforcement of any provision of this article upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of not less than $200.00 nor more than $750.00. 
(Code 1993, § 9-15.15) 
Secs. 8-859-8-879. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XXVII. - DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS 

Sec. 8-880. - In flood hazard areas. 
    No development, modification or construction of any building or structure of any sort shall occur or be permitted in the village unless it shall be in compliance with the provisions of article XXIX of this chapter, Appendix 9A, "Development Regulations in Flood Hazard Areas." The provisions of article XXIX of this chapter shall be deemed incorporated by reference in this section as if set forth verbatim herein. 
(Code 1993, § 9-16; Ord. No. 2000-O-65, 10-24-2000) 
Sec. 8-881. - In Edens Expressway Noise Impact Area. 
    No development, modification or construction of any building or structure of any sort shall occur or be permitted in the Edens Expressway Noise Impact Area unless it shall be in compliance with the provisions of article XXX of this chapter. The provisions of article XXX of this chapter shall be deemed incorporated by reference in this section as if set forth verbatim herein. 
(Code 1993, § 9-17; Ord. No. 2005-O-33, 4-12-2005) 
Secs. 8-882-8-910. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XXVIII. - FILING FEES 

Sec. 8-911. - For applications under the Zoning Ordinance. 
(a)  For residential administrative zoning review, including those requests made under sections 30-4.11 and 30-6.4.14 of appendix A, the Zoning Ordinance, the filing fee shall be $163.00. 
(b)  The filing fee for a special use or a variation shall be $394.00. If, however, the variation is for a fence, driveway, or accessory structure other than a garage, the fee shall be $163.00. 
(c)  The permit fee for a non-illuminated sign permit shall be $39.00. The permit fee for an illuminated sign permit shall be $123.00. The permit application fee for a sidewalk sign permit shall be $102.00. The filing fee for a signage variation shall be $123.00. 
(d)  The application fee for a request for a temporary use in excess of five days shall be $123.00. 
(e)  The application fee for an appearance review certificate shall be $123.00. 
(f)  The application fee for a text amendment and for rezoning shall be $777.00. 
(Code 1993, § 9-18; Ord. No. 2003-O-16, 3-11-2003; Ord. No. 2003-O-89, 11-24-2003; Ord. No. 2004-O-104, 11-22-2004; Ord. No. 2005-O-29, 4-26-2005; Ord. No. 2005-O-104, 11-21-2005; Ord. No. 2006-O-94, 11-28-2006; Ord. No. 2007-O-87, 11-27-2007; Ord. No. 2008-O-88, 12-9-2008; Ord. No. 2009-O-72, 11-24-2009; Ord. No. 2010-O-71, 11-23-2010; Ord. No. 2011-O-74, 11-22-2011; Ord. No. 2012-O-63, 11-27-2012; Ord. No. 2013- O-71, 11-26-2013) 
Secs. 8-912-8-940. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XXIX. - APPENDIX 9A DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS IN FLOOD HAZARD AREAS 

Sec. 8-941. - 200.0 Purpose. 
(a)  This appendix is enacted pursuant to the police powers granted to the village, Cook County, Illinois pursuant to ILCS ch. 65, act 5, § 1-2-1, ILCS ch. 65, act 5, § 11-12-12, ILCS ch. 65, act 5, § 11-30-2, ILCS ch. 65, act 5, § 11-30-8, and ILCS ch. 65, act 5, § 11-31-2, and additionally, pursuant to the home rule authority granted to the village pursuant to article VII, section 6, of the Constitution of the State. 
(b)  The purposes of this appendix are to maintain the village eligibility in the National Flood Insurance Program; to minimize potential losses due to periodic flooding including loss of life, loss of property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare; and to preserve and enhance the quality of surface waters, conserve economic and natural values and provide for the wise utilization of water and related land resources. 
(c)  This appendix is adopted in order to accomplish the following specific purposes: 
(1)  200.1 To meet the requirements of ILCS ch. 615, act 5, § 18g, Rivers, Lakes and Streams Act. 
(2)  200.2 To ensure that new development does not increase the flood or drainage hazards to others, or creating unstable conditions susceptible to erosion; 
(3)  200.3 To protect new buildings and major improvements to buildings from flood damage; 
(4)  200.4 To protect human life and health from the hazards of flooding; 
(5)  200.5 To lessen the burden on the taxpayer for flood control projects, repairs to flood-damaged public facilities and utilities, and flood rescue and relief operations; 
(6)  200.6 To make federally subsidized flood insurance available for property in the village by fulfilling the requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program; 
(7)  200.7 To comply with the rules and regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program codified as 44 CFR 59-79, as amended; 
(8)  200.8 To protect, conserve, and promote the orderly development of land and water resources; 
(9)  200.9 To preserve the natural characteristics and functions of watercourses and floodplains in order to moderate flood and stormwater impacts, improve water quality, reduce soil erosion, protect aquatic and riparian habitat, provide recreational opportunities, provide aesthetic benefits and enhance community and economic development. 
(Code 1993, app. 9A, § 200.0; Ord. No. 2000-O-65, 10-24-2000) 
Sec. 8-942. - 300.0 Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Act means an act in relation to the regulation of the rivers, lakes and streams of the State, ILCS ch. 615, act 5, § 5 et seq. 
    Applicant means any person, firm, corporation or agency which submits an application. 
    Appropriate use means only uses of the designated floodway that are permissible and will be considered for permit issuance. The only uses that will be allowed are as specified in section 8-947(4). 
    Base flood means the flood having a one-percent probability of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. The base flood is also known as the 100-year frequency flood event. Application of the base flood elevation at any location is as defined in section 8-948. 
    Building means a structure that is principally above ground and is enclosed by walls and a roof. The term "building" includes a gas or liquid storage tank, a manufactured home, mobile home or a prefabricated building. The term "building" also includes recreational vehicles and travel trailers to be installed on a site for more than 180 days, unless fully licensed and ready for highway use. 
    Channel means any river, stream, creek, brook, branch, natural or artificial depression, ponded area, flowage, slough, ditch, conduit, culvert, gully, ravine, wash, or natural or manmade drainageway, which has a definite bed and banks or shoreline, in or into which surface or groundwater flows, either perennially or intermittently. 
    Channel modification means alteration of a channel by changing the physical dimensions or materials of its bed or banks. Channel modification includes damming, rip-rapping (or other armoring), widening, deepening, straightening, relocating, lining and significant removal of native vegetation from the bottom or banks. Channel modification does not include the clearing of dead or dying vegetation, debris, or trash from the channel. Channelization is a severe form of channel modification involving a significant change in the channel cross-section and typically involving relocation of the existing channel (e.g., straightening). 
    Compensatory storage means an artificially excavated, hydraulically equivalent volume of storage within the SFHA used to balance the loss of natural flood storage capacity when artificial fill or structures are placed within the floodplain. The uncompensated loss of natural floodplain storage can increase off-site floodwater elevations and flows. 
    Conditional approval of a designated floodway map change means preconstruction approval by IDNR/OWR and FEMA of a proposed change to the floodway map. This preconstruction approval, pursuant to this part, gives assurances to the property owner that once an appropriate use is constructed according to permitted plans, the floodway map can be changed, as previously agreed, upon review and acceptance of as-built plans. 
    Conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) means a letter which indicates that FEMA will revise base flood elevations, flood insurance rate zones, flood boundaries or floodway as shown on an effective Flood Hazard Boundary Map or Flood Insurance Rate Map, once the as-built plans are submitted and approved. 
    Control structure means a structure designed to control the rate of flow that passes through the structure, given a specific upstream and downstream water surface elevation. 
    Dam means all obstructions, wall embankments or barriers, together with their abutments and appurtenant works, if any, constructed for the purpose of storing or diverting water or creating a pool. Underground water storage tanks are not included. 
    Designated floodway means the channel, including on-stream lakes, and that portion of the floodplain adjacent to a stream or watercourse as designated by IDNR/OWR, which is needed to store and convey the existing 100-year frequency flood discharge with no more than a 0.1-foot increase in stage due to the loss of flood conveyance or storage, and no more than a ten percent increase in velocities. 
(1)  The floodways are designated for the Skokie Ditch, the Skokie River, and the North Branch of the Chicago River, on the Flood Insurance Rate Map Number 17031C, panels 234, 253, 255, and 260, prepared by FEMA, effective August 19, 2008. 
(2)  The floodways for those parts of unincorporated Cook County that are within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the village that may be annexed into the village are designated for the Skokie Ditch, the Skokie River, and the North Branch of the Chicago River, on the Flood Insurance Rate Map prepared by FEMA, effective August 19, 2008 
(3)  To locate the designated floodway boundary on any site, the designated floodway boundary should be scaled off the designated floodway map and located on a Site Plan, using reference marks common to both maps. Where interpretation is needed to determine the exact location of the designated floodway boundary, IDNR/OWR should be contacted for the interpretation. 
    Development means any manmade change to real estate, including: 
(1)  Construction, reconstruction, repair, or placement of a building or any addition to a building. 
(2)  Installing a manufactured home on a site, preparing a site for a manufactured home, or installing a travel trailer or recreational vehicle on a site for more than 180 days. If the travel trailer or recreational vehicle is on site for less than 180 days, it must be fully licensed and ready for highway use. 
(3)  Drilling, mining, installing utilities, construction of roads, bridges, or similar projects. 
(4)  Demolition of a structure or redevelopment of a site. 
(5)  Clearing of land as an adjunct of construction. 
(6)  Construction or erection of levees, walls, fences, dams, or culverts; channel modification; filling, dredging, grading, excavating, paving, or other non-agricultural alterations of the ground surface; storage of materials; deposit of solid or liquid waste. 
(7)  Any other activity of man that might change the direction, height, or velocity of flood or surface water, including extensive vegetation removal; Development does not include maintenance of existing buildings and facilities such as re-roofing or re-surfacing of roads when there is no increase in elevation, or gardening, plowing, and similar agricultural practices that do not involve filling, grading, or construction of levees. 
    Elevation certificates means a form published by FEMA that is used to certify the elevation to which a building has been elevated. 
    Erosion means the general process whereby soils are moved by flowing water or wave action. 
    Exempt organizations means organizations which are exempt from this appendix per Illinois Compiled Statutes (ILCS) including state, federal or local units of government. 
    Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) has been completed before April 1, 1990. 
    Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
    FEMA means Federal Emergency Management Agency and its regulations at 44 CFR 59-79, revised as of October 1, 2001. This incorporation does not include any later editions or amendments. 
    Flood means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from overflow of inland or tidal waves, or the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
    Flood frequency means a period of years, based on a statistical analysis, during which a flood of a stated magnitude may be expected to be equaled or exceeded. 
    Flood fringe means that portion of the floodplain outside of the designated floodway. 
    Flood insurance rate maps (FIRM) means a map prepared by FEMA that depicts the Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA) within a community. This map includes insurance rate zones and floodplains and may or may not depict floodways. 
    Floodplain means that land typically adjacent to a body of water with ground surface elevations at or below the base flood or the 100-year frequency flood elevation. Floodplains may also include detached Special Flood Hazard Areas, ponding areas, etc. The floodplain is also known as the Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA). 
(1)  The floodplains are those lands within the jurisdiction of the village that are subject to inundation by the base flood or 100-year frequency flood. The SFHA's of the village are generally identified as such on Flood Insurance Rate Map Number 17031C, panels 234, 253, 255, and 260, prepared by FEMA, effective August 19, 2008. 
(2)  The SFHA's of those parts of unincorporated Cook County that are within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the village or that may be annexed into the village are generally identified as such on the Flood Insurance Rate Map prepared for Cook County by FEMA, effective August 19, 2008 
    Floodproofing means any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
    Floodproofing certificate means a form published by FEMA that is used to certify that a building has been designed and constructed to be structurally dry floodproofed to the flood protection elevation. 
    Flood protection elevation (FPE) means the elevation of the base flood or 100-year frequency flood plus one foot of freeboard at any given location in the SFHA. 
    Freeboard means an increment of elevation added to the base flood elevation to provide a factor of safety for uncertainties in calculations, future watershed development, unknown localized conditions, wave actions and unpredictable effects such as those caused by ice or debris jams. 
    Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places or preliminary determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminary determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historic district or a district preliminary determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on the state inventory of historic places by the Illinois Historic Preservation Agency; 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places that has been certified by the Illinois Historic Preservation Agency. 
    Hydrologic and hydraulic calculations means engineering analysis which determine expected flood flows and flood elevations based on land characteristics and rainfall events. 
    IDNR/OWR means Illinois Department of Natural Resources, Office of Water Resources. 
    Letter of map amendment (LOMA) means official determination by FEMA that a specific structure is not in a 100-year flood zone; amends the effective Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM) or FIRM. 
    Letter of map revision (LOMR) means letter that revises base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevations, flood insurance rate zones, flood boundaries or floodways as shown on an effective FHBM or FIRM. 
    Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designated for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term "manufactured homes" also includes park trailers, travel trailers and other similar vehicles placed on site for more than 180 consecutive days. The term "manufactured home" does not include a recreational vehicle. 
    Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
    Mitigation means mitigation includes those measures necessary to minimize the negative effects which floodplain development activities might have on the public health, safety and welfare. Examples of mitigation include compensatory storage, soil erosion and sedimentation control, and channel restoration. Mitigation may also include those activities taken to reduce a structure's susceptibility to flooding. 
    New manufactured home park or subdivision means manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) has been completed on or after April 1, 1990. 
    National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929 (NGVD) means reference surface set by the National Geodetic Survey deduced from a continental adjustment of all existing adjustments in 1929. 
    Natural means when used in reference to channels means those channels formed by the existing surface topography of the earth prior to changes made by man. A natural stream tends to follow a meandering path; its floodplain is not constrained by levees; the area near the bank has not been cleared, mowed or cultivated; the stream flows over soil and geologic materials typical of the area with no substantial alteration of the course or cross-section of the stream caused by filling or excavating. A modified channel may regain some natural characteristics over time as the channel meanders and vegetation is re-established. Similarly, a modified channel may be restored to more natural conditions by man through regrading and revegetation. 
    Ordinary high water mark (OHWM) means the point on the bank or shore up to which the presence and action of surface water is so continuous so as to leave a distinctive mark such as by erosion, destruction or prevention of terrestrial vegetation, predominance of aquatic vegetation or other easily recognized characteristics. 
    Public flood control project means a flood control project which will be operated and maintained by a public agency to reduce flood damages to existing buildings and structures which includes a hydrologic and hydraulic study of the existing and proposed conditions of the watershed. Nothing in this definition shall preclude the design, engineering, construction or financing, in whole or in part, of a flood control project by persons or parties who are not public agencies. 
    Public bodies of waters means all open public streams and lakes capable of being navigated by watercraft, in whole or in part, for commercial uses and purposes, and all lakes, rivers, and streams which in their natural condition were capable of being improved and made navigable, or that are connected with or discharge their waters into navigable lakes or rivers within, or upon the borders of the State, together with all bayous, sloughs, backwaters, and submerged lands that are open to the main channel or body of water directly accessible thereto. 
    Recreational vehicle or travel trailer means a vehicle which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
    Registered land surveyor means a land surveyor registered in the State, under The Illinois Land Surveyors Act. (ILCS ch. 225, act 330, § 1 et seq.) 
    Registered professional engineer means an engineer registered in the State, under The Illinois Professional Engineering Practice Act. (ILCS ch. 225, act 325, § 1 et seq.) 
    Repair, remodeling or maintenance means development activities which do not result in any increases in the outside dimensions of a building or any changes to the dimensions of a structure. 
    Repetitive loss means flood-related damages sustained by a structure on two separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood event, on the average, equals or exceeds 25 percent of the market value of the structure before the damaged occurred. 
    Retention/detention facility means a retention facility stores stormwater runoff without a gravity release. A detention facility provides for storage of stormwater runoff and controlled release of this runoff during and after a flood or storm. 
    Riverine SFHA means any SFHA subject to flooding from a river, creek, intermittent stream, ditch, on stream lake system or any other identified channel. This term does not include areas subject to flooding from lakes, ponding areas, areas of sheet flow, or other areas not subject to overbank flooding. 
    Runoff means the water derived from melting snow or rain falling on the land surface, flowing over the surface of the ground or collected in channels or conduits. 
    Sedimentation means the processes that deposit soils, debris, and other materials either on other ground surfaces or in bodies of water or watercourses. 
    Special flood hazard area (SFHA) means any base flood area subject to flooding from a river, creek, intermittent stream, ditch, or any other identified channel or ponding and shown on a Flood Hazard Boundary Map or Flood Insurance Rate Map as Zone A, A0, A1 30, AE, A99, AH, VO, V30, VE, V, M, E, D, or X. 
    Structure means the results of a manmade change to the land constructed on or below the ground, including the construction, reconstruction or placement of a building or any addition to a building; installing a manufactured home on a site; preparing a site for a manufactured home or installing a travel trailer on a site for more than 180 days unless they are fully licensed and ready for highway use. 
    Substantial damage means a building is considered substantially damaged when it sustains damage from any cause (fire, flood, earthquake, etc.), whereby the cost of fully restoring the structure would equal or exceed 50 percent of the pre-damage market value of the structure, regardless of the actual repair work performed. This term also includes structures which have incurred "repetitive loss." 
    Substantial improvement means: 
(1)  Any repair, reconstruction or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure either, before the improvement or repair is started, or if the structure has been damaged, and is being restored, before the damage occurred. The term "substantial improvement" also includes structures which have incurred repetitive loss. 
(2)  For the purposes of this definition, substantial improvement is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure regardless of the actual work performed. 
(3)  The term "substantial improvement" does not, however, include either: 
a.  Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions; or 
b.  Any alteration of an historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. 
    Transition section means reaches of the stream or floodway where water flows from a narrow cross-section to a wide cross-section or vice versa. 
(Code 1993, app. 9A, § 300.0; Ord. No. 2000-O-65, 10-24-2000; Ord. No. 2008-O-45, 7-22-2008) 
Sec. 8-943. - 400.0 How to use this appendix. 
(a)  401.0 The Village Engineer shall be responsible for fulfilling all of the duties listed in section 8-944. 
(b)  402.0 To fulfill those duties, the Village Engineer first should use the criteria listed in section 8-945, Base Flood Elevations, to determine whether the development site is located within a floodplain. 
(c)  403.0 Once it has been determined that a site is located within a floodplain, the Village Engineer must determine whether the development site is within a flood fringe, a designated floodway, or within a SFHA or floodplain for which no floodway has been identified. 
(d)  403.1 If the site is within a flood fringe, the Village Engineer shall require that the minimum requirements of section 8-946 are met. 
(e)  403.2 If the site is within a floodway, the Village Engineer shall require that the minimum requirements of section 8-947 are met. 
(f)  403.3 If the site is located within a SFHA or floodplain for which no detailed study has been completed and approved, the Village Engineer shall require that the minimum requirements of section 8-948 are met. 
(g)  404.0 In addition, the general requirements of section 8-926 shall be met for all developments meeting the requirements of section 8-946, 8-947, or 8-948. 
(h)  405.0 The Village Engineer shall assure that all subdivision proposals shall meet the requirements of section 8-950. 
(i)  406.0 If a variance is to be granted for a proposal, the Village Engineer shall review the requirements of section 8-951 to make sure they are met. In addition, the petitioner shall complete all notification requirements. 
(j)  407.0 In order to assure that property owners obtain permits as required in this appendix, the Village Engineer may take any and all actions as outlined in section 8-953. 
(Code 1993, app. 9A, § 400.0; Ord. No. 2000-O-65, 10-24-2000) 
Sec. 8-944. - 500.0 Duties of the enforcement official. 
    The Village Engineer shall be responsible for the general administration and enforcement of this appendix, which shall include the following: 
(1)  501.0 Determining the Floodplain Designation. 
(2)  501.1 Check all new development sites to determine whether they are in a Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA). 
(3)  501.2 If they are in a SFHA, determine whether they are in a floodway, flood fringe or in a floodplain for which a detailed study has not been conducted and which drains more than one square mile. 
(4)  501.3 Check whether the development is potentially within an extended SFHA (with a drainage area less than one square mile), indicating that the development would have adverse impacts regarding storage, conveyance, or inundation which would be the basis for the applicant being required to delineate the floodplain and floodway and be subject to the remaining sections of this appendix. 
(5)  502.0 Professional Engineer Review. 
(6)  502.1 If the development site is within a floodway or in a floodplain for which a detailed study has not been conducted and which drains more than one square mile, the permit shall be referred to a registered professional engineer under the employ or contract of the village for review to ensure that the development meets sections 8-947 or 8-948. 
(7)  502.2 In the case of an Appropriate Use, the P.E. shall state in writing that the development meets the requirements of section 8-947. 
(8)  503.0 Dam Safety Requirements. 
(9)  503.1 Ensure that an IDNR/OWR permit has been issued or a letter indicating no permit is required, if the proposed development activity includes construction of a dam as defined in section 8-942. 
(10)  503.2 Regulated dams may include weirs, restrictive culverts or impoundment structures. 
(11)  504.0 Other permit requirements. 
Ensure that any and all required federal, state and local permits are received prior to the issuance of a floodplain Development Permit. 
(12)  505.0 Plan Review and Permit Issuance. 
(13)  505.1 Ensure that all development activities within the SFHAs of the jurisdiction of the village meet the requirements of this appendix. 
(14)  505.2 Issue a floodplain Development Permit in accordance with the provisions of this appendix and other regulations of this community when the development meets the conditions of this appendix. 
(15)  506.0 Inspection Review. Inspect all development projects before, during and after construction to assure proper elevation of the structure and to ensure compliance with the provisions of this appendix. 
(16)  507.0 Elevation and Floodproofing Certificates. Maintain permit files including: 
(17)  507.1 An Elevation Certificate certifying the elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) of a residential or non-residential building subject to section 8-949 of this appendix, and/or; 
(18)  507.2 The elevation to which a non-residential building has been floodproofed, using a Floodproofing Certificate, for all buildings subject to section 8-949 of this appendix. 
(19)  508.0 Records for Public Inspection. Maintain for public inspection and furnish upon request base flood data, SFHA and designated floodway maps, copies of federal or state permit documents, variance documentation, Conditional Letter of Map Revision, Letter of Map Revision, Letter of Map Amendment and "as-built" elevation and floodproofing and/or elevation certificates for all buildings constructed subject to this appendix. 
(20)  509.0 State Permits. Ensure that construction authorization has been granted by IDNR/OWR, for all development projects subject to sections 8-947 and 8-948 of this appendix, unless enforcement responsibility has been delegated to the village. However, the following review approvals are not delegated to the village and shall require review or permits from IDNR/OWR: 
(21)  509.1 Organizations which are exempt from this appendix, as per the Illinois Compiled Statutes; 
(22)  509.2 IDNR/OWR projects, dams or impoundment structures as defined in section 8-942 and all other state, federal or local unit of government projects, including projects of the village and county, except for those projects meeting the requirements of section 8-947(11); 
(23)  509.3 An engineer's determination that an existing bridge or culvert crossing is not a source of flood damage and the analysis indicating the proposed flood profile, per section 8-947(7)e.; 
(24)  509.4 An engineer's analysis of the flood profile due to section 8-947(7)d.; 
(25)  509.5 Alternative transition sections and hydraulically equivalent compensatory storage as indicated in section 8-947(7)a., b. and h.; 
(26)  509.6 Permit issuance of structures within, under, or over publicly navigable rivers, lakes and streams; 
(27)  509.7 Any changes in the Base Flood Elevation or floodway locations; and 
(28)  509.8 Base Flood Elevation determinations where none now exist. 
(29)  510.0 Cooperation with other agencies. 
(30)  510.1 Cooperate with state and federal floodplain management agencies to improve base flood or 100-year frequency flood and floodway data and to improve the administration of this appendix; 
(31)  510.2 Submit data to IDNR/OWR and FEMA for proposed revisions of a regulatory map; 
(32)  510.3 Submit reports as required for the National Flood Insurance Program; and 
(33)  510.4 Notify FEMA of any proposed amendments to this appendix. 
(34)  511.0 Promulgate regulations. Promulgate rules and regulations as necessary to administer and enforce the provisions of this appendix, subject however to the review and approval of IDNR/OWR and FEMA for any appendix changes. 
(Code 1993, app. 9A, § 500.0; Ord. No. 2000-O-65, 10-24-2000) 
Sec. 8-945. - 600.0 Base flood elevation. 
    This appendix's protection standard is based on the Flood Insurance Study for the village. 
(1)  600.1 If a base flood elevation or 100-year frequency flood elevation is not available for a particular site, then the protection standard shall be according to the best existing data available in the Illinois State Water Survey's Floodplain Information Repository that has been approved by IDNR/OWR and FEMA. 
(2)  600.2 When a party disagrees with the best available data, he/she may finance the detailed engineering study needed to replace existing data with better data and submit it to IDNR/OWR and FEMA. 
(3)  601.0 The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for the SFHAs of the Skokie Ditch, the Skokie River, and the North Branch of the Chicago River, shall be as delineated on the 100-year flood profiles in the Flood Insurance Study of Cook County, Illinois, prepared by FEMA, effective August 19, 2008, and such amendments to such study and maps as may be prepared from time to time. 
(4)  602.0 The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for the SFHAs of those parts of unincorporated Cook County that are within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the village or that may be annexed into the village shall be as delineated on the 100-year flood profiles in the Flood Insurance Study of Cook County, Illinois, prepared by FEMA, effective August 19, 2008, and such amendments or revisions to such study and maps as may be prepared from time to time. 
(5)  603.0 The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for each SFHA delineated as an "AH Zone" or "AO Zone" shall be that elevation (or depth) delineated on the Flood Insurance Rate Map of the village. 
(6)  604.0 The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for each of the remaining SFHAs delineated as an "A Zone" on the Flood Insurance Rate Map of the village shall be according to the best existing data available in the Illinois State Water Survey Floodplain Information Repository. 
(7)  604.1 When no base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation exists, the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for a riverine SFHA shall be determined from a backwater model, such as HEC-2, HEC- RAS, WSP-2, or a dynamic model such as FEQ. 
(8)  604.2 The flood flows used in the hydraulic models shall be obtained from a hydrologic model, such as HEC-1, TR-20, HEC-HMS, or FEQ, or by techniques presented in various publications prepared by the United States Geological Survey for estimating peak flood discharges. 
(9)  604.3 Along any watercourses draining more than one square mile, the above analyses shall be submitted to IDNR/OWR for approval. Once approved it must be submitted to the Illinois State Water Survey Floodplain Information Repository for filing. 
(10)  604.4 For a non-riverine SFHA, the Base Flood Elevation shall be the historic Flood of Record plus three feet, unless calculated by a detailed engineering study and approved by IDNR/OWR for drainage areas greater than one square mile. 
(11)  604.5 For an unmapped extended SFHA (with a drainage area less than one square mile) which has been identified by the Village Engineer pursuant to section 8-944(4), the base flood elevation shall be determined by the applicant utilizing a method as approved in section 8-945(6) through (11), with concurrence of the Village Engineer. 
(Code 1993, app. 9A, § 600.0; Ord. No. 2000-O-65, 10-24-2000; Ord. No. 2008-O-45, 7-22-2008) 
Sec. 8-946. - 700.0 Occupation and use of flood fringe areas. 
    Development in and/or filling of the flood fringe will be permitted if protection is provided against the base flood or 100-year frequency flood by proper elevation, and compensatory storage, and other applicable provisions of this appendix. No use will be permitted which adversely affects the capacity of drainage facilities or systems. Developments located within the flood fringe shall meet the requirements of this section, along with the requirements of section 8-949. 
(1)  701.0 Development permit. 
(2)  701.1 No person, firm, corporation, or governmental body not exempted by state law shall commence any development in the SFHA without first obtaining a Development Permit from the Village Engineer. 
(3)  701.2 Application for a Development Permit shall be made on a form provided by the Village Engineer. 
a.  The application shall be accompanied by drawings of the site, drawn to scale, showing property line dimensions and legal description for the property and sealed by a licensed engineer, architect or land surveyor; existing grade elevations in M.S.L., 1929 adj. datum or N.G.V.D. and all changes in grade resulting from excavation or filling; the location and dimensions of all buildings and additions to buildings. 
b.  For all proposed buildings, the elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) and lowest adjacent grade shall be shown on the submitted plans and the development will be subject to the requirements of section 8-949. 
(4)  701.3 Upon receipt of a Development Permit application, the Village Engineer shall compare the elevation of the site to the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation. 
a.  Any development located on land that can be shown to be higher than the base flood elevation of the current Flood Insurance Rate Map and which has not been filled after the date of the site's first Flood Insurance Rate Map without a permit as required by this appendix is not in the SFHA and, therefore, not subject to the requirements of this appendix. 
b.  The Village Engineer shall maintain documentation of the existing ground elevation at the development site and certification that this ground elevation existed prior to the date of the site's first Flood Insurance Rate Map identification. 
(5)  701.4 A soil erosion and sediment control plan for disturbed areas shall be submitted. This plan shall include a description of the sequence of grading activities and the temporary sediment and erosion control measures to be implemented to mitigate their effects. This plan shall also include a description of final stabilization and revegetation measures, and the identification of a responsible party to ensure post-construction maintenance. 
(6)  701.5 The Village Engineer shall be responsible for obtaining from the applicant copies of all other federal, state, and local permits, approvals or permit-not-required letters that may be required for this type of activity. Village Engineer shall not issue a permit unless all other federal, state, and local permits have been obtained. 
(7)  702.0 Preventing increased damages. No development in the flood fringe shall create a threat to public health and safety. 
(8)  702.1 If fill is being used to elevate the site above the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation, the applicant shall submit sufficient data and obtain a letter of map revision (LOMR) from FEMA for the purpose of removing the site from the floodplain. 
(9)  702.2 Compensatory storage. 
a.  Whenever any portion of a floodplain is authorized for use, the volume of space which will be occupied by the authorized fill or structure below the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation shall be compensated for and balanced by a hydraulically equivalent volume of excavation taken from below the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation. 
b.  The excavation volume shall be at least equal to 1.5 times the volume of storage lost due to the fill or structure. 
c.  In the case of streams and watercourses, such excavation shall be made opposite or adjacent to the areas so filled or occupied. 
d.  All floodplain storage lost below the existing ten-year flood elevation shall be replaced below the proposed ten-year flood elevation. All floodplain storage lost above the existing ten-year flood elevation shall be replaced above the proposed ten-year flood elevation. 
e.  All such excavations shall be constructed to drain freely and openly to the watercourse. 
(Code 1993, app. 9A, § 700.0; Ord. No. 2000-O-65, 10-24-2000) 
Sec. 8-947. - 800.0 Occupation and use of designated floodways. 
    This section applies to proposed development, redevelopment, site modification or building modification within a designated floodway. The designated floodway for the Skokie Ditch, the Skokie River, and the North Branch of the Chicago River, shall be as delineated on the designated floodway maps designated by IDNR/OWR according to and referenced in section 8-942. Only those uses and structures will be permitted which meet the criteria in this section. All floodway modifications shall be the minimum necessary to accomplish the purpose of the project. The development shall also meet the requirements of section 8-949. 
(1)  801.0 Development permit. No person, firm, corporation or governmental body not exempted by state law shall commence any development in a floodway without first obtaining a Development Permit from the Village Engineer and IDNR/OWR. 
(2)  801.1 Application for a Development Permit shall be made on a form provided by the Village Engineer. The application shall include the following information: 
a.  Name and address of applicant. 
b.  Site location (including legal description) of the property, drawn to scale, on the designated floodway map, indicating whether it is proposed to be in an incorporated or unincorporated area. 
c.  Name of stream or body of water affected. 
d.  Description of proposed activity. 
e.  Statement of purpose of proposed activity. 
f.  Anticipated dates of initiation and completion of activity. 
g.  Name and mailing address of the owner of the subject property if different from the applicant. 
h.  Signature of the applicant or the applicant's agent. 
i.  If the applicant is a corporation, the president or other authorized officer shall sign the application form. 
j.  If the applicant is a partnership, each partner shall sign the application form. 
k.  If the applicant is a land trust, the trust officer shall sign the name of the trustee by him as trust officer. A disclosure affidavit shall be filed with the application, identifying each beneficiary of the trust by name and address and defining the respective interests therein. 
l.  Plans of the proposed activity shall be provided which include as a minimum: 
1.  A vicinity map showing the site of the activity, name of the waterway, boundary lines, names of roads in the vicinity of the site, graphic or numerical scale, and north arrow; 
2.  A plan view of the project and engineering study reach showing existing and proposed conditions including principal dimensions of the structure or work, elevations in mean sea level (1929 adjustment) datum or N.G.V.D. or North American Vertical Datum, adjacent property lines and ownership, drainage and flood control easements, location of any channels and any existing or future access roads, distance between proposed activity and navigation channel (when the proposed construction is near a commercially navigable body of water), designated floodway limit, floodplain limit, specifications and dimensions of any proposed channel modifications, location and orientation of cross-sections, north arrow, and a graphic or numerical scale; 
3.  Cross-section views of the project and engineering study reach showing existing and proposed conditions including principal dimensions of the work as shown in plan view, existing and proposed elevations, normal water elevation, ten-year frequency flood elevation, 100-year frequency flood elevation, and graphic or numerical scales (horizontal and vertical); 
4.  A soil erosion and sediment control plan for disturbed areas. This plan shall include a description of the sequence of grading activities and the temporary sediment and erosion control measures to be implemented to mitigate their effects. This plan shall also include a description of final stabilization and revegetation measures, and the identification of a responsible party to ensure post-construction maintenance; 
5.  A copy of the designated floodway map, marked to reflect any proposed change in the designated floodway location. 
m.  Any and all other federal, state, and local permits or approval letters that may be required for this type of development. 
n.  Engineering calculations and supporting data shall be submitted showing that the proposed work will meet the permit criteria of subsection (4) of this section. 
o.  If the designated floodway delineation, base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation will change due to the proposed project, the application will not be considered complete until IDNR/OWR has indicated conditional approval of the designated floodway map change. No structures may be built until a Letter of Map Revision has been approved by FEMA. 
p.  The application for a structure shall be accompanied by drawings of the site, drawn to scale showing property line dimensions and existing ground elevations and all changes in grade resulting from any proposed excavation or filling, and floodplain and floodway limits; sealed by a registered professional engineer, licensed architect or registered land surveyor; the location and dimensions of all buildings and additions to buildings; and the elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) of all proposed buildings subject to the requirements of section 8-949. 
q.  If the proposed project involves a channel modification, the applicant shall submit the following information: 
1.  A discussion of the purpose of and need for the proposed work; 
2.  A discussion of the feasibility of using alternative locations or methods (subsection (7)i.1 of this section) to accomplish the purpose of the proposed work; 
3.  An analysis of the extent and permanence of the impacts each feasible alternative identified in subsection (7)i.1 of this section would have on the physical and biological conditions of the body of water affected; and 
4.  An analysis of the impacts of the proposed project, considering cumulative effects on the physical and biological conditions of the body of water affected. 
(3)  801.2 The Village Engineer shall be responsible for obtaining from the applicant copies of all other federal, state, and local permits and approvals that may be required for this type of activity. 
a.  The Village Engineer shall not issue the Development Permit unless all required federal and state permits have been obtained. 
b.  A registered Professional Engineer, under the employ or contract of the village shall review and approve applications reviewed under this section. 
(4)  802.0 Preventing Increased Damages and a List of Appropriate Uses. 
(5)  802.1 The only development in a floodway which will be allowed are appropriate uses, which will not cause a rise in the base flood elevation, and which will not create a damaging or potentially damaging increase in flood heights or velocity or be a threat to public health and safety and welfare or impair the natural hydrologic and hydraulic functions of the floodway or channel, or permanently impair existing water quality or aquatic habitat. Construction impacts shall be minimized by appropriate mitigation methods as called for in this appendix. Only those appropriate uses listed in 17 Ill. Admin. Code 3708 will be allowed. The approved appropriate uses are as follows: 
a.  Public flood control structures, dikes, dams and other public works or private improvements relating to the control of drainage, flooding of existing structures, erosion, or water quality or habitat for fish and wildlife; 
b.  Structures or facilities relating to the use of, or requiring access to, the water or shoreline, such as in-stream aeration and similar treatment facilities, facilities and improvements related to recreational boating, and commercial shipping and other functionally water dependent uses; 
c.  Storm and sanitary sewer outfalls; 
d.  Underground and overhead utilities; 
e.  Public open space and recreational facilities such as playing fields and trail systems including any related fencing (at least 50 percent open when viewed from any one direction) built parallel to the direction of flood flows, and including open air pavilions; 
f.  Bridges, culverts, and associated roadways, sidewalks, and railways, necessary for crossing over the floodway or for providing access to other appropriate uses in the floodway and any modification thereto; 
g.  Floodproofing activities to protect previously existing lawful structures including the construction of water tight window wells, elevating structures, or construction of floodwalls around residential, commercial or industrial principal structures where the outside toe of the floodwall shall be no more than ten feet away from the exterior wall of the existing structure, and, which are not considered substantial improvements to the structure; 
h.  In the case of damaged or replacement buildings, reconstruction or repairs made to a building that are valued at less than 50 percent of the market value of the building before it was damaged or replaced, and which does not increase the outside dimensions of the building. 
(6)  802.2 Appropriate uses do not include the construction or placement of any new structures, fill, building additions, buildings on stilts, excavation or channel modifications done to accommodate otherwise non-appropriate uses in the floodway, fencing (including landscaping or planting designed to act as a fence) and storage of materials except as specifically defined above as an appropriate use. 
(7)  802.3 Within the designated floodway as identified on the floodway maps designated by IDNR/OWR, the construction of an Appropriate Use, will be considered permissible provided that the proposed project meets the following engineering and mitigation criteria and is so stated in writing with supporting plans, calculations and data by a registered professional engineer and provided that any structure meets the protection requirements of section 8-949: 
a.  Preservation of flood conveyance, so as not to increase flood stages upstream. For appropriate uses other than bridge or culvert crossings, on-stream structures or dams, all effective designated floodway conveyance lost due to the project will be replaced for all flood events up to and including the 100-year frequency flood. In calculating effective designated floodway conveyance, the following factors shall be taken into consideration: 
1.  Designated floodway conveyance, 
    "K" = (1.486/n)(AR2/3) where "n" is Manning's roughness factor, "A" is the effective flow area of the cross-section, and "R" is the ratio of the area to the wetted perimeter. (See Open Channel Hydraulics, Ven Te Chow, 1959, McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York) 
2.  The same Manning's "n" value shall be used for both existing and proposed conditions unless a recorded maintenance agreement with a federal, state, or local unit of government can assure the proposed conditions will be maintained or the land cover is changing from a vegetative to a non-vegetative land cover. 
3.  Transition sections shall be provided and used in calculations of effective designated floodway conveyance. The following expansion and contraction ratios shall be used unless an applicant's engineer can prove to IDNR/OWR through engineering calculations or model tests that more abrupt transitions may be used with the same efficiency: 
(i)  When water is flowing from a narrow section to a wider section, the water should be assumed to expand no faster than at a rate of one-foot horizontal for every four feet of the flooded stream's length. 
(ii)  When water is flowing from a wide section to a narrow section, the water should be assumed to contract no faster than at a rate of one-foot horizontal for every one-foot of the flooded stream's length. 
(iii)  When expanding or contracting flows in a vertical direction, a minimum of one-foot vertical transition for every ten feet of stream length shall be used. 
(iv)  Transition sections shall be provided between cross-sections with rapid expansions and contractions and when meeting the designated floodway delineation on adjacent properties. 
(v)  All cross-sections used in the calculations shall be located perpendicular to flood flows. 
b.  Preservation of floodway storage so as not to increase downstream flooding. 
1.  Compensatory storage shall be provided for any designated floodway storage lost due to the proposed work from the volume of fill or structures placed and the impact of any related flood control projects. 
2.  Compensatory storage for fill or structures shall be equal to at least 1.5 times the volume of floodplain storage lost. 
3.  Artificially created storage lost due to a reduction in head loss behind a bridge shall not be required to be replaced. 
4.  The compensatory designated floodway storage shall be placed between the proposed normal water elevation and the proposed 100-year flood elevation. All designated floodway storage lost below the existing ten year flood elevation shall be replaced below the proposed ten year flood elevation. All designated floodway storage lost above the existing ten-year flood elevation shall be replaced above the proposed ten-year flood elevation. All such excavations shall be constructed to drain freely and openly to the watercourse. 
5.  If the compensatory storage will not be placed at the location of the proposed construction, the applicant's engineer shall demonstrate to IDNR/OWR through a determination of flood discharges and water surface elevations that the compensatory storage is hydraulically equivalent. 
6.  There shall be no reduction in floodway surface area as a result of a floodway modification, unless such modification is necessary to reduce flooding at existing structure. 
c.  Preservation of floodway velocities so as not to increase stream erosion or flood heights. 
1.  For all Appropriate Uses, except bridges or culverts or on stream structures, the proposed work will not result in an increase in the average channel or designated floodway velocities or stage for all flood events up to and including the 100-year frequency event. 
2.  In the case of bridges or culverts or on stream structures built for the purpose of backing up water in the stream during normal or flood flows, velocities may be increased at the structure site if scour, erosion and sedimentation will be avoided by the use of rip-rap or other design measures. 
d.  Construction of new bridges or culvert crossings and roadway approaches. 
1.  The proposed structure shall not result in an increase of upstream flood stages greater than 0.1 foot when compared to the existing conditions for all flood events up to and including the 100-year frequency event; or the upstream flood stage increases will be contained within the channel banks (or within existing vertical extensions of the channel banks) such as within the design protection grade of existing levees or flood walls or within recorded flood easements. 
2.  If the proposed construction will increase upstream flood stages greater than 0.1 feet, the developer must contact IDNR/OWR to obtain a permit for a dam or waiver. 
(i)  The engineering analysis of upstream flood stages must be calculated using the flood study flows, and corresponding flood elevations for tailwater conditions for the flood study specified in section 8-945 of this appendix. Culverts must be analyzed using the U.S. DOT, FHWA Hydraulic Chart for the Selection of Highway Culverts. Bridges must be analyzed using the U.S. DOT/Federal Highway Administration Hydraulics of Bridge Waterways calculation procedures. 
(ii)  Lost floodway storage must be compensated for per section 8-947(7)b. 
(iii)  Velocity increases must be mitigated per section 8-947(7)c. 
(iv)  If the crossing is proposed over a public water that is used for recreational or commercial navigation, an IDNR/OWR permit must be received. 
(v)  The hydraulic analysis for the backwater caused by the bridge showing the existing condition and proposed regulatory profile must be submitted to IDNR/OWR for concurrence that a CLOMR is not required by section 8-947. 
(vi)  All excavations for the construction of the crossing shall be designed per section 8-947(7)h. 
e.  Reconstruction or modification of existing bridges, culverts, and approach roads. 
1.  The bridge or culvert and roadway approach reconstruction or modification shall be constructed with no more than 0.1-foot increase in backwater over the existing flood profile for all flood frequencies up to and including the 100-year event, if the existing structure is not a source of flood damage. 
2.  If the existing bridge or culvert and roadway approach is a source of flood damage to buildings or structures in the upstream floodplain, the applicant's engineer shall evaluate the feasibility of redesigning the structure to reduce the existing backwater, taking into consideration the effects on flood stages on upstream and downstream properties. 
3.  The determination as to whether or not the existing crossing is a source of flood damage and should be redesigned must be prepared in accordance with 17 Ill. Admin. Code 3708 (Floodway Construction in Northeastern Illinois) and submitted to IDNR/OWR for review and concurrence before a permit is issued. 
f.  On-stream structures built for the purpose of backing up water. 
1.  Any increase in upstream flood stages greater than 0.0-foot when compared to the existing conditions, for all flood events up to and including the 100-year frequency event shall be contained within the channel banks (or within existing vertical extensions of the channel banks) such as within the design protection grade of existing levees or flood walls or within recorded flood easements. 
2.  A permit or letter indicating a permit is not required must be obtained from IDNR/OWR for any structure built for the purpose of backing up water in the stream during normal or flood flow. 
3.  All dams and impoundment structures as defined in section 8-942 shall meet the permitting requirements of 17 Ill. Admin. Code 3702 (Construction and Maintenance of Dams). If the proposed activity involves a modification of the channel or floodway to accommodate an impoundment, it shall be demonstrated that: 
(i)  The impoundment is determined to be in the public interest by providing flood control, public recreation, or regional stormwater detention; 
(ii)  The impoundment will not prevent the migration of indigenous fish species, which require access to upstream areas as part of their life cycle, such as for spawning; 
(iii)  The impoundment will not cause or contribute to degraded water quality or habitat conditions. Impoundment design should include gradual bank slopes, appropriate bank stabilization measures, and a pre-sedimentation basin; 
(iv)  A non-point source control plan has been implemented in the upstream watershed to control the effects of sediment runoff as well as minimize the input of nutrients, oil and grease, metals, and other pollutants. If there is more than one municipality in the upstream watershed, the municipality in which the impoundment is constructed should coordinate with upstream municipalities to ensure comprehensive watershed control; 
(v)  The project otherwise complies with the requirements of section 8-947. 
g.  Floodproofing of existing habitable, residential and commercial structures. 
1.  If construction is required beyond the outside dimensions of the existing building, the outside perimeter of the floodproofing construction shall be placed no further than ten feet from the outside of the building. 
2.  Compensation of lost storage and conveyance will not be required for floodproofing activities. 
h.  Excavation in the floodway. 
1.  When excavation is proposed in the design of bridges and culvert openings, including the modifications to and replacement of existing bridge and culvert structures, or to compensate for lost conveyance or other appropriate uses, transition sections shall be provided for the excavation. 
2.  The following expansion and contraction ratios shall be used unless an applicant's engineer can prove to IDNR/OWR through engineering calculations or model tests that more abrupt transitions may be used with the same efficiency: 
(i)  When water is flowing from a narrow section to a wider section, the water should be assumed to expand no faster than at a rate of one-foot horizontal for every four feet of the flooded stream's length; 
(ii)  When water is flowing from a wide section to a narrow section, the water should be assumed to contract no faster than at a rate of one-foot horizontal for every one-foot of the flooded stream's length; 
(iii)  When expanding or contracting flows in a vertical direction, a minimum of one-foot vertical transition for every ten feet of stream length shall be used; and 
(iv)  Erosion/scour protection shall be provided inland upstream and downstream of the transition sections. 
i.  If the proposed activity involves a channel modification, it shall be demonstrated that: 
1.  There are no practicable alternatives to the activity which would accomplish its purpose with less impact to the natural conditions of the body of water affected. Possible alternatives include levees, bank stabilization, floodproofing of existing structures, removal of structures from the floodplain, clearing the channel, high flow channel, or the establishment of a stream side buffer strip or green belt. Channel modification is acceptable if the purpose is to restore natural conditions and improve water quality and fish and wildlife habitat; 
2.  Water quality, habitat, and other natural functions would be significantly improved by the modification and no significant habitat area may be destroyed, or the impacts are offset by the replacement of an equivalent degree of natural resource values; 
3.  The activity has been planned and designed and will be constructed in a way which will minimize its adverse impacts on the natural conditions of the body of water affected, consistent with the following criteria: 
(i)  The physical characteristics of the modified channel shall match as closely as possible those of the existing channel in length, cross-section, slope and sinuosity. If the existing channel has been previously modified, restoration of more natural physical conditions should be incorporated into channel modification design, where practical. 
(ii)  Hydraulically effective transitions shall be provided at both the upstream and downstream ends of the project, designed such that they will prevent erosion. 
(iii)  One-sided construction of a channel shall be used when feasible. Removal of streamside (riparian) vegetation should be limited to, one side of the channel, where possible, to preserve the shading and stabilization effects of the vegetation. 
(iv)  Clearing of stabilizing vegetation shall be limited to, that which is essential for construction of the channel. 
(v)  Channel banks shall be constructed with a side slope no steeper than 3:1 horizontal to vertical, wherever practicable. Native vegetation and gradual side slopes are the preferred methods for bank stabilization. Where high velocities or sharp bends necessitate the use of alternative stabilization measures, soil bioengineering techniques, natural rock or rip-rap are preferred approaches. Artificial materials such as concrete, gabions, or construction rubble should be avoided unless there are no practicable alternatives. 
(vi)  All disturbed areas associated with the modification shall be seeded or otherwise stabilized as soon as possible upon completion of construction. Erosion blanket or an equivalent material shall be required to stabilize disturbed channel banks prior to establishment of the vegetative cover. 
(vii)  If the existing channel contains considerable bottom diversity such as deep pools, riffles, and other similar features, such features shall be provided in the new channel. Spawning and nesting areas and flow characteristics compatible with fish habitat shall also be established, where appropriate. 
(viii)  A sediment basin shall be installed at the downstream end of the modification to reduce sedimentation and degradation of downstream water quality. 
(ix)  New or relocated channels should be built in the dry and all items of construction, including vegetation, should be completed prior to diversion of water into the new channel. 
(x)  There shall be no increases in stage or velocity as the channel enters or leaves the project site for any frequency flood unless necessitated by a public flood control project or unless such an increase is justified as part of a habitat improvement or erosion control project. 
(xi)  Unless the modification is for a public flood control project, there shall be no reduction in the volume of floodwater storage outside the floodway as a result of the modification. 
(xii)  The project otherwise complies with the requirements of section 8-947. 
j.  Seeding and Stabilization Plan. For all activities located in a floodway, a Seeding and Stabilization Plan shall be submitted by the applicant. 
k.  Soil erosion and sedimentation measures. For all activities in the floodway, including grading, filling, and excavation, in which there is potential for erosion of exposed soil, soil erosion and sedimentation control measures shall be employed consistent with the following criteria: 
(i)  The construction area shall be minimized to preserve the maximum vegetation possible. Construction shall be scheduled to minimize the time soil is exposed and unprotected. In no case shall the existing natural vegetation be destroyed, removed, or disturbed more than 15 days prior to the initiation of improvements. 
(ii)  Temporary and/or permanent soil stabilization shall be applied to denuded areas as soon as possible. As a minimum, soil stabilization shall be provided within 15 days after final grade is reached on any portion of the site, and within 15 days to denuded areas which may not be at final grade but will remain undisturbed for longer than 60 days. 
(iii)  Sedimentation control measures shall be installed before any significant grading or filling is initiated on the site to prevent the movement of eroded sediments off site or into the channel. Potential sediment control devices include filter fences, straw bale fences, check dams, diversion ditches, and sediment traps and basins. 
(iv)  A vegetated buffer strip of at least 25 feet in width shall be preserved and/or re-established, where possible, along existing channels (See section 8-947(7)p). Construction vehicle use of channels shall be minimized. Temporary stream crossings shall be constructed, where necessary, to minimize erosion. Necessary construction in or along channels shall be restabilized immediately. 
(v)  Soil erosion and sedimentation control measures shall be designed and implemented consistent with "Procedures and Standards for Urban Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control in Illinois" (1988) also known as the "Green Book" and "The Illinois Urban Manual" (NRCS, 1995). 
l.  Public Flood Control Projects. For Public Flood Control Projects, the permitting requirements of this section will be considered met if the applicant can demonstrate to IDNR/OWR through hydraulic and hydrologic calculations that the proposed project will not singularly or cumulatively result in increased flood heights outside the project right-of-way or easements for all flood events up to and including the 100-year frequency event. 
m.  General criteria for analysis of flood elevations. 
1.  The flood profiles, flows and floodway data in the designated floodway study, referenced in section 8-945, must be used for analysis of the base conditions. If the study data appears to be in error or conditions have changed, IDNR/OWR shall be contacted for approval and concurrence on the appropriate base conditions data to use. 
2.  If the 100-year designated floodway elevation at the site of the proposed construction is affected by backwater from a downstream receiving stream with a larger drainage area, the proposed construction shall be shown to meet: 
(i)  The requirements of this section for the 100-year frequency flood elevations of the designated floodway conditions; and 
(ii)  Conditions with the receiving stream at normal water elevations. 
3.  If the applicant learns from IDNR/OWR, local governments, or a private owner that a downstream restrictive bridge or culvert is scheduled to be removed, reconstructed, modified, or a regional flood control project is scheduled to be built, removed, constructed or modified within the next five years, the proposed construction shall be analyzed and shown to meet the requirements of this section for both the existing conditions and the expected flood profile conditions when the bridge, culvert or flood control project is built. 
n.  Conditional Letter of Map Revision. 
1.  If the appropriate use would result in a change in the designated floodway location or the 100-year frequency flood elevation, the applicant shall submit to IDNR/OWR and FEMA all information, calculations and documents necessary to be issued a conditional designated floodway map revision and receive from IDNR/OWR a conditional concurrence of the designated floodway change before a permit is issued. 
2.  The final designated floodway map will not be changed by FEMA until as-built plans or record drawings of initial filling, grading, dredging, or excavating activities are submitted and accepted by FEMA and IDNR/OWR. 
3.  In the case of non-government projects, the municipality in incorporated areas and the county in unincorporated areas shall concur with the proposed conditional designated floodway map revision before IDNR/OWR approval can be given. 
4.  No filling, grading, dredging or excavating shall take place until a conditional approval is issued. 
5.  After initial filling, grading, dredging or excavating, no activities shall take place until a final Letter of Map Revision (LOMR) is issued by FEMA with concurrence from IDNR/OWR. 
o.  Professional engineer's supervision. All engineering analyses shall be performed by or under the supervision of a registered professional engineer. 
p.  For all activities in the floodway involving construction within 25 feet of the channel, the following criteria shall be met: 
1.  A natural vegetation buffer strip shall be preserved within at least 25 feet of the ordinary high water mark of the channel. 
2.  Where it is impossible to protect this buffer strip during the construction of an appropriate use, a vegetated buffer strip shall be established upon completion of construction. 
q.  After receipt of conditional approval of the designated floodway change and issuance of a permit and a Conditional Letter of Map Revision, construction as necessary to change the floodway designation may proceed but no buildings or structures or other construction that is not an appropriate use may be placed in that area until the designated floodway map is changed and a final Letter of Map Revision is received. The designated floodway map will be revised upon acceptance and concurrence by IDNR/OWR and FEMA of the "as-built" plans. 
(8)  802.4 Development Activities in Delegated Communities Requiring State Review. For those projects listed below located in a designated floodway, the following criteria shall be submitted to IDNR/OWR for their review and concurrence prior to the issuance of a permit by a community or county delegated state permitting authority in the floodway. 
1.  An engineer's analysis of the flood profile due to a proposed bridge pursuant to section 8-947(7)d. 
2.  An engineer's determination that an existing bridge or culvert crossing is not a source of flood damage and the analysis indicating the proposed flood profile, pursuant to section 8-947(7)e. 
3.  Alternative transition sections and hydraulically equivalent storage pursuant to section 8-947(7)a, b, and h. 
4.  The construction of any IDNR/OWR projects, dams (as defined in section 8-942) and all other state, federal, or local units of government projects, including projects of the municipality or county. 
5.  An engineer's determination that a proposed bridge affected by backwater from a downstream receiving stream may be built with a smaller opening. 
6.  Projects which revise or establish the floodway and/or flood profiles. 
7.  Projects in public bodies of water. 
(9)  802.5 Other Permits. 
a.  In addition to the other requirements of this appendix, a Development Permit for a site located in a floodway shall not be issued unless the applicant first obtains a permit or written documentation that a permit is not required from IDNR/OWR, issued pursuant to ILCS ch. 615, act 5, §§ 5 et seq. 
b.  No permit from IDNR/OWR shall be required if IDNR/OWR has delegated this responsibility to the village. 
(10)  802.6 Permits for Dams. 
a.  Any work involving the construction, modification or removal of a dam as defined in section 8-942 per 17 Ill. Admin. Code 3702 (Rules for Construction of Dams) shall obtain an IDNR/OWR permit prior to the start of construction of a dam. 
b.  If the Village Engineer finds a dam that does not have an IDNR/OWR permit, the Village Engineer shall immediately notify the IDNR/OWR Schaumburg office. 
c.  If the Village Engineer finds a dam which is believed to be in unsafe condition, the Village Engineer shall immediately notify the owner of the dam, the IDNR/OWR Schaumburg office, and the Illinois Emergency Management Agency (IEMA). 
(11)  802.7 Activities That Do Not Require a Registered Professional Engineer's Review. The following activities may be permitted without a registered professional engineer's review. Such activities shall still meet the other requirements of this appendix, including the mitigation requirements. 
1.  Underground and overhead utilities that: 
(i)  Do not result in any increase in existing ground elevations; or 
(ii)  Do not require the placement of above ground structures in the floodway; or 
(iii)  In the case of underground stream crossings, the top of the pipe or encasement is buried a minimum of three feet below the existing streambed; and 
(iv)  Overhead utility lines shall be constructed above the estimated 100-year frequency flood elevation or attached above the low chord of an existing bridge (with the permission of the bridge owner). No supporting towers shall be placed in the watercourse and shall be designed so as to not catch debris; 
(v)  Disturbance of streamside vegetation shall be kept to minimum during construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation. All disturbed floodway areas, including the stream banks shall be restored to their original contours and seeded or otherwise stabilized upon completion of construction; 
(vi)  A utility crossing carrying material which may cause water pollution as defined by the Environmental Protection Act ILCS ch. 415, act 5 (1992 State Bar Edition) shall be provided with shut-off valves on each side of the body of water to be crossed; 
(vii)  All Illinois Commerce Commission, National Electrical Safety Codes, and federal requirements for clearance must be met. 
2.  Storm and sanitary sewer relief outfalls that: 
(i)  Do not extend riverward or lakeward of the existing adjacent natural bank slope; and 
(ii)  Do not result in an increase in ground elevation; 
(iii)  Are designed so as not to cause stream erosion at the outfall location. 
3.  Construction of sidewalks, athletic fields (excluding fences), properly anchored playground equipment and patios at grade. 
4.  Construction of shoreline and streambank protection that: 
(i)  Does not exceed 1,000 feet in length. 
(ii)  Materials are not placed higher than the existing top of bank. 
(iii)  Materials are placed so as not to reduce the cross-sectional area of the stream channel or bank of the lake. 
(iv)  Stabilization utilizing native vegetation and gradual side slopes are the preferred mitigation methods for existing erosion problems. Where high channel velocities, sharp bends or wave action necessitate the use of alternative stabilization measures, soil bioengineering techniques, natural rock or rip-rap are preferred materials. Artificial materials such as concrete, construction rubble, and gabions should be avoided unless there are no practicable alternatives. 
5.  Temporary stream crossings in which: 
(i)  The approach roads will be one-half foot or less above natural grade. 
(ii)  The crossing will allow stream flow to pass without backing up the water above the stream bank vegetation line or above any drainage tile or outfall invert. 
(iii)  The top of the roadway fill in the channel will be at least two feet below the top of the lowest bank. Any fill in the channel shall be non-erosive material, such as rip-rap or gravel. 
(iv)  All disturbed stream banks will be seeded or otherwise stabilized as soon as possible upon installation and again upon removal of construction. 
(v)  The access road and temporary crossings will be removed within one year after authorization. 
(Code 1993, app. 9A, § 800.0; Ord. No. 2000-O-65, 10-24-2000) 
Sec. 8-948. - 900.0 Occupation and use of SFHA areas where floodways are not identified. 
    In SFHA or floodplains, (including AE, AH, AO and Unnumbered A Zones ) where no floodways have been identified and no base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevations have been established by FEMA, and draining more than a square mile, no development shall be permitted unless the cumulative effect of the proposals, when combined with all other existing and anticipated uses and structures, shall not significantly impede or increase the flow and passage of the floodwaters nor significantly increase the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation. 
(1)  901.0 Development Permit. 
(2)  901.1 No person, firm, corporation, or governmental body, not exempted by state law, shall commence any development in a SFHA or floodplain without first obtaining a Development Permit from the Village Engineer. 
(3)  901.2 Application for a Development Permit shall be made on a form provided by the Village Engineer. 
a.  The application shall be accompanied by drawings of the site, drawn to scale showing property line dimensions; and existing grade elevations and all changes in grade resulting from excavation or filling, sealed by a licensed engineer, architect or surveyor; the location and dimensions of all buildings and additions to buildings; and the elevations of the lowest floor (including basement) of all proposed buildings subject to the requirements of section 8-949. 
b.  The application for a Development Permit shall also include the following information: 
1.  A detailed description of the proposed activity, its purpose, and intended use; 
2.  Site location (including legal description) of the property, drawn to scale, on the designated floodway maps, indicating whether it is proposed to be in an incorporated or unincorporated area; 
3.  Anticipated dates of initiation and completion of activity; 
4.  Plans of the proposed activity shall be provided which include as a minimum: 
(i)  A vicinity map showing the site of the activity, name of the waterway, boundary lines, names of roads in the vicinity of the site, graphic or numerical scale, and north arrow; 
(ii)  A plan view of the project and engineering study reach showing existing and proposed conditions including principal dimensions of the structure or work, elevations in mean sea level (1929 adjustment) datum or NGVD, adjacent property lines and ownership, drainage and flood control easements, distance between proposed activity and navigation channel (when the proposed construction is in or near a commercially navigable body of water), floodplain limit, location and orientation of cross-sections, north arrow, and a graphical or numerical scale; 
(iii)  Cross-section views of the project perpendicular to the flow of floodwater and engineering study reach showing existing and proposed conditions including principal dimensions of the work as shown in plan view, existing and proposed elevations, normal water elevation, ten-year frequency flood elevation, 100-year frequency flood elevation, and graphical or numerical scales (horizontal and vertical); and 
(iv)  A soil erosion and sedimentation control plan for disturbed areas. This plan shall include a description of the sequence of grading activities and the temporary sediment and erosion control measures to be implemented to mitigate their effects. This plan shall also include a description of final stabilization and revegetation measures, and the identification of a responsible party to ensure post-construction maintenance. 
c.  Engineering calculations and supporting data shall be submitted showing that the proposed work will meet the criteria of section 8-948(6). 
d.  Any and all other federal, state, and local permits or approvals that may be required for this type of development. 
(4)  901.3 Based on the best available existing data according to the Illinois State Water Survey's Floodplain Information Repository, the Village Engineer shall compare the elevation of the site to the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation. 
a.  Should no elevation information exist for the site, the developer's engineer shall calculate the elevation according to section 8-945(6). 
b.  Any development located on land that can be shown to have been higher than the base flood elevation of the current Flood Insurance Rate Map Identification is not in the SFHA and, therefore, not subject to the requirements of this appendix. 
c.  Village Engineer shall maintain documentation of the existing ground elevation at the development site and certification that this ground elevation existed prior to the date of the site's first Flood Insurance Rate Map identification. 
(5)  901.4 The Village Engineer shall be responsible for obtaining from the applicant copies of all other federal, state, and local permits, approvals or permit-not-required letters that may be required for this type of activity. The Village Engineer shall not issue the Development Permit unless all required federal, state, and local permits have been obtained. 
(6)  902.0 Preventing Increased Damages. 
(7)  902.1 No development in the SFHA, where a floodway has not been determined shall create a damaging or potentially damaging increase in flood heights or velocity or threat to public health, safety and welfare or impair the natural hydrologic and hydraulic functions of the floodway or channel, or impair existing water quality or aquatic habitat. Construction impacts shall be minimized by appropriate mitigation methods as called for in this appendix. 
(8)  902.2 Within all riverine SFHA's where the floodway has not been determined, the following standards shall apply: 
a.  The developer shall have a registered Professional Engineer state in writing and show through supporting plans, calculations, and data that the project meets the engineering requirements of section 8-947(7)a through l for the entire floodplain as calculated under the provisions of section 8-945(6). 
1.  As an alternative, the developer should have an engineering study performed to determine a floodway and submit that engineering study to IDNR/OWR for acceptance as a designated floodway. 
2.  Upon acceptance of the floodway by IDNR/OWR, the developer shall then demonstrate that the project meets the requirements of section 8-948 for the designated floodway. The floodway shall be defined according to the definition in section 8-942. 
b.  A Development Permit shall not be issued unless the applicant first obtains a permit from IDNR/OWR or written documentation that a permit is not required from IDNR/OWR. 
c.  No permit from IDNR/OWR shall be required if IDNR/OWR has delegated permit responsibility to the (city, village) per 17 Ill. Admin. Code 3708 for designated floodways. 
d.  Permits for dams. 
1.  Any work involving the construction, modification or removal of a dam as defined in section 300.12 per 17 Ill. Admin. Code 3702 (Rules for Construction of Dams) shall obtain an IDNR/OWR permit prior to the start of construction of a dam. 
2.  If the Village Engineer finds a dam that does not have an IDNR/OWR permit, the Village Engineer shall immediately notify the IDNR/OWR Schaumburg office. 
3.  If the Village Engineer finds a dam which is believed to be in unsafe condition, the Village Engineer shall immediately notify the owner of the dam, the IDNR/OWR Schaumburg office, and the Illinois Emergency Management Agency (IEMA). 
(9)  902.3 The following activities may be permitted without a registered Professional Engineer's review or calculation of a base flood elevation and designated floodway. Such activities shall still meet the other requirements of this appendix: 
a.  Underground and overhead utilities that: 
1.  Do not result in any increase in existing ground elevations; or 
2.  Do not require the placement of above ground structures in the floodway; or 
3.  In the case of underground stream crossings, the top of the pipe or encasement is buried a minimum of three feet below the existing streambed; and 
4.  Overhead utility lines shall be constructed above the estimated 100-year frequency flood elevation or attached above the low chord of an existing bridge (with the permission of the bridge owner). No supporting towers shall be placed in the watercourse and shall be designed so as to not catch debris; 
5.  Disturbance of streamside vegetation shall be kept to minimum during construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation; 
6.  A utility crossing carrying material which may cause water pollution as defined by the Environmental Protection Act ILCS ch. 415, act 5 (1992 State Bar Edition) shall be provided with shut-off valves on each side of the body of water to be crossed; 
7.  All Illinois Commerce Commission, National Electrical Safety Codes, and federal requirements for clearance must be met. 
b.  Storm and sanitary sewer relief outfalls that: 
1.  Do not extend riverward or lakeward of the existing adjacent natural bank slope; and 
2.  Do not result in an increase in ground elevation; and 
3.  Are designed so as not to cause stream erosion at the outfall location. 
c.  Construction of shoreline and streambank protection that: 
1.  Does not exceed 1,000 feet in length. 
2.  Materials are not placed higher than the existing top of bank. 
3.  Materials are placed so as not to reduce the cross-sectional area of the stream channel by more than ten percent. 
4.  Stabilization utilizing native vegetation and gradual side slopes are the preferred mitigation methods for existing erosion problems. Where high channel velocities, sharp bends or wave action necessitate the use of alternative stabilization measures, soil bioengineering techniques, natural rock or rip-rap are preferred materials. Artificial materials such as concrete, construction rubble, and gabions should be avoided unless there are no practicable alternatives. 
d.  Temporary stream crossings in which: 
1.  The approach roads will be one-half foot or less above natural grade. 
2.  The crossing will allow stream flow to pass without backing up the water above the stream bank vegetation line or above any drainage tile or outfall invert. 
3.  The top of the roadway fill in the channel will be at least two feet below the top of the lowest bank. Any fill in the channel shall be non-erosive material, such as rip-rap or gravel. 
4.  All disturbed stream banks will be seeded or otherwise stabilized as soon as possible upon installation and again upon removal of construction. 
5.  The access road and temporary crossings will be removed within one year after authorization. 
e.  The construction of light poles, sign posts and similar structures; 
f.  The construction of sidewalks, driveways, athletic fields (excluding fences), patios and similar surfaces which are built at grade; 
g.  The construction of properly anchored, unwalled, open structures such as playground equipment, pavilions, and carports built at or below existing grade that would not obstruct the flow of floodwaters; 
h.  The placement of properly anchored buildings not exceeding 70 square feet in size, nor ten feet in any one dimension (e.g., animal shelters and tool sheds); 
i.  The construction of additions to existing buildings which do not increase the first floor area by more than 20 percent, which are located on the upstream or downstream side of the existing building, and which do extend beyond the sides of the existing building that are parallel to the flow of floodwaters; 
j.  Minor maintenance dredging of a stream channel where: 
1.  The affected length of stream is less than 1,000 feet. 
2.  The work is confined to reestablishing flows in natural stream channels, or 
3.  The cross-sectional area of the dredged channel conforms to that of the natural channel upstream and downstream of the site. 
(10)  902.4 The flood carrying capacity within any altered or relocated watercourse shall be maintained. 
(11)  902.5 Compensatory storage. 
a.  Whenever any portion of a floodplain is authorized for use, the volume of space which will be occupied by the authorized fill or structure below the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation shall be compensated for and balanced by a hydraulically equivalent volume of excavation taken from below the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation. 
b.  The excavation volume shall be at least equal to 1.5 times the volume of storage lost due to the fill or structure. 
c.  In the case of streams and watercourses, such excavation shall be made opposite or adjacent to the areas so filled or occupied. 
d.  All floodplain storage lost below the existing ten-year flood elevation shall be replaced below the proposed ten-year flood elevation. All floodplain storage lost above the existing ten-year flood elevation shall be replaced above the proposed ten-year flood elevation. All such excavations shall be constructed to drain freely and openly to the watercourse. 
(Code 1993, app. 9A, § 900.0; Ord. No. 2000-O-65, 10-24-2000) 
Sec. 8-949. - 1000.0 Permitting requirements applicable to all floodplain areas. 
    In addition to the requirements found in sections 8-946, 8-947 and 8-948 for development in flood fringes, designated floodways, and SFHA or floodplains where no floodways have been identified (Zones A, AO, AH, AE, A1-A30, A99, VO, V1-30, VE, V, M, E, D, or X), the following requirements shall be met. 
(1)  1001.0 Public health standards. 
(2)  1001.1 No developments in the SFHA shall include locating or storing chemicals, explosives, buoyant materials, animal wastes, fertilizers, flammable liquids, pollutants, or other hazardous or toxic materials below the flood protection elevation (FPE). 
(3)  1001.2 New and replacement water supply systems, wells, sanitary sewer lines and on-site waste disposal systems may be permitted providing all manholes or other above ground openings located below the FPE are watertight. 
(4)  1002.0 Carrying capacity and notification. 
(5)  1002.1 For all projects involving channel modification, fill, or stream maintenance (including levees), the flood carrying capacity of the watercourse shall be maintained. 
(6)  1002.2 In addition, the village shall notify adjacent communities in writing 30 days prior to the issuance of a permit for the alteration or relocation of the watercourse. 
(7)  1003.0 Protecting buildings. 
(8)  1003.1 All buildings located within a 100-year floodplain also known as a SFHA, and all buildings located outside the 100-year floodplain but within the 500-year floodplain, shall be protected from flood damage below the flood protection elevation. This building protection criteria applies to the following situations: 
a.  Construction or placement of a new building. 
b.  Substantial improvement to an existing building as defined in section 8-942, including an increase to the first floor area by more than 20 percent. This alteration shall be figured cumulatively beginning with any alteration which has taken place subsequent to April 1, 1990. 
c.  Substantial damage to an existing building as defined in section 8-942. 
d.  Repetitive loss to an existing building as defined in section 8-942. 
e.  Installing a manufactured home on a new site or a new manufactured home on an existing site. This building protection requirements does not apply to returning a mobile home to the same site it lawfully occupied before it was removed to avoid flood damage. 
f.  Installing a travel trailer on a site for more than 180 days. 
This building protection requirement may be met by one of the following methods. 
(9)  1003.2 A residential or non-residential building, when allowed, may be constructed on permanent land fill in accordance with the following: 
a.  The lowest floor (including basement) shall be at or above the flood protection elevation. 
b.  Fill requirements. 
1.  The fill shall be placed in layers no greater than one foot deep before compaction and should extend at least ten feet beyond the foundation of the building before sloping below the flood protection elevation. 
2.  The top of the fill shall be above the flood protection elevation. However, the ten-foot minimum may be waived if a structural engineer certifies an alternative method to protect the building from damages due to hydrostatic pressures. 
3.  The fill shall be protected against erosion and scour. 
4.  The fill shall not adversely affect the flow or surface drainage from or onto neighboring properties. 
(10)  1003.3 A residential or non-residential building may be elevated in accordance with the following: 
a.  The building or improvements shall be elevated on crawl space, stilts, piles, walls, or other foundation that is permanently open to floodwaters and not subject to damage by hydrostatic pressures of the base flood or 100-year frequency flood. The permanent openings shall be no more than one foot above existing grade, and consists of a minimum of two openings. The openings must have a total net area of not less than one square inch for every one square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding below the Base Flood Elevation. 
b.  The foundation and supporting members shall be anchored and aligned in relation to flood flows and adjoining structures so as to minimize exposure to known hydrodynamic forces such as current, waves, ice and floating debris. 
c.  All areas below the flood protection elevation shall be constructed of materials resistant to flood damage. 
1.  The lowest floor (including basement) and all electrical, heating, ventilating, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and utility meters shall be located at or above the flood protection elevation. 
2.  Water and sewer pipes, electrical and telephone lines, submersible pumps, and other waterproofed service facilities may be located below the flood protection elevation. 
d.  The areas below the flood protection elevation may only be used for the parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement. 
e.  Manufactured homes, and travel trailers to be installed on a site for more than 180 days, shall be elevated to or above the flood protection elevation; and shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement by being tied down in accordance with the Rules and Regulations for the Illinois Mobile Home Tie-Down Act issued pursuant to 77 Ill. Admin. Code 870. In addition, all manufactured homes shall meet the following elevation requirements: 
1.  In the case of manufactured homes placed or substantially improved (1) outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision, (2) in a new manufactured home park or subdivision, (3) in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, or (4) in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred substantial damage from a flood, the top of the lowest floor shall be elevated to or above the flood protection elevation. 
2.  In the case of manufactured homes placed or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, the manufactured home shall be elevated so that either the top of the lowest floor is above the base flood elevation or the chassis is at least 36 inches in height above grade and supported by reinforced piers or other foundations of equivalent strength, whichever is less. 
f.  Recreational vehicles or travel trailers shall be required to meet the elevation and anchoring requirements of subsection (10)e of this section unless: 
1.  They are on site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; and 
2.  They are fully licensed and ready for highway use. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utility and service devices, and has no permanently attached additions. 
(11)  1003.4 Only a non-residential building may be structurally dry floodproofed (in lieu of elevation) provided that: 
a.  A registered professional engineer shall certify that the building has been structurally dry floodproofed below the flood protection elevation, the structure and attendant utility facilities are watertight and capable of resisting the effects of the base flood or 100-year frequency flood. 
b.  The building design shall take into account flood velocities, duration, rate of rise, hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces, the effects of buoyancy, and impacts from debris or ice. 
c.  Floodproofing measures shall be operable without human intervention and without an outside source of electricity (levees, berms, floodwalls and similar works are not considered floodproofing for the purpose of this subsection). 
(12)  1003.5 Tool sheds and detached garages on an existing single-family platted lot, may be constructed with the lowest floor below the flood protection elevation in accordance with the following: 
a.  The building is not used for human habitation. 
b.  All areas below the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation shall be constructed with waterproof material. Structures located in a designated floodway shall be constructed and placed on a building site so as not to block the flow of floodwaters and shall also meet the appropriate use criteria of section 8-924. In addition, all other requirements of sections 8-946, 8-947, and 8-948 must be met. 
c.  The structure shall be anchored to prevent flotation. 
d.  Service facilities such as electrical and heating equipment shall be elevated or floodproofed to the flood protection elevation. 
e.  The building shall be valued at less than $7,500.00 and be less than 500 square feet in floor size. 
f.  The building shall be used only for the storage of vehicles or tools and may not contain other rooms, workshops, greenhouses or similar uses. 
g.  The building shall meet the permanent opening criteria of subsection (10)a of this section. 
(13)  1003.6 Existing buildings located within a designated floodway shall also meet the more restrictive appropriate use standards included in section 8-947. Non-conforming structures located in a designated floodway may remain in use and may only be enlarged, replaced or structurally altered in accordance with section 8-947(4). A non-conforming structure damaged by flood, fire, wind or other natural or manmade disaster may be restored unless the damage exceeds 50 percent of its market value before it was damaged, in which case it shall conform to this appendix. 
(Code 1993, app. 9A, § 1000.0; Ord. No. 2000-O-65, 10-24-2000) 
Sec. 8-950. - 1100.0 Other development requirements. 
    The Board of Trustees shall take into account flood hazards, to the extent that they are known in all official actions related to land management, use and development. 
(1)  1101.0 New subdivisions, manufactured home parks, annexation agreements, and Planned Unit Developments (PUDs) within the SFHA shall be reviewed to assure that the proposed developments are consistent with sections 8-946, 8-947, 8-948 and 8-949 and the need to minimize flood damage. Plats or plans for new subdivisions, mobile home parks and Planned Unit Developments (PUDs) shall include a signed statement by a registered Professional Engineer that the plat or plans account for changes in the drainage of surface waters in accordance with the Plat Act (ILCS ch. 765, act 205, § 2). 
(2)  1102.0 Proposals for new subdivisions, manufactured home parks, travel trailer parks, planned unit developments (PUDs) and additions to manufactured home parks and additions to subdivisions shall include base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation data and floodway delineations. 
(3)  1102.1 Where this information is not available from an existing study filed with the Illinois State Water Survey, the applicant's engineer shall be responsible for calculating the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation per section 8-945(6) and the floodway delineation per the definition in section 8-942. 
(4)  1102.2 The applicant's engineer shall submit the data to IDNR/OWR for review and approval as best available regulatory data and then send it to the State Water Survey. 
(5)  1103.0 Streets, blocks, lots, parks and other public grounds shall be located and laid out in such a manner as to preserve and utilize natural streams and channels. Wherever possible, the floodplains shall be included within parks or other public grounds. 
(6)  1104.0 The Board of Trustees shall not approve any Planned Unit Development (PUD) or plat of subdivision located outside the corporate limits unless such agreement or plat is in accordance with the provisions of this appendix. 
(Code 1993, app. 9A, § 1100.0; Ord. No. 2000-O-65, 10-24-2000) 
Sec. 8-951. - 1200.0 Variances. 
(a)  1201.0 No variances shall be granted to any development located in a designated floodway as defined in section 8-919. 
(1)  1201.1 Whenever the standards of this appendix place undue hardship on a specific development proposal, the applicant may apply to the Village Engineer for a variance. 
(2)  1201.2 The Village Engineer shall review the applicant's request for a variance and shall submit its recommendation to the Board of Trustees. 
(b)  1202.0 No variance shall be granted unless the applicant demonstrates that: 
(1)  1202.1 The development activity cannot be located outside the SFHA; 
(2)  1202.2 An exceptional hardship would result if the variance were not granted; 
(3)  1202.3 The relief requested is the minimum necessary; 
(4)  1202.4 There will be no additional threat to public health, safety, beneficial stream uses and functions, especially aquatic habitat, or creation of a nuisance; 
(5)  1202.5 There will be no additional public expense for flood protection, lost environmental stream uses and functions, rescue or relief operations, policing, or repairs to streambeds and banks, roads, utilities, or other public facilities; 
(6)  1202.6 The provisions of sections 8-946(7) and 8-947(6) shall still be met; 
(7)  1202.7 The activity is not in a designated floodway; 
(8)  1202.8 The applicant's circumstances are unique and do not represent a general problem; and 
(9)  1202.9 The granting of the variance will not alter the essential character of the area involved including existing stream uses. 
(c)  1203.0 The Village Engineer shall notify an applicant in writing that a variance from the requirements of section 8-949 that would lessen the degree of protection to a building will: 
(1)  1203.1 Result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25.00 for $100.00 of insurance coverage; 
(2)  1203.2 Increase the risks to life and property; 
(3)  1203.3 Require that the applicant proceed with knowledge of these risks and that he will acknowledge in writing that he assumes the risk and liability; 
(d)  1204.0 Variances requested in connection with restoration of a historic site or historic structure as defined in section 8-942 "Historic Structures," may be granted using criteria more permissive than the requirements of subsections (b) and (c) of this section, subject to the conditions that: 
(1)  1204.1 The repair or rehabilitation is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure; and 
(2)  1204.2 The repair or rehabilitation will not result in the structure being removed as a certified historic structure. 
(Code 1993, app. 9A, § 1200.0; Ord. No. 2000-O-65, 10-24-2000) 
Sec. 8-952. - 1300.0 Disclaimer of liability. 
(a)  1301.0 The degree of flood protection required by this appendix is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on available information derived from engineering and scientific methods of study. 
(b)  1302.0 Larger floods may occur or flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. 
(c)  1303.0 This appendix does not imply that development, either inside or outside of the SFHA, will be free from flooding or damage. 
(d)  1304.0 This appendix does not create liability on the part of the village or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damage that results from reliance on this appendix or any administrative decision made lawfully thereunder. 
(Code 1993, app. 9A, § 1300.0; Ord. No. 2000-O-65, 10-24-2000) 
Sec. 8-953. - 1400.0 Penalties. 
    Failure to comply with the requirements of a permit or conditions of a variance resolution shall be deemed to be a violation of this appendix. Upon due investigation, the Village Engineer may determine that a violation of the minimum standards of this appendix exist. The Village Engineer shall notify the owner in writing of such violation. 
(1)  1401.0 If such owner fails after ten days' notice to correct the violation: 
(2)  1401.1 The village may make application to the Circuit Court for an injunction requiring conformance with this appendix or make such other order as the Court deems necessary to secure compliance with the appendix. 
(3)  1401.2 Any person who violates this appendix shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not less than $50.00 or more than $1,000.00 for each offense. 
(4)  1401.3 A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. 
(5)  1401.4 The village may record a notice of violation on the title to the property. 
(6)  1402.0 The Village Engineer shall inform the owner that any such violation is considered a willful act to increase flood damages and, therefore, may cause coverage by a Standard Flood Insurance Policy to be suspended. 
(7)  1402.1 The Village Engineer is authorized to issue an order requiring the suspension of the subject development. The stop-work order shall be in writing, shall indicate the reason for the issuance, and shall order the action, if necessary, to resolve the circumstances requiring the stop-work order. The stop-work order constitutes a suspension of the permit. 
(8)  1402.2 No site Development Permit shall be permanently suspended or revoked until a hearing is held by the Board of Trustees. Written notice of such hearing shall be served on the permittee and shall state: 
a.  The grounds for compliant or reasons for suspension or revocation; and 
b.  The time and place of the hearing. At such hearing, the permittee shall be given an opportunity to present evidence on his behalf. 
At the conclusion of the hearing, the Board of Trustees shall determine whether the permit shall be suspended or revoked. 
(9)  1403.0 Nothing herein shall prevent the village from taking such other lawful action to prevent or remedy any violations. All costs connected therewith shall accrue to the person or persons responsible. 
(Code 1993, app. 9A, § 1400.0; Ord. No. 2000-O-65, 10-24-2000) 
Sec. 8-954. - 1500.0 Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
(a)  1501.0 This appendix is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. 
(b)  1502.0 Where this appendix and other ordinance, easements, covenants, or deed restrictions conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(c)  1503.0 This appendix is intended to and shall be deemed hereby to repeal Ordinance No. 94-O-3, adopted on or about March 8, 1994, which was adopted by the village to meet the National Flood Insurance Program regulations, but is not intended to repeal any resolution which the village has previously passed in order to establish initial eligibility for the program. 
(Code 1993, app. 9A, § 1500.0; Ord. No. 2000-O-65, 10-24-2000) 
Secs. 8-955-8-981. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XXX. - APPENDIX 9B DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS IN EDENS EXPRESSWAY NOISE IMPACT AREA 

Sec. 8-982. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article, appendix 9B, is to further protect existing and future residential properties from the adverse impact of noise generated by the traffic on the Edens Expressway (Interstate Highway 94), which is the only limited-access expressway in the village. This article, appendix 9B, identifies the geographic boundaries of an Edens Expressway Noise Impact Area, wherein noise from the Edens Expressway adversely impacts the quality of life in residential structures near the Edens Expressway, and prescribes construction standards for that portion of the village which is uniquely and adversely impacted by this noise. This article, appendix 9B, also sets forth the procedures for the implementation and enforcement of sound transmission control construction requirements. 
(Code 1993, app. 9B, § 200.0; Ord. No. 2005-O-33, 4-12-2005) 
Sec. 8-983. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Construction means new construction of principal residential buildings and remodeling and additions to existing principal residential buildings as required by the building codes adopted by incorporation under section 8-105. 
    Edens Expressway Noise Impact Area means the geographic area of the village enclosed by the following boundary: Beginning at the intersection of the south public right-of-way boundary of Illinois Road and a line 100 feet west of the west right-of-way boundary of the Edens Expressway, thence south along said line 100 feet west of the west right-of-way boundary of the Edens Expressway to the south corporate limits of the village, thence east along the south corporate limits of the village to its intersection with a line 100 feet east of the east right-of-way boundary of the Edens Expressway, thence north along said line 100 feet east of the east right-of-way boundary of the Edens Expressway to the point of the intersection of said line with the south public right-of-way boundary of Lake Avenue, thence west to the east right-of-way boundary of the Edens Expressway, thence north along the east right-of-way boundary of the Edens Expressway to a line extended east across the Edens Expressway right-of-way from the south public right-of-way boundary of Illinois Road, thence west across said extension of the south public right-of-way boundary of Illinois Road to the point of the beginning. The Edens Expressway Noise Impact Area is depicted in Figure 9B-1, accompanying this article, appendix 9B. 
(Code 1993, app. 9B, § 300.0; Ord. No. 2005-O-33, 4-12-2005) 
Sec. 8-984. - Applicability and effective date. 
(a)  The sound transmission control construction requirements set forth in this article, appendix 9B, shall be applicable to Building Permits for all residential construction in the Edens Expressway Noise Impact Area, including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Construction of new principal residential structures, whether detached dwellings or multifamily dwellings. 
(2)  Construction of additions or modifications to existing principal residential structures, whether detached dwellings or multifamily dwellings, including, but not limited to, first-floor, second-floor, and dormer additions. 
(b)  The sound transmission control construction requirements referenced in subsection (a) of this section shall become effective and apply to applications for Building Permits filed with the Department of Community Development on or after the date 14 days after publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the village of a Notice by the village Director of Community Development certifying the construction of a noise abatement barrier, commonly referred to as a "sound wall," along the Edens Expressway, has commenced. 
(Code 1993, app. 9B, § 400.0; Ord. No. 2005-O-33, 4-2-2005) 
Sec. 8-985. - Exemptions. 
    Construction projects that, in the reasonable determination of the Director of Community Development, are separate from a principal residential structure or wholly contained within a principal residential structure, shall not be subject to the Edens Expressway Noise Impact Area construction requirements set forth in this article, appendix 9B. Such construction projects include, but not limited to, the construction of: 
(1)  Detached garages and car ports. 
(2)  Interior remodeling. 
(3)  Patios. 
(4)  Sidewalks. 
(5)  Driveways. 
(6)  Decks. 
(7)  Fences. 
(8)  Sheds. 
(9)  Porches. 
(10)  Swimming pools and spas. 
(11)  Tennis and outdoor courts. 
(12)  Other accessory structures as defined in the Zoning Ordinance, appendix A of this Code. 
(Code 1993, app. 9B, § 500.0; Ord. No. 2005-O-33, 4-2-2005) 
Sec. 8-986. - Noise control construction requirements. 
    The Director of Community Development shall enforce the following regulations the course of reviewing all Building Permit applications for construction in the Edens Expressway Noise Impact Area identified in section 8-983, and not exempt under section 8-984. 
(Code 1993, app. 9B, § 600.0; Ord. No. 2005-O-33, 4-2-2005) 
Sec. 8-987. - Exterior walls. 
(a)  For any new construction, sheathing must be a minimum of one-half-inch of plywood, OSB, or a material of similar mass. 
(b)  The interior face of the exterior walls must be a minimum of one-half-inch drywall or a material of similar mass. Lightweight paneling and similar low mass surfaces must be backed with drywall. 
(c)  New construction of exterior walls must include batt or blown-in insulation with a rating of R-13 or higher. 
(Code 1993, app. 9B, § 610.0; Ord. No. 2005-O-33, 4-2-2005) 
Sec. 8-988. - Windows. 
    Windows must include double-glazed insulating glass. Blocking and insulation must be installed around windows to provide a tight seal. Caulking must be provided to effect an air tight seal. 
(Code 1993, app. 9B, § 620.0; Ord. No. 2005-O-33, 4-2-2005) 
Sec. 8-989. - Exterior doors. 
    All exterior doors must be solid core or insulated. Blocking and insulation must be installed around doors to provide a tight seal. Caulking must be provided to effect an air tight seal. Doors must be equipped with gasketing at the head and jamb and equipped with a wipe at the base. 
(Code 1993, app. 9B, § 630.0; Ord. No. 2005-O-33, 4-2-2005) 
Sec. 8-990. - Wall penetrations. 
    Seal or caulk all opening or penetrations through walls, particularly around water and gas pipes, electrical cables, and refrigerant lines. 
(Code 1993, app. 9B, § 640.0; Ord. No. 2005-O-33, 4-2-2005) 
Sec. 8-991. - Mechanical openings. 
    Ductwork for ducted range hoods and bathroom fans must include one 90-degree bend. The opening through the exterior wall must be caulked. The opening around dryer vents must be caulked. All exhaust vents must include a damper. 
(Code 1993, app. 9B, § 650.0; Ord. No. 2005-O-33, 4-2-2005) 
Secs. 8-992-8-1010. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XXXI. - APPENDIX 9C COOK COUNTY WATERSHED MANAGEMENT ORDINANCE 

Sec. 8-1011. - Adoption of Cook County Watershed Management Ordinance. 
    The amended Watershed Management Ordinance of Cook County, attached to Ordinance Number 2018-O-18 as Exhibit A, is hereby adopted by reference in its entirety as Appendix 9C to Chapter 8 of this Code and shall supersede the prior Appendix 9C of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-18, 4-24-2018) 
Chapter 10 - LIQUOR CONTROL 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 10-1. - Construction and enforcement. 
(a)  This chapter shall be construed and strictly enforced to the end that the health, safety and welfare of the people of Wilmette shall be protected. 
(b)  No licensee licensed hereunder shall deny or permit his agents and employees to deny any person the full and equal enjoyment of the accommodations, advantages, facilities and privileges of any premises in which alcoholic liquors are authorized to be sold, subject only to the conditions and limitations established by law, and applicable alike to all citizens. 
(Code 1993, § 11-1; Ord. No. 2006-O-9, 3-28-2006) 
Sec. 10-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alcohol means the product of distillation of any fermented liquid, whether refortified or diluted, whatever may be the origin thereof, and includes synthetic ethyl alcohol, but not including denatured alcohol or wood alcohol. 
    Alcoholic liquor means any alcohol, spirits, wine and beer, and every liquid or solid, patented or not, containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer and capable of being consumed as a beverage by a human being. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to alcohol used in the manufacture of denatured alcohol produced in accordance with Acts of Congress and regulations promulgated thereunder, nor to any liquid or solid containing one-half of one percent, or less, of alcohol by volume. 
    Applicant means an individual, co-partnership or corporation which seeks to be licensed under the provisions of this chapter. In the case of a club, applicant shall mean the officers, directors and person operating as manager, and in the case of a corporation, it shall mean the officers, directors, all persons owning directly or beneficially more than five percent of the stock of such corporation and the person operating as manager of the premises. 
    Bar means a counter upon or over which alcoholic liquor is the principal commodity served for consumption by persons at such counter. 
    Beer means a beverage obtained by the alcoholic fermentation of an infusion or concoction of barley, or other grain, malt and hops in water, and includes, among other things, beer, ale, stout, lager, porter and the like. 
    Café means a place of business licensed under chapter 24 whose primary purpose is the sale of coffee and other non-alcoholic beverages along with baked goods, sandwiches or light meals. 
    Club means a not-for-profit corporation organized under the laws of the State, solely for the promotion of some common object other than the sale or consumption of alcoholic liquors, which shall have been in operation in the village for two years prior to applying for a liquor license, kept, used and maintained by its members, through the payment of annual dues, and owning, hiring or leasing a building or space in a building, of such extent and character as may be suitable and adequate for the reasonable and comfortable use and accommodation of its members and their guests, and provided with suitable and adequate kitchen and dining room space and equipment for cooking, preparing and serving complete meals for its members and their guests; and further provided that its affairs and management are conducted by a board of directors, executive committee or similar body chosen by the members at their annual meeting, and that no member, or any officer, agent or employee of the club is paid or directly or indirectly receives, in the form of salary or other compensation any profits from the distribution or sale of alcoholic liquor to the club or the members of the club or its guests, beyond the amount of such salary as may be fixed and voted at any annual meeting by the members or by its board of directors or other governing body out of the general revenue of the club. 
    Hotel means a building offering transient lodging accommodations to the general public for compensation, and which may provide additional accessory services such as restaurants, food and beverage service, meeting rooms, sundries shops, salons, and fitness and recreational facilities. 
    Keg means any original package container capable of holding more than three gallons of beer. 
    Local Liquor Control Commissioner means when, in this chapter the Local Liquor Control Commissioner shall be referred to, it shall include any committee or other agency appointed by such Local Liquor Control Commissioner. 
    Manufacture means to distill, rectify, ferment, brew, make, mix, concoct, process, blend, bottle or fill an original package with any alcoholic liquor, whether for one's self or for another, and includes blending but does not include the mixing or other preparation of drinks for serving by those persons authorized and permitted by law to serve drinks for consumption on the premises where sold. All containers or packages of blended alcoholic liquors shall have affixed thereto a label setting forth and stating clearly the names of all ingredients which the blended alcoholic liquors offered for sale shall contain. 
    Mixed use premises means premises which are operated, directly or indirectly, by the same person, firm or corporation and which are internally subdivided or arranged so as to create the impression to the public that two or more separate lines of business are being conducted. 
    Original package means any bottle, flask, jug, can, cask, barrel, keg, hogshead, or other receptacle or container, whatsoever, used, corked or capped, sealed and labeled by the manufacturer of alcoholic liquor, to contain and to convey any alcoholic liquor. 
    Package store means a place of business having not less than 4,400 square feet of retail display area in which the premises are used primarily or exclusively for the retail sale of alcoholic liquors in original packages for consumption off the premises where sold. 
    Restaurant means a place of business licensed under chapter 24, without sleeping accommodations, whose primary purpose is the sale and on-site consumption of meals and beverages on non-disposable tableware, where meals are actually and regularly served or consumed at tables that are serviced by bus staff or wait staff. The meal service offered by a restaurant must include a complete menu offering several courses, including dinner or luncheon menus, at which the service of alcoholic beverages is incidental and complementary to the service of such meals. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the term "restaurant," within the meaning of this chapter, does not include any of the following: 
(1)  Lounges, luncheonettes, diners, cafes, drive-ins. 
(2)  Any establishment that has less than either: 
a.  350 square feet of table seating area for customers dining in; or 
b.  400 square feet of kitchen and food preparation area. 
(3)  Any establishment with less than 25 seats at tables at which customers dining in may be served. 
    Retail food shop means a place of business having less than 6,000 square feet of store area or less than 3,800 square feet of retail display area in which food and food products are the principal line of merchandise sold. 
    Retail food store means a place of business having 6,000 or more square feet of total store area and 3,800 or more square feet of retail display area in which food and food products are the principal line of merchandise sold. 
    Sale means any transfer, exchange or barter in any manner, or by any means whatsoever, for a consideration, and includes and means all sales made by a person, and also includes soliciting or receiving an order for keeping or exposing for sale, and keeping with intent to sell. 
    Sale at retail means sales for use or consumption and not for resale in any form. 
    Sale of a keg means any sale of beer in a keg, even though the keg is to be returned by the purchaser to the seller. 
    Specialty restaurant and gourmet products retailer means a single place of business of no more than 2,500 square feet, licensed under chapter 24, without sleeping accommodations, that on the same premises both: 
(1)  Operates as a place where complete meals are served, and where complete meals are actually and regularly served, such space being provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment and having employed in such space a sufficient number and kind of persons to prepare, cook and serve food for its patrons where, as part of a demonstration or instructional program on food preparation techniques, a host or hostess is present to seat patrons, where all patrons are served the same prix fixe , multi-course meal at a scheduled seating, where admission to the scheduled seating is by reservation only, where no more than 30 patrons may be served at a scheduled seating, where food is served to patrons while they are seated at tables or at a counter using non-disposable dishes, glassware and utensils, and at which the service of alcoholic beverages is incidental and complementary to the service of such meals, and where the premises does not contain a bar or counter used solely for serving alcoholic beverages to customers located in a waiting area; and 
(2)  Displays and offers for sale at retail gourmet foods, food products, and food preparation utensils and equipment. 
    Specialty restaurant with limited wine service means a single place of business licensed as a restaurant under chapter 24 which serves a limited menu of specialty gourmet desserts, chocolates, confections, pastries and similar items to patrons seated at tables using non- disposable dishes, glassware and utensils, and at which the service of wine, including sparkling wines, is incidental and complementary to the service of such gourmet items consumed on the premises, and where the premises does not contain a bar or counter used solely for serving alcoholic beverages. 
    Theater means a business whose primary purpose is the public exhibition of motion pictures, or public presentation of live musical, comedic, dramatic or other theatrical entertainment. 
    Wine means any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of the natural contents of fruits or vegetables, containing sugar, including such beverages when fortified by the addition of alcohol, as defined above. 
(Code 1993, § 11-2; Ord. No. 75-O-3, 1-7-1975; Ord. No. 82-O-28, 6-15-1982; Ord. No. 83-O-7, 3-15-1983; Ord. No. 84-O-4, 3-20-1984; Ord. No. 92-O-66, 10-20-1992; Ord. No. 99-O-15, 3-9-1999; Ord. No. 2001-O-72, 11-13-2001; Ord. No. 2001-O-73, 11-13-2001; Ord. No. 2005-O-101, 11-21-2005; Ord. No. 2006-O-9, 3-28-2006; Ord. No. 2006-O-40, 5-23-2006; Ord. No. 2007-O-94, 12-11-2007; Ord. No. 2009-O-19, 3-10-2009; Ord. No. 2013-O-51, 10-8-2013; Ord. No. 2015-O-35, 8-25-2015; Ord. No. 2018-O-58, § 2, 9-25-2018) 
Sec. 10-3. - License required. 
    It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale in the village any alcoholic liquor without having a liquor vendor's license, or to sell such alcoholic liquor in violation of the terms of such license. 
(Code 1993, § 11-3; Ord. No. 2006-O-9, 3-28-2006) 
Sec. 10-4. - Local Liquor Control Commissioner with appointed assistants. 
(a)  The President of the Board of Trustees of the village shall be the local Liquor Control Commissioner and shall be charged with the administration within the village of the appropriate provisions of this chapter. He may designate one or more persons to assist him in the exercise of such powers and the performance of such duties as he may deem necessary. 
(b)  When the Liquor Control Commissioner shall have determined that there is a qualified applicant, or applicants, for a license of a class for which no additional licenses are available, the commissioner shall notify the Board of Trustees. 
(c)  The Liquor Control Commissioner shall be paid $1000.00 per year as compensation for performance of his duties and functions. 
(Code 1993, § 11-4; Ord. No. 2006-O-9, 3-28-2006) 
Sec. 10-5. - Power and duties of local Liquor Control Commissioner. 
    The local Liquor Control Commissioner shall have the following powers, functions and duties: 
(1)  To grant, suspend for not more than 30 days, or revoke for cause, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, all local licenses issued to persons for premises within his jurisdiction, and in addition thereto, impose fines on licensees in such amounts as may be provided in section 10-61. 
(2)  To enter or to authorize any law enforcement officer or peace officer to enter at any time upon any premises licensed hereunder, to determine whether any of the provisions of this chapter or any rules or regulations adopted by him or by any other agency having the authority to do so have been or are being violated, and at the time of such entry to examine such premises in connection therewith. 
(3)  To receive complaints from any citizen that any of the provisions of this chapter, or any rules or regulations adopted pursuant thereto, or any other applicable rules or regulations, have been or are being violated and to act upon such complaints in the manner hereinafter provided. 
(4)  To deny any application for the issuance or renewal of a license to an applicant he has determined to be ineligible therefor. 
(5)  To receive local fees and pay the same forthwith to the Village Treasurer. 
(6)  To examine, or cause to be examined under oath any applicant for a local license or for a renewal thereof, or any licensee upon whom notice of revocation or suspension has been served in the manner hereinafter provided, and to examine or cause to be examined, the books and records of any such applicant or licensee; to hear testimony and take proof for his information in the performance of his duties, and for such purpose to issue subpoenas which shall be effective in any part of this state. For the purpose of obtaining any of the information desired by the local Liquor Control Commissioner under this section, he may authorize his agent to act on his behalf. 
(7)  To grant an exemption to the minimum distance prohibitions for the licensing of retail sale of alcohol at locations located within 100 feet of a church, school, hospital, home for aged or indigent persons or for veterans, their spouses or children or any military or naval stations as provided for in 235 ILCS 5/6-11 of the Illinois Liquor Control Act 
(Code 1993, § 11-5; Ord. No. 96-O-59, 8-27-1996; Ord. No. 2001-O-7, 2-27-2001; Ord. No. 2006-O-9, 3-28-2006; Ord. No. 2018-O-58, § 4, 9-25-2018) 
Sec. 10-6. - Application for license. 
(a)  Applications for such license shall be made to the commissioner in writing, signed by the applicant, if an individual, or by the president and secretary thereof, if a club or corporation, verified by oath or affidavit, and shall contain the following statements and information: 
(1)  The name, age, and address of the applicant in the case of an individual; in the case of a co-partnership, the persons entitled to share in the profits thereof; and in the case of a corporation, the date of incorporation, the objects for which it was organized, a summary of its activities during the past year, and the names and addresses of the officers, directors, all persons owning directly or beneficially, or through any form of indirect or concealed ownership or control, more than five percent of the stock of such corporation, and the person operating as manager of the premises; and in the case of a club, the date of its incorporation, the objects for which it was organized, a summary of its activities during the past year, the names and addresses of the officers, directors, and the person operating as manager. A club must file with the local Liquor Control Commissioner at the time of its application for a license under this chapter two copies of a list of names and residences of its members, and similarly file within ten days of the election of any additional member, his name and address. 
(2)  The citizenship of the applicant, the place of his birth, and if a naturalized citizen, the time and place of his naturalization. 
(3)  The character of business of the applicant; and in case of a corporation, the objects for which it was formed. 
(4)  The length of time said applicant has been in business of that character, or in the case of a corporation, the date when its charter was issued. 
(5)  The amount of goods, wares, and merchandise on hand at the time application is made. 
(6)  The location and description of the premises or place of business which is to be operated under such license, including a description of signs advertising alcoholic beverages. 
(7)  A statement whether the applicant has made application for a similar or other license on premises other than described in this application, and the disposition of such application. 
(8)  A statement that the applicant is not disqualified to receive a license by reason of any matter or thing contained in this chapter, the laws of this state, or the ordinances of the village, and a statement as to whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a felony. 
(9)  Whether a previous license by any state or subdivision thereof, or by the federal government has been revoked, and the reasons therefor. 
(10)  A statement that the applicant will not violate any of the laws of the State, or of the United States, or any ordinances of the village in the conduct of his business. 
(11)  Such other and further information as the local Liquor Control Commissioner may, by rule or regulation not inconsistent with law, prescribe. 
a.  If the applicant, as required under subsection (a)(8) of this section, reports a felony conviction, such conviction may be considered in determining qualifications for licensing, but of itself shall not operate as a bar to licensing. 
b.  If said application is made in behalf of a partnership, firm, association, club or corporation, then the same shall be signed and sworn to by at least two governing or managing officials of such partnership, firm, association, or club, or the president and secretary of such corporation. 
(b)  Before any license shall be issued on any application for original issuance or renewal of a license permitting the sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption on the licensed premises, the applicant shall furnish a bond with a corporate surety, such corporate surety to be a surety company regularly authorized to act as surety and to be approved by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner proof of insurance, either in the form of a certificate of insurance or insurance policy, that the applicant has obtained dram shop liability insurance from an insurer licensed to do business in the State in an amount no less than the maximum liability limits set forth in article VI, section 6-21 of the Illinois Liquor Control Act (235 ILCS 5/6-21) now or hereafter amended, provided that, if an application for such dram shop liability insurance is submitted with an initial application for issuance of a license, then such license shall not be issued until such time as the applicant presents proof of having obtained such insurance. 
(c)  With respect to application for a Class F License, in lieu of the foregoing information, the Wilmette Park District shall submit to the Local Liquor Control Commissioner a certified copy of a resolution duly adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Wilmette Park District declaring that the public interest and convenience will be served by the issuance of a Class F License, and designating the name and title of the person or persons who shall be responsible for managing the licensed food facility and complying with all applicable provisions of this chapter and state law. 
(Code 1993, § 11-6; Ord. No. 2006-O-9, 3-28-2006) 
Sec. 10-7. - Eligibility for license. 
    No such license shall be issued to: 
(1)  A person who is not of good character and reputation in the community; 
(2)  A person who is not a citizen of the United States or an alien with legal status to hold such license under the laws and treaties of the United States of America; 
(3)  A person who has been convicted of a felony under any federal or state law if the commissioner determines, after investigation, that such person has not been sufficiently rehabilitated to warrant the public trust; 
(4)  A person who has been convicted of being the keeper of or is keeping a house of prostitution; 
(5)  A person who has been convicted of pandering or other crime or misdemeanor opposed to public decency and morality; 
(6)  A person whose license under this chapter has been revoked for cause; 
(7)  A person who at the time of application for renewal of any license issued hereunder would not be eligible for such license under a first application; 
(8)  A co-partnership, unless all of the members of such co-partnership shall be qualified to obtain a license; 
(9)  A corporation, if any officer, manager or director thereof, or any stockholder owning directly, beneficially, or through any form of indirect ownership or control in the aggregate more than five percent of the stock of such corporation, would not be eligible to receive a license hereunder for any reason other than citizenship and residence within the political subdivision; 
(10)  A corporation unless it is incorporated in Illinois or unless it is a foreign corporation which is qualified under the Business Corporation Act to transact business in Illinois; 
(11)  A person whose place of business is conducted by a manager or agent unless said manager or agent possesses the same qualifications required of the licensee; 
(12)  A person who has been convicted of a violation of any federal or State law concerning the manufacture, possession or sale of alcoholic liquor, or who shall have forfeited his bond to appear in court to answer charges for any such violation; 
(13)  A person who does not own the premises for which a license is sought or does not have a lease thereon for the full period for which the license is issued; 
(14)  Any elected or appointed public official of the village, village employee, or member of any Wilmette Board or Commission, and no such official shall be interested in any way, except as a member of a club as defined herein or as provided by law, either directly or indirectly; 
(15)  Any applicant who fails to obtain a state liquor license; 
(16)  A person who is not a beneficial owner of the business to be operated by the licensee; 
(17)  A person who has been convicted of a gambling offense; 
(18)  A person to whom a federal gaming device stamp or a federal wagering stamp has been issued by the federal government for the current tax period; 
(19)  A co-partnership to which a federal gaming device stamp or a federal wagering stamp has been issued by the federal government for the current tax period, or if any of the partners have been issued a federal gaming device stamp or federal wagering stamp by the federal government for the current tax period; 
(20)  A corporation, if any officer, manager or director thereof, or any stockholder owning directly, beneficially, or through any form of indirect or hidden ownership or control in the aggregate more than five percent of the stock of such corporation, has been issued a federal gaming stamp or a federal wagering stamp for the current tax period; 
(21)  Any premises for which a federal gaming device stamp or a federal wagering stamp has been issued by the federal government for the current tax period; 
(22)  Any premises used in whole or in part as an automobile service or motor fuel station; 
(23)  Any mixed use premises, unless each of the separate lines of business being conducted on the mixed use premises would be eligible for a license under section 10-9 if it were the only line of business conducted on the premises. 
(Code 1993, § 11-7; Ord. No. 74-O-37, 11-5-1974; Ord. No. 78-O-12, 3-7-1978; Ord. No. 82-O-28, 6-15-1982; Ord. No. 2004-O-83, 8-24-2004; Ord. No. 2006-O-9, 3-28-2006) 
Sec. 10-8. - Term. 
    Each such license shall terminate one year from the date of issuance. Renewal applications shall be submitted 60 days prior to expiration. 
(Code 1993, § 11-8; Ord. No. 2006-O-9, 3-28-2006) 
Sec. 10-9. - Classification of licenses and schedule of fees. 
(a)  Class A and A-1 Licenses. 
(1)  Class A Licenses, which shall authorize the retail sale of alcoholic liquor by restaurants without bars, as defined in this chapter, but only when such sale is incidental and complementary to the sale and consumption of meals, eaten at tables served by wait staff or bus, for consumption only on the premises where sold. Patrons may be served alcoholic beverages while waiting to be seated when no tables are available. It shall be unlawful for any holder of a Class A License to offer for sale or serve alcoholic liquor by the drink without concurrently offering for sale or serving meals to patrons. It shall be unlawful for any holder of a Class A License that provides outdoor restaurant seating in the public right-of-way, as licensed under chapter 24, to serve alcoholic liquor to any patron seated in the public right-of-way unless that person has purchased a meal. The annual license fee for Class A Licenses for restaurants which are affected by the hours limitation contained in section 10-21(c) shall be $1,000.00 and the annual license fee for all other Class A Licenses shall be $2,000.00. 
(2)  Class A-1 Licenses, which shall duplicate Class A Licenses in all regards, except that Class A-1 Licenses shall additionally authorize the retail sale of wine only in its original package or packages for consumption off the premises, subject to the following conditions: 
a.  The retail sale of any wine in original packages for consumption off the premises must be incidental and complementary to the sale of food for consumption off the premises. It shall be unlawful for any holder of a Class A-1 License to render a bill for sale of wine in its original package which does not include a charge for food to be consumed off the premises. 
b.  The amount of wine sold as incidental and complementary to the sale of food for consumption off the premises in any single transaction may not exceed 1,500 milliliters in volume. 
c.  Any wine sold at retail in original packages for consumption off the premises pursuant to this section cannot be sold at a price lower than that charged for consumption of the same wine on the premises. 
d.  The annual license fee for a Class A-1 License for restaurants which are affected by the hours limitation of contained in section 10-21 shall be $1,100.00, and the annual license fee for all other Class A-1 Licenses shall be $2,100.00. 
(b)  Class B and B-1 Licenses. 
(1)  Class B Licenses, which shall duplicate Class A Licenses in all regards, except that beer and/or wine only may be served. The annual license fee for such license shall be $1,000.00. 
(2)  Class B-1 Licenses, which shall duplicate Class B Licenses in all regards, except that Class B-1 Licenses shall additionally authorize the retail sale of wine only in its original package or packages for consumption off the premises, subject to the following conditions: 
a.  The retail sale of any wine in original packages for consumption off the premises must be incidental and complementary to the sale of food for consumption off the premises. It shall be unlawful for any holder of a Class B-1 License to render a bill for sale of wine in its original package which does not include a charge for food to be consumed off the premises. 
b.  The amount of wine sold as incidental and complementary to the sale of food for consumption off the premises in any single transaction may not exceed 1,500 milliliters in volume. 
c.  Any wine sold at retail in original packages for consumption off the premises pursuant to this section cannot be sold at a price lower than that charged for consumption of the same wine on the premises. 
d.  The annual license fee for such license shall be $1,100.00. 
(3)  Class B-2 Licenses, which shall authorize the retail sale by a bowling alley of beer and wine, but only when such sale is to bowling alley patrons who are bowling or waiting to bowl and only for consumption on the premises. The annual license fee for a Class B-2 License be $1,000.00. 
(c)  Class C, C-B, C-1 and C-B-1 Licenses. 
(1)  Class C Licenses, which shall duplicate Class A Licenses in all regards, except that patrons may also be served alcoholic beverages at a bar, provided such bar shall meet the following conditions: 
a.  The bar shall be no longer than 15 feet; 
b.  The number of seats at the bar shall not exceed eight seats; 
c.  The bar shall not be located in a room separate from the principal room in which meals are served. 
d.  The annual license fee for such license shall be $2,500.00. 
(2)  Class C-B Licenses, which shall duplicate Class B Licenses in all regards, except that patrons may also be served alcoholic beverages at a bar, provided such bar shall meet the following conditions: 
a.  The bar shall be no longer than 15 feet; 
b.  The number of seats at the bar shall not exceed eight seats; 
c.  The bar shall not be located in a room separate from the principal room in which meals are served. 
d.  The annual license fee for such license shall be $1,500.00. 
(3)  Class C-1 Licenses and Class C-B-1, which shall duplicate Class C and Class C-B Licenses, respectfully, in all regards, except that Class C-1 and Class C-B-1 Licenses shall additionally authorize the retail sale of wine only in its original package or packages for consumption off the premises, subject to the following conditions: 
a.  The retail sale of any wine in original packages for consumption off the premises must be incidental and complementary to the sale of food for consumption off the premises. It shall be unlawful for any holder of a Class C-1 and Class C-B-1 License to render a bill for sale of wine in its original package which does not include a charge for food to be consumed off the premises. 
b.  The amount of wine sold as incidental and complementary to the sale of food for consumption off the premises in any single transaction may not exceed 1,500 milliliters in volume. 
c.  Any wine sold at retail in original packages for consumption off the premises pursuant to this section cannot be sold at a price lower than that charged for consumption of the same wine on the premises. 
The annual license fee for such license shall be $2,600.00 for a Class C-1 License and $1,600.00 for a Class C-B-1 License. 
(d)  Class D Licenses, which shall authorize the sale of alcoholic liquors by clubs which maintain permanent club quarters (irrespective of the size of their membership), but only for consumption on the club's premises and only to club members and their guests. The annual license fee for such license shall be $1,500.00. 
(e)  Class E Licenses, which shall authorize the retail sale of alcoholic liquors by a civic, fraternal, service, charitable or other organization at a picnic, outing, festival or other similar special occasion, provided that in each case the sale is for consumption incidental and complementary to the service of food on the premises or within an area specifically designated in such license. No Class E License shall be valid for more than 72 hours. The license fee for each Class E License shall be $25.00, except that within any 90-day period, the fee for a second or subsequent license shall be $10.00. No more than 12 such licenses shall be issued to any one licensee within a calendar year, and no more than four such licenses issued to a licensee within a calendar year shall permit the service of alcoholic liquor outdoors. 
(f)  Class F License, which shall authorize the Wilmette Park District to engage in the retail sale of alcoholic liquor at the Park District Golf Club located at 3900 Fairway Drive in connection with the operation of an established food-serving facility, but only when, concurrently offering for sale or serving meals to patrons seated at tables, for consumption only on the premises where sold. 
(1)  Notwithstanding the foregoing limitation, such license shall authorize the Wilmette Park District to engage in the retail sale of alcoholic liquor at such food-serving facility without the concurrent service of food to persons at the golf course for the principal purpose of playing golf. 
(2)  Upon written request by the Wilmette Park District, the Local Liquor Control Commissioner shall be authorized to reissue its Class F License in the name of an entity that is under contract with the Park District to operate for the Park District the food service and beverage facilities at the Park District Golf Club. Such entity shall be required to submit to the Local Liquor Control Commissioner a copy of its current and valid contract with the Park District and all such application materials as are otherwise required of any licensee under section 10-6, and shall also meet all requirements for eligibility for license as set forth in section 10-7. A Class F License issued to a Park District contractor shall terminate immediately upon written notice to the Local Liquor Control Commissioner by the Park District that its contract is no longer in effect or that the Park District no longer wishes its contractor to hold such license, at time said Class F License shall be reissued in favor of the Park District. 
(3)  The annual license fee for such license shall be $1,000.00. 
(g)  Class G Licenses, which shall authorize the retail sale of alcoholic liquors in original packages for consumption off the premises where sold in package stores. The annual license fee for such license shall be $3,000.00. 
On and after March 14, 1995, no further Class G Licenses shall issue and the Class G License shall be eliminated upon the expiration without renewal, or the revocation of, or the surrender of the last Class G License held prior to March 14, 1995. 
(h)  Class H Licenses, which shall authorize the retail sale of beer and wine only in original packages for consumption off the premises where sold in retail food, stores and shops, and in which the retail display area devoted to the sale of beer and wine shall not exceed ten percent of the total retail display area. The annual license fee shall be $1,500.00. 
(i)  Class I Licenses, which shall authorize the retail sale of alcoholic liquors in original packages for consumption off the premises where sold in retail food, retail pharmacies/convenience stores, and in which the retail display area devoted to the sale of alcoholic liquor shall not exceed ten percent of the total retail display area. The annual license fee shall be $3,000.00. 
(j)  Class J Licenses, which shall duplicate Class A licenses in all regards, except that patrons may also be served alcoholic beverages at a bar when such a sale is incidental and complementary to consumption of a meal by each such patron, provided the number of seats at the bar shall not exceed 15 percent of the number of seats at tables where meals are served. A Class J License shall not be issued to any applicant whose restaurant (including dining rooms, kitchens and all other internal space) does not have 2,500.00 or more square feet of total area, and whose restaurant is not located in the Village Center ("VC") zoning district, as defined in the Wilmette Zoning Ordinance, appendix A of this Code. The annual license fee for such a license shall be $3,000.00. 
(k)  Class K Licenses, which shall authorize the sale by a specialty restaurant and gourmet products retailer of: 
(1)  Beer and wine, as part of a demonstration or instructional program on food preparation techniques, where a host or hostess is present to seat patrons, where all patrons are served the same prix fixe , multi-course meal at a scheduled seating, where admission to the scheduled seating is by reservation only, where no more than 40 patrons are served at a scheduled seating, where food is served to patrons while they are seated at tables or at a counter using non-disposable dishes, glassware and utensils, and at which the service of beer or wine is incidental and complementary to the service of such meals; and 
(2)  Beer and wine, in its original package or packages which must contain more than a single serving, for consumption off the premises, where the beer and wine are displayed and offered for sale at retail along with gourmet foods, food products, and food preparation utensils and equipment, provided that the retail area devoted to display for sale of wine shall not exceed five percent of the business' total retail display area, and in no event shall exceed 50 square feet of the business' total retail display area. 
(3)  The annual license fee shall be $500.00. 
(l)  Class L Licenses, which shall authorize the retail sale of bottled wine premium imported beer and American craft beer for consumption off the premises, the limited tasting of bottled wines, and the limited service of fine wine, premium imported beer and American craft beer for immediate consumption on the premises incidental to the purchase and consumption of meals, at a boutique wine store whose principal business is the sale at retail of fine bottled wines, premium imported beer and American craft beer, and accessories related thereto. A Class L license shall be subject to all of the following conditions: 
(1)  The Class L License shall authorize the sale only of bottled fine wines, premium imported beer, and American craft beer and of no other alcoholic liquors. For the purposes of the Class L license: 
a.  The term "fine wine" shall mean wine sold only in glass bottles and made from vinifera (grape varieties) and not from other fermented fruit juices. 
b.  The term "imported beer" means beer not brewed in the United States. 
c.  The term "American craft beer" means beer brewed in the United States by an American craft brewer who holds at least one of the following characteristics: 
1.  Small brewer. Has annual production of less than 2,000,000 barrels or otherwise qualifies for the federal small brewer's excise tax differential, as administered by the U.S. Treasury Department by producing less than 2,000,000 barrels annually; or 
2.  Independent brewer. Less than 25 percent of the craft brewery is owned or controlled by an alcoholic beverage industry member which is not itself a craft brewer; or 
3.  Traditional brewer. Has either an all-malt flagship beer (which has the greatest volume of sales among all the brewer's brands) or has at least 50 percent of its sales volume in either all-malt beers or in beers that use adjuncts to enhance, rather than lighten, the flavor of the beer. 
(2)  The tasting of small quantities of varieties of fine wine, premium imported beer, and American craft beer shall be permitted on the licensed premises. No charge, cost, fee, or other consideration of any kind shall be levied for any such tasting. A fixed price registration fee may be charged only for pre-registered events or classes when the store is closed to the general public, provided that such events shall for educational or instructional purposes, all such classes or events shall have a written agenda or curriculum, and all such classes or events shall end by 9:00 p.m. 
(3)  A Class L License may be issued only to a business whose principal merchandise offered for sale is fine wines, premium imported beer, and American craft beer, and whose ancillary sales are limited to, wine and beer related accessories, small gourmet food products, and specialty gift products such as fine food accessories. No sale of food for intended for immediate consumption shall be permitted. The retail display area devoted to the sale of beer shall not exceed ten percent of the total retail display area. 
(4)  A Class L License shall additionally permit the sale of craft beer and fine wine for immediate consumption on the licensed premises, only when such sale is incidental and complementary to the purchase and consumption of meals to patrons seated at tables using non-disposable dishes, glassware and utensils, and not at a bar or counter. The following additional limitations shall also apply to the sale of fine wine or craft beer pursuant to this section: 
a.  It shall be unlawful for any holder of a Class L License to serve wine or beer to any patron without concurrently selling and serving a meal to such patron. 
b.  It shall be unlawful for any holder of a Class L License that provides outdoor restaurant seating in the public right-of-way, as licensed under chapter 24, to serve wine or beer to any patron seated in the public right-of-way without concurrently serving a meal to said patron. 
c.  The indoor table seating area where fine wine or craft beer is served for immediate consumption incidental and complimentary to the sale of meals shall not be located in a separate room. 
d.  The indoor table seating area where fine wine or craft beer is served for immediate consumption incidental and complimentary to the sale of meals to persons seated at tables shall not exceed eight tables located in the interior area of licensed premises, which may be expanded to no more than 12 tables between the hours of 5:00 p.m. and the cessation time stated in subsection (l)(4)e of this section. 
e.  Notwithstanding the provisions of section 10-21, the sale of craft beer or fine wine for immediate consumption in the table seating area described herein shall be limited to the hours of 11:00 a.m. until 9:00 p.m. Monday through Thursday; 11:00 a.m. until 10:00 p.m. Friday through Saturday; and 12:00 noon until 7:00 p.m. on Sunday. 
(5)  No tobacco product of any kind shall be sold or offered for sale on the licensed premises. 
(6)  A Class L License may be issued only to a store no less than 1,000 square feet in area, and no more than 2,200 square feet in area. 
(7)  A Class L License may be issued only to a store located in the Village Center ("VC") zoning district, as defined in the Wilmette Zoning Ordinance, appendix A of this Code. 
(8)  The annual license fee for such a Class L license shall be $1,500.00. 
(m)  Class M and M-1 Licenses. 
(1)  Class M Licenses, which shall duplicate Class A Licenses in all regards, except that patrons may also be served alcoholic liquor in a designated bar area where meals may be served by the licensee. The licensed premises must have a minimum total area of at least 2,500 square feet. The designated bar area is subject to the following limitations and requirements: 
a.  The bar area may include a bar, a table seating area, or combination of both. 
b.  The bar area must be identified on a scale drawing of the licensed premises submitted with the application for the Class M License, and is subject to the review and approval of the Local Liquor Control Commissioner. 
c.  The bar area of the restaurant open to patrons either seated or standing shall not exceed 15 percent of the total interior area of restaurant open to patrons, not including restrooms. 
d.  The bar area shall not be located in the public right-of-way, in whole or in part, regardless of whether the licensee has an Outdoor Restaurant Seating License. 
e.  No alcoholic liquor may be offered for sale or served in the bar area unless the licensee is concurrently offering for sale or serving meals to patrons seated at tables dining outside of the bar area. 
f.  Class M Licenses may be issued only to licensed premises located in the following zoning districts as defined in the Wilmette Zoning Ordinance, appendix A, of this Code: 
1.  Village Center ("VC") zoning district. 
2.  Planned Commercial Development - 1 ("PCD-1") zoning district. 
3.  Planned Commercial Development - 2 ("PCD-2") zoning district. 
4.  General Commercial - 1 ("GC-1") zoning district. 
g.  The annual license fee for such a Class M license shall be $5,000.00. 
(2)  Class M-1 License, which shall duplicate Class M Licenses, in all regards, except that Class M-1 Licenses shall additionally authorize the retail sale of beer and/or wine in its original package or packages for consumption off the premises, subject to the following conditions: 
a.  The retail sale of any beer and/or wine in original packages for consumption off the premises must be incidental and complementary to the sale of food for consumption off the premises. It shall be unlawful for any holder of a Class M-1 License to render a bill for sale of beer and/or wine in its original package which does not include a charge for food to be consumed off the premises. 
b.  The amount of beer and wine sold as incidental and complementary to the sale of food for consumption off the premises in any single transaction may not exceed the following quantities: 
1.  1,500 milliliters of wine; or 
2.  12 12-ounce containers of beer; or 
3.  750 milliliters of wine and six 12-ounce containers of beer, when sold in combination. 
c.  Any beer and/or wine sold at retail in original packages for consumption off the premises pursuant to this section cannot be sold at a price lower than that charged for consumption of the same beer and/or wine on the premises. The annual license fee for such Class M-1 license shall be $5,100.00. 
(n)  Class N Licenses, which shall permit the sale of wine and beer only, for immediate consumption on the licensed premises, by a specialty restaurant or cafe, only when such sale is incidental and complementary to the sale and consumption of specialty gourmet desserts, chocolates, confections, pastries, appetizers, sandwiches, light meals and similar food for consumption on the licensed premises to patrons seated at tables using non-disposable dishes, glassware and utensils, and not at a bar. It shall be unlawful for any holder of a Class N License to serve wine and beer by the drink to any patron without concurrently selling food to such patron. It shall be unlawful for any holder of a Class N License that provides outdoor restaurant seating in the public right-of-way, as licensed under chapter 24, to serve alcoholic liquor to any patron seated in the public right-of-way without concurrently serving such food to said patron. The annual license fee shall be $500.00. 
(o)  Class O License. 
(1)  Class O Licenses shall permit the sale of beer and wine only, for immediate consumption on the licensed premises, by a café which does not have a bar when such sale is incidental and complementary to the sale and consumption of a meal to be consumed on the premises or incidental to the presentation of a live music performance on the premises. It shall be unlawful for any holder of a Class O License that provides outdoor café seating to serve alcoholic liquor to any patron without concurrently serving a meal to said patron. 
(2)  The annual license fee shall be $1,500.00. 
(p)  Class P Licenses, which shall permit the retail sale and service of beer and wine in hotels as follows: 
(1)  Service of beer and wine to registered guests only for consumption on the premises and only in areas and at times specifically designated on the license; 
(2)  Service of beer and wine to registered guests and invitees in meeting rooms for consumption on the premises only; 
(3)  Retail sale of beer and wine in original containers in sundries shops to registered guests only for consumption on or off the premises; and 
(4)  Provision of beer and wine in cabinets within guest rooms, provided that each such cabinet shall be securely locked and accessible only by a key separate from the room key, and such separate key shall be given only to a guest 21 years of age or older at the time of registration. 
(5)  The annual fee for such license shall be $500.00. 
(6)  Restaurants within hotels may sell and serve alcoholic liquor only subject to a separately issued Class A, B, C or C-B license. 
(q)  Class T Licenses, which shall permit the sale of beer and wine by a theater, subject to the following limitations and requirements: 
(1)  The theater must be located in the Village Center (VC) business zoning district, as defined in appendix A (Zoning Ordinance) of this Code. 
(2)  Alcohol may only be sold to persons who are ticketed patrons of the theater. 
(3)  Any time alcohol is being offered for sale, the employee selling admission tickets to the theater must be at least 21 years of age. 
(4)  Alcohol may not be sold or consumed outside of the theater or on any public sidewalk or right-of-way, except during special events. A theater may hold up to 4 special events per calendar year. During special events, a theater may serve beer and wine outside the theater building in the rear of the theater premises and wholly on the theater premises. 
(5)  The lobby area shall not have any games or amusement devices, and any video screens located in the lobby area shall be limited to, presenting theatrical trailers and coming attractions, announcements of upcoming events, information about the theater and booking events, advertising sold by the theater, or other information specifically relating to the operation of the theater and its presentations. Said video screens may not be used for the display of cable service, video service or broadcast service television or other programming unrelated to the theater's own operations, sales or presentations. 
(6)  Beer and wine shall be served in a cup or glass which is unique to the service of beer and wine at the theater and obviously different from cups or glasses used for the service of soft drinks, and beer may be served in its original bottle or can. 
(7)  Patrons may purchase not more than two alcoholic drinks per person at any one time. 
(8)  No beer and wine may be served during motion pictures which have a rating of G by the Motion Picture Association of America. 
(9)  The annual license fee for such a Class T License shall be $1,000.00. 
(Code 1993, § 11-9; Ord. No. 75-O-3, 1-7-1975; Ord. No. 75-O-5, 1-22-1975; Ord. No. 76-O-33, 8-3-1976; Ord. No. 76-O-37, 8-3-1976; Ord. No. 82-O-28, 6-15-1982; Ord. No. 84-O-4, 3-20-1984; Ord. No. 84-O-41, 10-16-1984; Ord. No. 86-O-13, 3-18-1986; Ord. No. 94-O-61, 9-13-1994; Ord. No. 95-O-12, 2-28-1995; Ord. No. 96-O-54, 10-8-1996; Ord. No. 99-O-15, 3-9-1999; Ord. No. 2001-O-73, 11-13-2001; Ord. No. 2005-O-47, 5-10-2005; Ord. No. 2005-O-84, 10-11-2005; Ord. No. 2005-O-101, 11-21-2005; Ord. No. 2006-O-9, 3-28-2006; Ord. No. 2006-O-37, 4-25-2006; Ord. No. 2006-O-40, 5-23-2006; Ord. No. 2006-O-79, 10-10-2006; Ord. No. 2006-O-90, 11-28-2006; Ord. No. 2006-O-103, 12-12-2006; Ord. No. 2007-O-63, 9-11-2007; Ord. No. 2007-O-94, 12-11-2007; Ord. No. 2007-O-95, 12-11-2007; Ord. No. 2008-O-54, 8-26-2008; Ord. No. 2010-O- 27, 5-11-2010; Ord. No. 2010-O-28, 5-11-2010; Ord. No. 2010-O-57, 9-28-2010; Ord. No. 2012-O-33, 7-24-2012; Ord. No. 2012-O-57, 10-23-2012; Ord. No. 2013-O-51, 10-8-2013; Ord. No. 2014-O-8, 2-25-2014; Ord. No. 2014-O-22, 5-27-2014; Ord. No. 2014-O-23, 5-27-2014; Ord. No. 2015-O-35, 8-25-2015; Ord. No. 2016-O-41, 8-23-2016) 
Sec. 10-10. - Payment, disposition, and proration of fees. 
(a)  The amount of such fee, as is hereinbefore provided for licenses, shall be paid to the commissioner at the time application is made either for the issuance of a license or the renewal thereof, and shall be forthwith turned over to the Village Treasurer. In the event the license applied for is denied, such payment shall be returned to the applicant; if the license is granted, such payment shall be deposited in the general corporate fund or in such other funds as the Village Board of Trustees may, by appropriate action, direct. 
(b)  When an application for a license requires the applicant to seek an amendment to this chapter by the Board of Trustees, either to increase the number of licenses in a permitted classification or to otherwise amend the requirements under which a license may be issued, the applicant may defer payment of the license fee until a date no later than 14 days after the date upon which the ordinance making such amendment is adopted by the Board of Trustees, or the date of issuance of the license, whichever is sooner. 
(Code 1993, § 11-10; Ord. No. 2001-O-48, 7-10-2001) 
Sec. 10-11. - Number of licenses. 
    The following shall be the number of licenses to be issued in each Class: 
(1)  a.  Class A: 3. 
b.  Class A-1: 0. 
(2)  Class B: 6. 
a.  Class B-1: 2. 
b.  Class B-2: 1. 
(3)  Class C: 4. 
a.  Class C-1: 1. 
b.  Class C-B: 0. 
c.  Class C-B-1: 0. 
(4)  Class D: 3. 
(5)  Class E: Unlimited. 
(6)  Class F: 1. 
(7)  Class G: 1. 
On and after March 14, 1995, no further Class G Licenses shall issue and the Class G License shall be eliminated upon the expiration without renewal, or the revocation of, or the surrender of the last Class G License held prior to March 14, 1995. 
(8)  Class H: 1. 
(9)  Class I: 7. 
(10)  Class J: 0. 
(11)  Class K: 1. 
(12)  Class L: 2. 
(13)  Class M: 2. 
(14)  Class M-1: 1. 
(15)  Class N: 0. 
(16)  Class O: 1. 
(17)  Class P: 1. 
(18)  Class Q: 1. 
(19)  Class T: 1. 
(Code 1993, § 11-11; Ord. No. 75-O-3, 1-7-1975; Ord. No. 76-O-2, 1-20-1976; Ord. No. 79-O-5, 2-20-1979; Ord. No. 79-O-23, 6-5-1979; Ord. No. 79-O-57, 11-16-1979; Ord. No. 82-O-28, 6-15-1982; Ord. No. 82-O-47, 9-21-1982; Ord. No. 82-O-68, 12-21-1982; Ord. No. 83-O-71, 11-15-1983; Ord. No. 83-O-74; Ord. No. 83-O-76; Ord. No. 84-O-35, 9-18-1984; Ord. No. 89-O-1, 1-17-1989; Ord. No. 90-O-6, 2-6-1990; Ord. No. 90-O-49, 7-2-1990; Ord. No. 90-O-91, 12-18-1990; Ord. No. 91-O-7, 2-19-1991; Ord. No. 91-O-39, 6-18-1991; Ord. No. 91-O-73, 11-5-1991; Ord. No. 92-O-7, 1-21-1992; Ord. No. 95-O-12, 2-28-1995; Ord. No. 95-O-31, 4-25-1995; Ord. No. 95-O-32, 5-9-1995; Ord. No. 96-O-104, 12-10-1996; Ord. No. 97-O-46, 6-24-1997; Ord. No. 98-O-32, 4-28-1998; Ord. No. 98-O-33, 4-28-1998; Ord. No. 98-O-36, 5-12-1998; Ord. No. 99-O-14, 3-9-1999; Ord. No. 2001-O-71, 11-13-2001; Ord. No. 2001-O-72, 11-13-2001; Ord. No. 2001-O-73, 11-13-2001; Ord. No. 2002-O-83, 11-26-2002; Ord. No. 2003-O-3, 2-11-2003; Ord. No. 2003-O-72, 10-14-2003; Ord. No. 2003-O-86, 11-24-2003; Ord. No. 2003-O-87, 11-24-2003; Ord. No. 2004-O-48, 5-11-2004; Ord. No. 2004-O-67, 7-13-2004; Ord. No. 2005-O- 66, 8-23-2005; Ord. No. 2005-O-71, 9-13-2005; Ord. No. 2005-O-84, 10-11-2005; Ord. No. 2005-O-112, 12-13-2005; Ord. No. 2005-O-119, 12-13-2005; Ord. No. 2006-O-9, 3-28-2006; Ord. No. 2006-O-40, 5-23-2006; Ord. No. 2006-O-61, 8-8-2006; Ord. No. 2006-O-62, 8-8-2006; Ord. No. 2006-O-90, 11-28-2006; Ord. No. 2007-O-10, 2-13-2007; Ord. No. 2007-O-42, 8-28-2007; Ord. No. 2007-O-94, 12-11-2007; Ord. No. 2007-O-95, 12-11-2007; Ord. No. 2008-O-23, 4-22-2008; Ord. No. 2008-O-82, 12-9-2008; Ord. No. 2009-O-17, 2-10-2009; Ord. No. 2009-O-19, 3-10-2009; Ord. No. 2009-O-28, 4-14-2009; Ord. No. 2009-O-52, 9-8-2009; Ord. No. 2009-O-75, 11-24-2009; Ord. No. 2010-O-44, 7-27-2010; Ord. No. 2010-O-57, 9-28-2010; Ord. No. 2010-O-72, 11-23-2010; Ord. No. 2011-O-14, 3-8-2011; Ord. No. 2011-O-28, 5-24-2011; Ord. No. 2011-O-29, 6-14-2011; Ord. No. 2011-O-87, 1-10-2012; Ord. No. 2012-O-2, 4-10-2012; Ord. No. 2012-O-3, 2-14-2012; Ord. No. 2012-O-9, 4-24-2012; Ord. No. 2012-O-10, 4-24-2012; Ord. No. 2012-O-32, 7-24-2012; Ord. No. 2012-O-33, 7-24-2012; Ord. No. 2012-O-41, 9-11-2012; Ord. No. 2012-O-57, 10-23-2012; Ord. No. 2012-O-59, 11-27-2012; Ord. No. 2013-O-3, 2-12-2013; Ord. No. 2013-O-4, 2-12-2013; Ord. No. 2013-O-5, 2-26-2013; Ord. No. 2013-O-11, 3-12-2013; Ord. No. 2013-O-12, 3-26-2013; Ord. No. 2013-O-22, 5-28-2013; Ord. No. 2013-O-49, 10-8-2013; Ord. No. 2013-O-51, 10-8-2013; Ord. No. 2013-O-87, 11-26-2013; Ord. No. 2014-O-8, 2-25-2014; Ord. No. 2014-O-22, 5-27-2014; Ord. No. 2014-O-33, 6-24-2014; Ord. No. 2014-O-37, 6-24-2014; Ord. No. 2014-O-76, 12-9-2014; Ord. No. 2015-O-5, 3-10-2015; Ord. No. 2015-O-14, 4-28-2015; Ord. No. 2015-O-35, 8-25-2015; Ord. No. 2015-O-80, 12-8-2015; Ord. No. 2015-O-81, 1-12-2016; Ord. No. 2016-O-16, 4-26-2016; Ord. No. 2016-O-23, 4-26-2016; Ord. No. 2016-O-24, 5-10-2016; Ord. No. 2017-O-13, 3-14-2017; Ord. No. 2017-O-17, § 2, 4-11-2017; Ord. No. 2018-O-49, § 2, 7-10-2018; Ord. No. 2018-O-50, § 2, 7-10-2018; Ord. No. 2018-O-79, § 2, 11-27-2018) 
Sec. 10-12. - Record of licenses; notification of certain officials of revocation, etc. 
(a)  The commissioner shall keep or cause to be kept a complete record of all licenses, issued by him under this chapter, and shall furnish the Clerk, Treasurer and Chief of Police each with a copy thereof; upon issuance of any new license, or the revocation of any existing license, the commissioner shall give written notice of such action to each of these officers within 48 hours of such action. 
(b)  The commissioner shall report to the Village Board of Trustees all of his acts and doings in the enforcement of this chapter and in the collection of liquor license fees, including the date collected, and date the fees were turned over to the Village Treasurer. 
(Code 1993, § 11-12; Ord. No. 2006-O-9, 3-28-2006) 
Sec. 10-13. - Transfer of license. 
    A license shall be purely a personal privilege, good for not to exceed one year after issuance unless sooner revoked as in this chapter provided, and shall not constitute property, nor shall it be subject to attachment, garnishment or execution, nor shall it be alienable or transferable, voluntarily or involuntarily, or subject to being encumbered or hypothecated. Such license shall cease upon the death of the licensee and shall not descend by the laws of testate or intestate devolution, provided that executors or administrators of the estate of any deceased licensee, and the trustee of any insolvent or bankrupt licensee, when such estate consists in part of alcoholic liquor under the order of the appropriate court, may exercise the privileges of the deceased or insolvent or bankrupt licensee after the death of such decedent, or such insolvency or bankruptcy until the expiration of such license, but not longer than six months after the death, bankruptcy or insolvency of such licensee. 
(Code 1993, § 11-13; Ord. No. 2006-O-9, 3-28-2006) 
Sec. 10-14. - Change in personnel. 
(a)  Any changes in partnerships, officers, directors, persons holding directly, beneficially, or through any form of indirect or concealed ownership or control, more than five percent of the stock or ownership interest, or managers of establishments licensed under this chapter, shall be reported in writing to the Local Liquor Control Commissioner within ten days of the change. All new personnel shall meet all the standards of this chapter and must otherwise qualify to hold a liquor license. All such changes in personnel shall be subject to review by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner. 
(b)  When a license has been issued to a partnership and a change of ownership occurs resulting in a partnership interest by one who is not eligible to hold a liquor license, said license shall terminate. 
(c)  When a license has been issued to a corporation and a change takes place in officers, directors, shareholders of more than five percent of the stock, resulting in the holding of such shares of stock by one who is not eligible for a license, said license shall terminate. 
(d)  When a license has been issued to an individual who is no longer eligible for a license, said license shall terminate. 
(Code 1993, § 11-14) 
Sec. 10-15. - Renewal of license. 
    Any licensee may renew his license at the expiration thereof, provided that he is then qualified to receive a license and the premises for which such renewal license is sought are suitable for such purposes; provided further, that the renewal privilege herein provided for shall not be construed as a vested right which shall in any case prevent the Village Board of Trustees from decreasing from year to year the number of licenses to be issued within its jurisdiction. 
(Code 1993, § 11-15; Ord. No. 2006-O-9, 3-28-2006) 
Sec. 10-16. - Change of location. 
    A liquor license shall permit the sale of alcoholic liquor only on the premises described in the application and license. Such location may be changed only upon written permission to make such change, issued by the commissioner. No change of location shall be permitted unless the proposed new location is a proper one for the sale of alcoholic liquor under the laws of this State and the ordinances of the village. 
(Code 1993, § 11-16; Ord. No. 2006-O-9, 3-28-2006) 
Sec. 10-17. - Peddling. 
    It shall be unlawful to peddle alcoholic liquor in the village. 
(Code 1993, § 11-17; Ord. No. 2006-O-9, 3-28-2006) 
Sec. 10-18. - Sanitary conditions. 
    All premises used for the sale of alcoholic liquor, or for the storage of such liquor for sale, shall be kept in full compliance with the applicable statutes and ordinances regulating the condition of premises for the storage and sale of food for human consumption. 
(Code 1993, § 11-18; Ord. No. 2006-O-9, 3-28-2006; Ord. No. 2015-O-39, 7-28-2015) 
Sec. 10-19. - Identification cards. 
(a)  If a licensee or the licensee's agent or employee believes or has reason to believe that a sale or delivery of alcoholic liquor is prohibited because of the age of the prospective recipient, the licensee or agent or employee thereof shall, before making such sale or delivery, demand presentation of one of the following forms of positive identification, each containing proof of age and a photograph of the prospective recipient, without which such sale or delivery shall not be permitted: 
(1)  A motor vehicle operator's license or an identification card issued by the Secretary of State of the State of Illinois; or 
(2)  A motor vehicle operator's license or identification card issued by another State of the United States of America, or a foreign government; 
(3)  A passport; or 
(4)  A military identification card issued to a member of the armed forces of the United States of America. 
(b)  No person shall transfer, alter or deface such an identification card; use the identification card of another; carry or use a false or forged identification card; or obtain an identification card by means of false information. 
(c)  Any person who is convicted of a violation of this section shall, for the first offense be fined not less than $100.00 nor more than $250.00, and for a second or subsequent offense shall be fined not less than $250.00 nor more than $750.00. 
(Code 1993, § 11-19; Ord. No. 83-O-69, 12-6-1983; Ord. No. 94-O-92, 12-13-1994; Ord. No. 2006-O-9, 3-28-2006) 
Sec. 10-20. - Sales by minors. 
(a)  No licensee holding a license permitting the sale of alcohol liquor for immediate consumption shall employ or permit any person under the age of 21 years to attend bar, or to pour, draw, mix, or otherwise prepare alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises, provided that nothing herein shall prohibit an employee of such a licensee who is under the age of 21 years from performing wait staff functions or carrying alcoholic liquor to and from tables as part of the licensee's service. 
(b)  No licensee holding a license permitting the retail sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption off the premises shall employee or permit any person under the age of 21 years to complete the sale of alcoholic liquor to any customer. 
(Code 1993, § 11-20; Ord. No. 86-O-59, 10-21-1986; Ord. No. 2006-O-9, 3-28-2006) 
Sec. 10-21. - Hours of sale. 
(a)  Permitted hours of sale. Subject to the provisions of subsections (b) through (d) of this section, the permitted hours of sale for each class of liquor license shall be as set forth in the table below. 
CLASS OF LICENSE PERMITTED HOURS OF SALE A, A-1, B, B-1, C, C-1, C-B, C-B-1, D, E, J, K, L, M, N, O, P Sunday through Thursday: 11:00 a.m. to 12:00 midnight Friday, Saturday, and December 31: 11:00 a.m. to 1:00 a.m. B-2 Sunday through Thursday: 12:00 noon to 10:00 p.m., 11:00 p.m. for private parties. Friday, Saturday, and December 31: 12:00 noon to 12:00 midnight F Sunday through Friday: 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 midnight Friday, Saturday, and December 31: 8:00 a.m. to 1:00 a.m. G, H, I Every Day: 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. T Every Day: 1 hour prior to the scheduled time of the first motion picture of the day but not earlier than 11:00 a.m. to 12:00 midnight  
All closing times above which are stated in the a.m. shall refer to the early morning of the day following the opening time. For example, when open on Fridays, a Class A licensee must cease selling alcoholic liquor by 1:00 a.m. Saturday morning. 
(b)  Special hours for the Class NR zoning district. For all liquor licenses held by businesses located within the NR Zoning District, except for Classes D and E, the hours of permitted sale shall be 11:00 a.m. to 11:30 p.m. 
(c)  Package sales for Class A-1, B-1, C-1 and C-B-1. Notwithstanding the hours of sale set forth above, it shall be unlawful for holders of Class A-1, B-1, C-1 and C-B-1 licenses to sell or offer for sale at retail any alcoholic liquor in original packages for consumption off the premises after 10:00 p.m. 
(d)  Food sales. Licensed premises may remain open for the sale of food during the hours within which the sale of alcoholic liquor is prohibited, but no alcoholic liquor may be sold to or consumed by the public during such hours. 
(Code 1993, § 11-21; Ord. No. 75-O-3, 1-7-1975; Ord. No. 75-O-5, 1-21-1975, 2005-O-85, 10-1-2005; Ord. No. 2006-O-9, 3-28-2006; Ord. No. 2006-O-37, 4-25-2006; Ord. No. 2007-O-94, 12-11-2007; Ord. No. 2010-O-57, 9-28-2010; Ord. No. 2012-O-56, 11-13-2012; Ord. No. 2013-O-25, 5-28-2013; Ord. No. 2013-O- 44, 8-27-2013; Ord. No. 2014-O-14, 4-8-2014; Ord. No. 2016-O-41, 8-23-2016; Ord. No. 2017-O-55, 10-10-2017; Ord. No. 2018-O-58, § 3, 9-25-2018) 
Sec. 10-22. - Signs. 
    Any sign on premises indicating that alcoholic liquor is sold thereon shall be subordinate to the sign indicating the principal business of the licensed premises and shall conform to all applicable sign ordinances of the village. No such sign shall advertise any particular alcoholic product. 
(Code 1993, § 11-22; Ord. No. 2006-O-9, 3-28-2006) 
Sec. 10-23. - Sales to minors, known substance abusers, habitual drunkards and mental incompetents. 
    No licensee or officer, associate, member, representative, agent or employee of such licensee shall sell, give or deliver alcoholic liquor to any person who is under the age of 21 years, or to any person known by him to be a known substance abuser, an habitual drunkard, insane, mentally ill, mentally deficient or in need of mental treatment. It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years to purchase or obtain alcoholic liquor or to misrepresent his age for the purpose of purchasing or obtaining alcoholic liquor in any place in the village where alcoholic liquor is sold. In every place in the village where alcoholic liquor is sold, there shall be displayed at all times in a prominent place a printed card which shall be supplied by the Village Clerk and which shall read substantially as follows: 
"Warning to Minors: You are subject to a fine up to $750.00 under the ordinances of the village, if you purchase beer, wine or alcoholic liquor or misrepresent your age for the purpose of purchasing or obtaining beer, wine or alcoholic liquor." 
(Code 1993, § 11-23; Ord. No. 86-O-59, 10-21-1986; Ord. No. 96-O-11, 4-9-1996; Ord. No. 2006-O-9, 3-28-2006) 
Sec. 10-24. - Sales at less than the regular price. 
    Licensees holding a license which allows consumption of alcoholic liquor on premises may sell alcoholic liquor at a price less the price regularly charged by the licensee for such beverage only in compliance with section 6-28 and 6-28.5 of the Illinois Liquor Control Act, 235 ILCS 5/6-28 and 235 ILCS 5/6-28.5. 
(Code 1993, § 11-24; Ord. No. 85-O-31, 7-2-1985; Ord. No. 2006-O-9, 3-28-2006; Ord. No. 2015-O-39, 7-28-2015) 
Secs. 10-25-10-51. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PROHIBITIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES 

Sec. 10-52. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article, the term "under age person" means any person who is less than 21 years of age. 
(Code 1993, § 11-25.1; Ord. No. 2006-O-9, 3-28-2006) 
Sec. 10-53. - Unlawful possession and consumption by under age persons. 
(a)  Except as provided in section 10-54, it shall be unlawful for any under age person to consume, purchase or accept delivery of alcoholic liquor or to have alcoholic liquor in his possession within the village. 
(b)  Except as provided in section 10-54, it shall be unlawful for any person, after purchasing or otherwise obtaining alcoholic liquor, to sell, give or deliver such alcoholic liquor to an under age person. 
(Code 1993, § 11-25.2; Ord. No. 2006-O-9, 3-28-2006) 
Sec. 10-54. - Permitted possession and consumption by under age persons. 
    The following activities are excluded from section 10-53 and may lawfully be engaged in by under age persons: 
(1)  The possession and dispensing or consumption of wine in the performance of a religious service or ceremony; 
(2)  The consumption of alcoholic liquor under the direct supervision and approval of the under age person's parents or guardians in the parent's or guardian's home, provided, that this exception shall not apply if the under age person leaves the parent's or guardian's home while still under the influence of alcoholic liquor; and 
(3)  The purchase, possession, or acceptance of the delivery of alcoholic liquor when done under the direction and supervision of a law enforcement officer engaged in the officer's official duties. 
(Code 1993, § 11-25.3; Ord. No. 94-O-65, 9-13-1994; Ord. No. 2006-O-9, 3-28-2006) 
Sec. 10-55. - Parental responsibility. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any parent or guardian to permit his child or ward, if an under age person, to consume, purchase or accept delivery of alcoholic liquor, except as permitted by section 10-53. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to permit his residence to be used by an under age person in a manner which constitutes a violation of section 10-53. A parent or guardian shall be deemed to have permitted his residence to be used in violation of section 10-53 if he knowingly authorizes, knows or reasonably should know that such use was occurring or enables such use to occur by failing to control access to either the residence or the alcoholic liquor maintained therein. 
(c)  Every person whose residence is used by an under age person, for the consumption of alcoholic liquor in a manner which constitutes a violation of section 10-53(a) shall be presumed to have permitted the conduct which constitutes the violation of section 10-53(a) to occur, unless said presumption is rebutted by a preponderance of the evidence. 
(Code 1993, § 11-25.4; Ord. No. 2006-O-9, 3-28-2006) 
Sec. 10-56. - Responsibility of the owner or occupant of premises. 
    It shall be unlawful for any owner or occupant of any premises located within the village to permit any under age person other than the owner's or occupant's own child or ward to remain on such premises while in possession of alcoholic liquor or while consuming alcoholic liquor in violation of section 10-53. 
(Code 1993, § 11-25.5; Ord. No. 2006-O-9, 3-28-2006) 
Sec. 10-57. - Penalty. 
    Every person convicted of a violation of section 10-53 shall be subject to either or both of the following penalties: 
(1)  A fine of not less than $100.00 upon the first conviction and not less than $750.00 for any subsequent conviction; and 
(2)  A period of supervision not to exceed one year. 
(Code 1993, § 11-25.6; Ord. No. 86-O-65, 11-18-1986; Ord. No. 96-O-11, 4-9-1996; Ord. No. 2006-O-9, 3-28-2006) 
Sec. 10-58. - Supervision. 
    Each order of supervision shall require the defendant, as a condition of the satisfactory completion of the term, to comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Not to violate any criminal statute or quasi-criminal ordinance of any jurisdiction; 
(2)  To report to and appear in person before such person or agency as may be directed by the court; 
(3)  Mandatory attendance at remedial counseling, or similar program as directed by the court; 
(4)  To pay the reasonable cost of the counseling referred to in subsection (3) of this section. 
(Code 1993, § 11-25.7; Ord. No. 86-O-65, 11-18-1986; Ord. No. 2006-O-9, 3-28-2006) 
Sec. 10-59. - Civil liability for violation. 
(a)  Every person who is injured, in person or property, by any intoxicated under age person has a right of action in his own name, severally or jointly for damages (including reasonable attorney's fees and expenses) against any person: 
(1)  Who by selling, giving, or delivering alcoholic liquor in violation of section 10-23 or 10-53(b) causes, or contributes to, the intoxication of such under age person; 
(2)  Who by permitting consumption of alcoholic liquor in violation of section 10-55 or section 10-56 causes, or contributes to, the intoxication of such under age person; or 
(3)  Who causes such injury and had become intoxicated by consuming alcoholic liquor in violation of section 10-53(a). 
(b)  An action for damages under this subsection may be brought in the circuit court. An action for damages under this subsection shall be barred unless commenced within one year after the right of action arises. 
(Code 1993, § 11-25.8; Ord. No. 92-O-66, 10-20-1992; Ord. No. 2006-O-9, 3-28-2006) 
Sec. 10-60. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  Any person who distributes or sells alcoholic liquor at any place within the village without having a current valid license so to do, issued under the provisions of this chapter, or who shall make any false statement or otherwise violate any of the provisions of this chapter in obtaining any license hereunder, or who having obtained the license hereunder, shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter or of the restrictions of said license with respect to the possession, distribution or sale of alcoholic liquor, or with respect to the maintenance of the licensed premises, or who shall violate any other provisions of this chapter shall be fined not less than $100.00 nor more than $1,000.00. 
(b)  Each day on or during which any person violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense. 
(c)  Any person under the age of 21 years who, for the purpose of buying, or accepting or receiving alcoholic liquor from a licensee, represents that he is at least 21 years of age, or who accepts or receives alcoholic liquor from a person other than a licensee, shall for the first offense be fined not less than $100.00 nor more than $250.00, and for a second or subsequent offense shall be fined not less than $250.00 nor more than $750.00. 
(d)  Every act or omission of whatsoever nature constituting a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, by any officer, director, manager or other agent or employee of any licensee, shall be deemed and held to be the act of such employer or licensee, and said employer or licensee shall be punishable in the same manner as if said act or omission had been done by him personally. 
(Code 1993, § 11-26; Ord. No. 86-O-59, 10-21-1986; Ord. No. 96-O-11, 4-9-1996; Ord. No. 96-O-59, 8-27-1996; Ord. No. 2006-O-9, 3-28-2006) 
Sec. 10-61. - Hearing by local Liquor Control Commissioner; imposition of fine; revocation or suspension of license. 
(a)  The Local Liquor Control Commissioner may revoke or suspend up to 30 days any license issued by him if he determines the licensee has violated any of the provisions of this chapter or any applicable rules or regulations established by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner or the State Commissioner which is not inconsistent with law. In addition to any such suspension or revocation, or in lieu of suspension or revocation as the case may be, the Local Liquor Control Commissioner may levy a fine on the licensee for such violations. The fine imposed shall not exceed $1,000.00 for the first violation within a 12-month period, $1,500.00 for a second violation occurring within a 12-month period after the date of the preceding offense, and $2,500.00 for a third or subsequent violation within a 12-month period after the date of the first offense. Not more than $15,000.00 in aggregate fines under this section may be imposed against any licensee during the time period over which the same license is held and renewed annually by the licensee, however, the time period for the purposes of the limitation on fines in this sentence shall be ended by any change in ownership, voluntary surrender of license, change in classification of license, or event that requires a new application for license or change of classification of license to be submitted to the Local Liquor Control Commissioner. Subject to the foregoing limitations, in determining the amount of a fine imposed, length of a suspension imposed or revocation of a license under this section, the Local Liquor Control Commissioner may consider in aggravation prior violations of other village laws and ordinances by the same licensee, including, but not limited to, those restricting the sale of tobacco to underage persons. Additionally, the Local Liquor Control Commission may also require a licensee that has violated any of the provisions of this chapter to provide Beverage Alcohol Sellers and Servers Education and Training (BASSET) certified by the State Liquor Control Commission to its employees as a condition of further operation of the licensed premises. 
(b)  No such license shall be so revoked or suspended, or fine imposed under subsection (a) of this section, except after a public hearing by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner with a three-day written notice to the licensee affording the licensee an opportunity to appear and defend. If the Local Liquor Control Commissioner has reason to believe that any continued operation of a particular licensed premises will immediately threaten the health, safety or welfare of the community, he may, upon the issuance of a written order stating the reason for such conclusion and without notice or hearing, order the licensed premises closed for not more than seven days, giving the licensee an opportunity to be heard during that period, except that if such licensee shall also be engaged in the conduct of another business or businesses on the licensed premises, such order shall not be applicable to such other business or businesses. Appeals shall be taken to the Illinois Liquor Control Commission and the Circuit Court in the manner provided by law. 
(c)  Public hearings conducted by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner incident to the revocation or suspension of any license issued by him shall be hearings of record. Any order of suspension or revocation shall be based on written findings of fact, and such findings shall be supported by substantial evidence in the light of the whole record. In the event an appeal from the order is taken, review of the order shall be on the record. The commissioner shall certify and file the official record of the proceedings taken and prepared by a certified court reporter within five days after notice of the filing of such appeal. 
(Code 1993, § 11-27; Ord. No. 2001-O-7, 2-27-2001; Ord. No. 2002-O-79, 2-25-2003; Ord. No. 2006-O-9, 3-28-2006) 
Sec. 10-62. - Complaint of violation. 
    Any person shall have the right to file a complaint with the Local Liquor Control Commissioner stating that any licensee, subject to the jurisdiction of the Local Liquor Control Commissioner, has been or is violating the provisions of this chapter or the rules or regulations issued pursuant hereto. Such complaint shall be in writing in the form prescribed by the local commissioner and shall be signed and sworn to by the parties complaining. 
(Code 1993, § 11-28; Ord. No. 86-O-59, 10-21-1986; Ord. No. 2006-O-9, 3-28-2006) 
Sec. 10-63. - Exceptions. 
(a)  The provisions of this chapter do not apply to: 
(1)  Alcohol used in the manufacture of denatured alcohol produced in accordance with Acts of Congress and regulations promulgated thereunder; 
(2)  Flavoring extracts and syrups and food products; 
(3)  Patent and proprietary medicines, medicinal, antiseptic, culinary and toilet preparations; 
(4)  Scientific, industrial and chemical products; 
(5)  Scientific, chemical, experimental or mechanical purposes; 
(6)  Any liquid or solid containing one-half of one percent, or less, of alcohol by volume. 
(b)  Nothing contained in this chapter shall prohibit any duly licensed practicing physician or dentist from possessing or using alcoholic liquor in the strict practice of his profession, or hospitals or other institutions caring for sick and diseased persons from possessing and using alcoholic liquor for the treatment of bona fide patients of that hospital or other institution, or drugstores employing a licensed pharmacist from possessing and using alcoholic liquor in the concoction of prescriptions of duly licensed physicians, or the possession and dispensation of wine by the authorized representative of any church for the purpose of conducting any bona fide rite or religious ceremony conducted by that church. 
(Code 1993, § 11-29; Ord. No. 2006-O-9, 3-28-2006) 
Sec. 10-64. - Sale of kegs. 
(a)  A licensee who sells a keg shall affix to each keg sold a tag, furnished by the Liquor Control Commissioner, containing an identification number enabling the purchaser to be identified in accordance with subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  The licensee shall keep a logbook of all kegs sold, showing the identification number on the tag affixed to each keg, and the purchaser's name, address, telephone number, driver's license/state identification number, date of birth, and signature. The logbook shall be available for inspection by the Wilmette Police Department during normal business hours. 
(c)  The licensee shall require the purchaser to deposit, at the time of the sale of a keg, at least $70.00 for sale of a keg with pumper, and at least $20.00 for sale of a keg without a pumper. The deposit shall be refunded only upon the return of the keg with the tag properly affixed. 
(d)  The licensee shall require the purchaser, at the time of the sale, to sign a form to be provided by the Liquor Control Commissioner, setting forth the provisions of subsection (b) of this section and informing the purchaser that the deposit will be forfeited if the keg is not returned with the tag properly affixed. The licensee shall retain this form for 90 days after the sale. 
(e)  Any keg not returned with the tag properly affixed within 60 days following the date of sale shall be considered lost, and the deposit shall be forfeited. The licensee shall notify the Wilmette Police Department on a monthly basis of all deposits that are forfeited. 
(f)  A licensee may retain the forfeited deposit. 
(g)  It shall be unlawful to possess a keg within the village which does not have a proper tag affixed or, if the keg was purchased outside the village, without proof of purchase for the keg, including the name and address of the seller. 
(Code 1993, § 11-30; Ord. No. 74-O-27, 7-16-1974; Ord. No. 92-O-66, 10-20-1992; Ord. No. 2006-O-9, 3-28-2006) 
Chapter 12 - MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 12-1. - Assault. 
    It is unlawful for any person to commit an assault in the village. A person commits an assault when, without lawful authority, he engages in conduct which places another in reasonable apprehension of receiving a battery. 
(Code 1993, § 12-1) 
Sec. 12-2. - Battery. 
    It is unlawful for any person to commit a battery in the village. A person commits battery if he intentionally or knowingly without legal justification and by any means: 
(1)  Causes bodily harm to an individual; or 
(2)  Makes physical contact of an insulting or provoking nature with an individual. 
(Code 1993, § 12-2) 
Secs. 12-3-12-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CURFEW 

Sec. 12-23. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Curfew hours means: 
(1)  Between 11:00 p.m. on any Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday or Thursday, inclusive, and 6:00 a.m. on the following day; 
(2)  Between 12:01 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on any Saturday; and 
(3)  Between 12:01 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on any Sunday. 
    Emergency means an unforeseen combination of circumstances, or the resulting state, that calls for immediate action. The term "emergency" includes, but is not limited to, a fire, a natural disaster, an automobile accident, or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life. 
    Establishment means any privately-owned place of business operated for a profit to which the public is invited, including, but not limited to, any place of amusement or entertainment. 
    Guardian means: 
(1)  A person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a minor; or 
(2)  A public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by a court. 
    Minor means any person under 17 years of age. 
    Operator means any individual, firm, association, partnership or corporation operating, managing or conducting any establishment. The term "operator" includes the members or partners of an association or partnership, and the officers of a corporation. 
    Parent means a person who is: 
(1)  A natural parent, adoptive parent or step-parent of another person; or 
(2)  At least 18 years of age, and authorized by a parent or guardian to have the care and custody of a minor. 
    Public place means any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access, including, but not limited to, streets, highways, and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transport facilities and shops. 
    Remain means to: 
(1)  Linger or stay; or 
(2)  Fail to leave premises when requested to do so by a police officer or the owner, operator or other person in control of the premises. 
    Serious bodily injury means bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of death or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement, or protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ. 
(Code 1993, § 12-3.1; Ord. No. 76-O-53, 12-7-1976; Ord. No. 2004-O-39, 4-27-2004) 
Sec. 12-24. - Offenses. 
(a)  A minor commits an offense if he remains in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the village during curfew hours. 
(b)  A parent or guardian of a minor commits an offense if he knowingly permits, or by insufficient control allows, the minor to remain in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the village during curfew hours. 
(c)  The owner, operator or any employee of an establishment commits an offense if he knowingly allows a minor to remain upon the premises of the establishment during curfew hours. 
(Code 1993, § 12-3.2; Ord. No. 76-O-53, 12-7-1976; Ord. No. 2004-O-39, 4-27-2004) 
Sec. 12-25. - Defenses. 
(a)  It is a defense to prosecution under section 12-24(a) that the minor was: 
(1)  Accompanied by the minor's parent or guardian; 
(2)  On an errand at the direction of the minor's parent or guardian, without any detour or stop; 
(3)  In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel; 
(4)  Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home from an employment activity, without any detour or stop; 
(5)  Involved in an emergency; 
(6)  On the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence or abutting the residence of a next-door neighbor, if the neighbor did not complain to the Police Department about the minor's presence; 
(7)  Attending an official school, religious or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city, a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor, or going to or returning home from, without any detour or stop, an official school, religious or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city, a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor; 
(8)  Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the right of assembly; or 
(9)  Married or had been married, or is an emancipated minor under the Emancipation of Mature Minors Act, as amended. 
(b)  It is a defense to prosecution under section 12-24(c) that the owner, operator or employee of an establishment promptly notified the Police Department that a minor was present on the premises of the establishment during curfew hours and refused to leave. 
(Code 1993, § 12-3.3; Ord. No. 2004-O-39, 4-27-2004) 
Sec. 12-26. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Before taking any enforcement action under this section, a police officer shall ask the apparent offender's age and reason for being in the public place. The police officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest under this section, unless the police officer reasonably believes that an offense has occurred and that, based on any response and other circumstances, no defense in section 12-25 is present. 
(b)  After satisfying the requirements of subsection (a) of this section, a police officer is authorized to detain a minor violating the provisions of section 12-24 for the minor's safety, and to release the minor into the custody of the minor's parent or guardian; provided that such police officer, upon taking custody of the child, shall immediately make a reasonable attempt to notify the minor's parent or guardian of same, and request that the parent or guardian take custody of the minor. 
(Code 1993, § 12-3.4; Ord. No. 2004-O-39, 4-27-2004) 
Sec. 12-27. - Penalties. 
    A person who violates a provision of this chapter is guilty of a separate offense for each day or part of a day during which the violation is committed, continued or permitted. Each offense, upon conviction, is punishable by a fine of not less than $50.00 and not more than $750.00. 
(Code 1993, § 12-3.5; Ord. No. 78-O-27, 8-1-1978; Ord. No. 2004-O-39, 4-27-2004) 
Secs. 12-28-12-57. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DISORDERLY CONDUCT 

Sec. 12-58. - Breach of the peace. 
    It is unlawful for any person to knowingly do any act in such unreasonable manner as to alarm or disturb another and to provoke a breach of the peace in the village. The causing or making of any unnecessary loud noise and shouting or yelling is considered disorderly conduct. 
(Code 1993, § 12-4.1) 
Sec. 12-59. - Disturbing assemblies or other functions. 
    It is unlawful for any person to disturb any lawful assemblage or gathering in the village, or to interfere with or obstruct in any way, any duly authorized parade or public function. 
(Code 1993, § 12-4.2) 
Sec. 12-60. - False fire alarms. 
    It is unlawful for any person knowingly to start or spread any false alarm of fire in the village. 
(Code 1993, § 12-4.3) 
Sec. 12-61. - Consumption of alcohol on public property. 
(a)  It is unlawful to consume beer, wine or alcoholic liquor, as those terms are defined in section 10-2 of this Code, or to be in possession of an open container of beer, wine or alcoholic liquor, while on a public parkway, sidewalk, street, thoroughfare or other public way of the village, or while on a public parking lot owned, leased or operated by the village. 
(b)  The prohibition set forth in subsection (a) of this section shall not apply to: 
(1)  Patrons or employees of a restaurant that is licensed to serve alcohol pursuant to chapter 10 and has received an Outdoor Restaurant Seating License permitting use of the public sidewalk pursuant to chapter 24; or 
(2)  Any person or group that has received from the village approval, a permit or other authorization provided for under this Code for the use of a public parking lot, sidewalk, street, thoroughfare or other public way for a special event, or for a temporary use under the Zoning Ordinance, appendix A, provided such approval, permit or authorization specifically allows the consumption of alcohol and all requirements of chapter 10 are satisfied. 
(Code 1993, § 12-4.4) 
Sec. 12-62. - Use of cooking devices on public property. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to place, use or operate any cooking grill, barbecue grill or any other device using heat and/or open flame for the cooking of food on a public parkway, sidewalk, street, thoroughfare or other public way of the village, or on a public parking lot owned, leased or operated by the village. 
(b)  The prohibition set forth in subsection (a) of this section shall not apply to a person or group that has: 
(1)  Received a permit to conduct a block party as provided in section 20-95, provided that the use of such a device is included in the scope of the permit approved by the Chief of Police; or 
(2)  Received from the village approval, a permit or other authorization provided for under this Code, for the use of a public parking lot, sidewalk, street, thoroughfare or other public way for a special event, or for a temporary use under the Zoning Ordinance, appendix A. 
(3)  Received a license from the village pursuant to section 24-33. 
(Code 1993, § 12-4.5; Ord. No. 2010-O-23, 4-27-2010) 
Secs. 12-63-12-82. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - GAMBLING 

Sec. 12-83. - Prohibited. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to keep a place of gambling in the village by himself, or his agent, or to procure or permit any person to frequent or to come together to play for money or other valuable thing at any game at any place in the village. It is also unlawful for any person to possess or use in the village any table, device, handbook, bagatelle, pigeon hole tables, parlay cards, or paraphernalia or other apparatus for playing at any game, lottery or sport for money or any valuable thing, or keep or allow to be used or rented any table, device, handbook, bagatelle, pigeon hole table, parlay cards, paraphernalia or other apparatus for playing at any game, lottery or sport for money or other valuable thing or to keep or allow to be used or rented any such place for gambling purposes. 
(b)  Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, pursuant to section 27 of the Illinois Video Gaming Act, P.A. 96-34, video gaming is prohibited anywhere in the corporate limits of the village. It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to engage in video gaming, to operate or make available for gambling use a video gaming terminal, or to operate as a licensed establishment for video gaming as provided in the Video Gaming Act. For the purposes of this section, the term "video gaming," "video gaming terminal," and "licensed establishment," shall have the same meaning as provided in the Video Gaming Act, P.A. 96-34. 
(Code 1993, § 12-5; Ord. No. 2009-O-53, 9-8-2009) 
Sec. 12-84. - Exceptions. 
(a)  Bingo. The prohibitions in section 12-83 above shall not apply to participants in the game commonly known as "bingo," provided it is conducted in accordance with "An Act making lawful the conducting of bingo by certain non-profit organizations, requiring licensing and prescribing regulations therefor." (ILCS ch. 230, act 25, § 1 et seq.) 
(b)  Lottery. The prohibitions in section 12-83 above shall not apply to participants in the Illinois State lottery, provided it is conducted in accordance with "An Act to implement and regulate a lottery within the State," (ILCS ch. 20, act 1605, § 1 et seq.) 
(c)  Charitable gaming. The prohibition in section 12-83 above shall not apply to organizers or participants in charitable gaming activities, provided that said activities are conducted in accordance with the Illinois Charitable Games Act, ILCS ch. 230, act 30, §1 et seq. 
(d)  Licensed raffles. The prohibition in section 12-83 above shall not apply to individuals conducting and participating in a raffle conducted in accordance with the Illinois Raffles Act, 230 ILCS 15/0.01 et seq., and licensed in conformance with this section. 
(Code 1993, §§ 12-5.1-12-5.4) 
Secs. 12-85-12-111. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - LICENSED RAFFLES 

Sec. 12-112. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Business means a voluntary organization composed of individuals and businesses who have joined together to advance the commercial, financial, industrial and civic interests of a community. 
    Charitable means an organization or institution organized and operated to benefit an indefinite number of the public. The service rendered to those eligible for benefits must also confer some benefit on the public. 
    Educational means an organization or institution organized and operated to provide systematic instruction in useful branches of learning by methods common to schools and institutions of learning which compare favorably in their scope and intensity with the course of study presented in tax-supported schools. 
    Fraternal means an organization of persons having a common interest, the primary interest of which is to promote the welfare of its members and to provide assistance to the general public in such a way as to lessen the burdens of government by caring for those that would otherwise be cared for by the government. 
    Labor means an organization composed of workers organized with the objective of betterment of the conditions of those engaged in such pursuit and the development of a higher degree of efficiency in their respective occupations. 
    Non-profit means an organization or institution organized and conducted on a not-for-profit basis with no personal profit inuring to anyone as a result of the operation. 
    Religious means any church, congregation, society, or organization founded for the purpose of religious worship. 
    Veterans means an organization or association comprised of members of which substantially are all individuals who are veterans or spouses, widows, or widowers of veterans, the primary purpose of which is to promote the welfare of its members and to provide assistance to the general public in such a way as to confer a public benefit. 
(Code 1993, § 12-5.4.1) 
Sec. 12-113. - License qualification. 
(a)  Licenses to operate raffles shall be granted only to bona fide non-profit religious, charitable, labor, business, fraternal, educational or veteran's organizations that operate without profit to their members, and which have been in existence continuously for a period of five years immediately before making application for a license and which have had during that entire five year period a bona fide membership engaged in carrying out their objects. 
(b)  The following are ineligible for any license under this section: 
(1)  Any person who has been convicted of a felony; 
(2)  Any person who is or has been a professional gambler or gambling promoter; 
(3)  Any person who is not of good moral character; 
(4)  Any firm or corporation in which a person described in subsections (b)(1), (2) or (3) of this section has a proprietary, equitable or credit interest, or in which such a person is active or employed; 
(5)  Any organization in which a person defined in subsections (b)(1), (2) or (3) of this section is an officer, director, or employee, whether compensated or not; 
(6)  Any organization in which a person defined in subsections (b)(1), (2) or (3) of this section is to participate in the management or operation of a raffle as defined in this division. 
(Code 1993, § 12-5.4.2) 
Sec. 12-114. - License application; fee. 
    An application for license to operate a raffle shall be made in conformity with the general requirements of this section relating to applications for licenses. Said application shall not require the payment of a licensing fee. The application shall be on a form provided by the village and shall contain such pertinent information as the Village Manager shall require in order to determine compliance with the provisions of this section and the statutes of the State. 
(Code 1993, § 12-5.4.3) 
Sec. 12-115. - License issuance; revocation; appeal. 
(a)  The Village Manager shall cause a license to be issued upon compliance with the provisions of this article. The Village Manager may also revoke or suspend any license issued under this section if the Village Manager determines that the licensee has violated any provision of this section. Upon denial of application for a license or upon suspension or revocation of a license, the Village Manager shall state the basis for the denial, suspension, or revocation in writing to the applicant or licensee, as the case may be. 
(b)  The applicant may appeal a decision of the Village Manager denying an application for a license or suspending or revoking a license to the Village Board by submitting notice of appeal in writing to the Village Clerk no more than 14 days after notice of a suspension, revocation or denial of the license application is sent by the Village Manager via first class mail and certified mail, return receipt requested. 
(Code 1993, § 12-5.4.4) 
Sec. 12-116. - Restrictions on operations. 
(a)  Any raffle license issued pursuant to the provisions of this section shall be subject to the following restrictions: 
(1)  The aggregate retail value of all prizes and merchandise awarded by a licensee in a single raffle shall not exceed $100,000.00; 
(2)  The maximum retail value of any single prize awarded by a licensee in a single raffle shall not exceed $50,000.00; 
(3)  The maximum price which may be charged for each raffle chance issued or sold shall not exceed $100.00; and 
(4)  The maximum number of days during which chances may be issued or sold shall not exceed 180 days. 
(b)  The restrictions hereinabove set forth may be varied by the Village Board upon showing of unusual circumstances or hardship. 
(Code 1993, § 12-5.4.5) 
Sec. 12-117. - Restrictions on licensees. 
(a)  The following further restrictions apply with respect to the issuance of licenses: 
(1)  The license and application for license must specify the area or areas within the village where the raffle chances will be sold or issued, the time period during which raffle chances will be sold or issued, the time of determination of winning chances and the locations at which winning chances will be determined; 
(2)  The license application must contain a sworn statement attesting to the not-for-profit character of the prospective licensee organization, signed by the presiding officer and the secretary of that organization; 
(3)  The application for license shall be prepared in accordance with this article. 
(b)  A license authorizes the licensee to conduct raffles as defined in this article. Each such license is valid for one raffle. 
(Code 1993, § 12-5.4.6) 
Sec. 12-118. - Conduct of raffles. 
    The conducting of raffles is subject to the following restrictions: 
(1)  The entire net proceeds of any raffle must be exclusively devoted to the lawful purposes of the organization permitted to conduct that game; 
(2)  No person except a bona fide member of the sponsoring organization may participate in the management or operation of the raffle; 
(3)  No person may receive any remuneration or profit for participating in the management or operation of the raffle; 
(4)  A licensee may rent premises on which to determine the winning chance or chances in a raffle only from: 
a.  An organization which is also licensed under this chapter; or 
b.  A non-profit corporation or organization approved in the license; or 
c.  A commercial entity approved in the license, but only if no rent or other charge is made or to be made for the renting of the premises above the lowest rates that are being charged by the entity for use of the same space; 
(5)  Raffle chances may be sold or issued only within the area specified on the license and winning chances may be determined only at those locations specified on the license; 
(6)  No person under the age of 18 years may participate in the conducting of raffles or selling of chances. A person under the age of 18 years may be within the area where winning chances are being determined only when accompanied by his parent or guardian. 
(Code 1993, § 12-5.4.7) 
Sec. 12-119. - Raffles Manager; bond. 
    All operation of and the conduct of raffles shall be under the supervision of a single Raffles Manager designated by the organization. The manager shall give a fidelity bond in the sum of an amount equal to the total cash value of prizes to be awarded in favor of the organization conditioned upon the manager's honesty in the performance of the manager's duties. Terms of the bond shall provide that notice shall be given in writing to the village not less than 30 days prior to its cancellation. The Village Manager may, in the alternative and in the Village Manager's sole discretion, require a nominal cash bond in an amount to be determined by the Village Manager where the total cash value of prizes to be awarded does not exceed $5,000.00. 
(Code 1993, § 12-5.4.8) 
Sec. 12-120. - Records. 
(a)  Each organization licensed to conduct raffles and chances shall keep records of its gross receipts, expenses and net proceeds for each single gathering or occasion at which winning chances are determined. All deductions from gross receipts for each single gathering or occasion shall be documented with receipts or other records indicating the amount, a description of the purchased item or service or other reason for the deduction, and the recipient. The distribution of net proceeds shall be itemized as to payee, purpose, amount and date of payment. 
(b)  Gross receipts from the operation of raffles programs shall be segregated from other revenues of the organization, including bingo gross receipts, if bingo games are also conducted by the same nonprofit organization pursuant to license therefor issued by the Department of Revenue of the State, and placed in a separate account. Each organization shall have separate records of its raffles. The person who accounts for gross receipts, expenses and net proceeds from the operation of raffles shall not be the same person who accounts for other revenues of the organization. 
(c)  Each organization licensed to conduct raffles shall report promptly after the conclusion of each raffle to its membership, and to the village, its gross receipts, expenses, and net proceeds from raffles, and the distribution of net proceeds itemized as required in this section. 
(d)  Records required by this section shall be preserved for three years, and organizations shall make available their records relating to operation of raffles for public inspection at reasonable times and places. 
(Code 1993, § 12-5.4.9) 
Sec. 12-121. - Liability of village. 
    The issuance of license hereunder shall not constitute an endorsement by the village of any raffle. The village shall not be liable to any person, firm, or organization for any claim, damage, or liability arising from holding of raffle pursuant to license. The licensee, by acceptance of license, agrees to indemnify and hold harmless the village for such claims. 
(Code 1993, § 12-5.4.10; 94-O-75, 9-13-1995) 
Secs. 12-122-12-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - OTHER OFFENSES 

Sec. 12-141. - Impersonating an officer or employee. 
    It is unlawful for any person to impersonate a village officer or employee. 
(Code 1993, § 12-6) 
Sec. 12-142. - Indecent conduct or exposure. 
    It is unlawful for any person to commit any indecent or immoral act in any street, alley, bathing beach or public place in the village. 
(Code 1993, § 12-7) 
Sec. 12-143. - Interfering with village officers. 
    It is unlawful for any person to interfere with, hinder or resist any officer or employee of the village while that officer or employee is engaged in the duties of his office or employment. 
(Code 1993, § 12-8) 
Sec. 12-144. - Mechanical amusement devices. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to operate, maintain, or permit the operation or maintenance of any mechanical amusement device in any public place in the village. 
(b)  The term "mechanical amusement device" shall mean any machine, which, upon the insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate or disc, may be operated by the public generally for use as a game, entertainment or amusement, whether or not registering a score. It shall include such devices as marble machines, pinball machines, skill ball, mechanical grab machines, electronic games and all games, operations, or transactions similar thereto under whatever name they may be indicated. 
(Code 1993, § 12-9; Ord. No. 77-O-1, 1-4-1977) 
Sec. 12-145. - Obscene literature. 
    It is unlawful for any person in the village knowingly to sell, offer for sale, exhibit, expose, give away, circulate, distribute, attempt to distribute, advertise, print or publish any obscene book, magazine, pamphlet, paper, writing, drawing, picture, print, photograph, motion picture film, videotape, play, statue, advertisement, circular, or any other article or material whatsoever which is obscene. For the purpose of this section, any material, performance or act is defined as obscene if: 
(1)  The average person, applying contemporary adult community standards, would find that, taken as a whole, it appeals to the prurient interest; and 
(2)  The average person, applying contemporary adult community standards, would find that it depicts or describes, in a patently offensive way, ultimate sexual acts or sadomasochistic sexual acts, whether normal or perverted, actual or simulated, or masturbation, excretory functions or lewd exhibition of the genitals; and 
(3)  Taken as a whole, it lacks serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value. 
(Code 1993, § 12-10) 
Secs. 12-146-12-173. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - PICKETING 

Sec. 12-174. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Employee means any employee, except an employee of a person who is not an employer under the definition of that term in this section but shall not include any individual having authority, in the interests of an employer, to hire, transfer, suspend, lay off, recall, promote, discharge, assign, reward, or discipline other employees or responsibly to direct them, or to adjust their grievances, or effectively to recommend such action, if in connection with the foregoing, the exercise of such authority is not of a merely routine or clerical nature but requires the use of independent judgment. 
    Employer means and includes any person acting as an agent of an employer, directly or indirectly, but does not include any person subject to the Federal Railway Labor Act as amended from time to time, nor within the jurisdiction of the National Labor Relations Board as announced from time to time by such board. 
    Labor organization means any organization of any kind or any agency or employee representation committee or plan, in which employees participate and which exists for the purpose, in whole or in part, of dealing with employers concerning grievances, labor disputes, wages, rates of pay, hours of employment, or conditions of work. 
    Person means and includes one or more individuals, labor organizations, partnerships, associations, legal representatives, trustees in bankruptcy, or receivers. 
    Picket or picketing means the patrolling or stationing of one or more persons about the premises being picketed on the sidewalks and/or streets thereabouts, to convey in either oral or written form, by means of banners, signs, placards, advertisements, or handbills, the message of the person or persons picketing. 
(Code 1993, § 12-11.1) 
Sec. 12-175. - Activities prohibited. 
    It is unlawful for any labor organization, or any officer, member, or agent thereof: 
(1)  By picketing to cause deliveries to or from the picketed premises to be reduced or cut off, when no labor dispute exists between that employer whose premises are picketed and his employees; or 
(2)  By oral or written statement, by gesture, by threat or intimidation, or by force, to cause deliveries to or from any premises to be reduced or cut off or free access to or from any premises to be interfered with, when no labor dispute exists between the employer whose premises are so affected and his employees; or 
(3)  By harassment, coercion, or intimidation (including threats of violence, or loss of business, or employment; or following or trailing by automobile or truck) of any employer or his employees, or any other person, to interfere in any way with the normal business operation of any employer or the employment or work of his employees, when no labor dispute exists between such employer and his employees; or 
(4)  To cause deliveries to or from the premises of any self-employed person to be reduced or cut off by means of picketing for the purpose of requiring such self-employed person to join or pay any dues, fees, or other sums of money to such labor organization or to any officer, member, or agent thereof; or 
(5)  By oral or written statement, by gesture, by threat or intimidation, or by force to cause deliveries to or from any premises of a self-employed person to be reduced or cut off or free access to or from such premises to be interfered with, for the purpose of requiring such self-employed person to join or pay any dues, fees or other sums of money to such labor organization or to any officer, member, or agent thereof; or 
(6)  By harassment, coercion, or intimidation (including threats of violence or loss of business or employment; or following or trailing by automobile or truck) of any self-employed person or any person, to interfere in any way with the normal business operation of any self-employed person for the purpose of requiring such self-employed person to join or pay any dues, fees, or other sums of money to such labor organization or to any officer, member, or agent thereof. 
(Code 1993, § 12-11.2) 
Sec. 12-176. - Labor dispute. 
    No labor dispute between an employer and his employees shall be deemed to exist for the purposes of section 12-175 where the labor organization participating or sponsoring the activity prohibited does not in fact represent a majority of the employees of such employer and an objective of such activity is to obtain recognition or designation as the exclusive collective bargaining representative of such employees. 
(Code 1993, § 12-11.3) 
Sec. 12-177. - Representation of employees. 
    It shall be presumed for the purposes of this article that a labor organization does or does not represent a majority of the employees of an employer by the use of the criteria set forth in the National Labor Management Relations Act as amended. 
(Code 1993, § 12-11.4) 
Secs. 12-178-12-207. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - PROSTITUTION 

Sec. 12-208. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Prostitution means a person performing, offering to perform, or agreeing to perform an act of sexual penetration as defined in this section for any money, property, token, object, or article or anything of value; or any touching or fondling of the sex organs of one person by another person, for any money, property, token, object, or article or anything of value, for the purpose of sexual arousal or gratification. 
    Sexual penetration means any contact, however slight, between the sex organ or anus of one person by an object, the sex organ, mouth or anus of another person, or any intrusion, however slight, of any part of the body of one person or of any animal or object into the sex organ or anus of another person. 
    Solicitation of a sexual act means a person offering another person who is not his spouse any money, property, token, object or article or anything of value to perform: 
(1)  An act of sexual penetration as defined in this section; or 
(2)  Any touching or fondling of the sex organs of one person by the other person for the purpose of sexual arousal or gratification. 
    Soliciting for a prostitute means: 
(1)  Soliciting another for the purpose of prostitution; or 
(2)  Arranging or offering to arrange a meeting of persons for the purpose of prostitution; or 
(3)  Directing another to a place knowing such direction is for the purpose of prostitution. 
(Code 1993, § 12-12.1) 
Sec. 12-209. - Prostitution and solicitation. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)  Commit any act of prostitution; or 
(2)  Commit any act of soliciting for a prostitute; or 
(3)  Commit any act of soliciting of a sexual act. 
(Code 1993, § 12-12.2) 
Sec. 12-210. - Keeping a place of prostitution. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person who has or exercises control over the use of any place which could offer seclusion or shelter for the practice of prostitution to: 
(1)  Knowingly grant or permit the use of such place for the purpose of prostitution; or 
(2)  Grant or permit the use of such place under circumstances from which the person could reasonably know that the place is used or is to be used for the purposes of prostitution; or 
(3)  Permit the continued use of a place after becoming aware of facts or circumstances from which the person should reasonably know that the place is being used for the purposes of prostitution. 
(Code 1993, § 12-12.3; Ord. No. 97-O-10, 2-25-1997) 
Secs. 12-211-12-228. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - PUBLIC PROPERTY DAMAGE 

Sec. 12-229. - Injury or damage. 
    It is unlawful for any person to deface, interfere with or damage any property of any nature whatsoever belonging to the village. 
(Code 1993, § 12-13.1) 
Sec. 12-230. - Closed after dark; loitering prohibited. 
    All public facilities, including recreation, school, and village facilities shall be closed to the public after dark when no regularly scheduled program under the direction of or authorized by a governmental agency is in progress. It is unlawful for any person to remain on the premises or in or upon any building or structure situated thereon when such public facilities are closed as in this section provided, unless on official business of the village. 
(Code 1993, § 12-13.2.1) 
Sec. 12-231. - Elmwood Dunes Preserve. 
(a)  Definition. The term "Elmwood Dunes Preserve" means the unimproved Elmwood Dunes Preserve public right-of-way east of Michigan Avenue extending to the lakefront. 
(b)  Hours open to public. Elmwood Dunes Preserve shall be open to the public from sunrise until sunset and shall be closed to the public from sunset each day until sunrise the following day. 
(c)  Boat launching prohibited. No person shall launch any vessel into Lake Michigan from Elmwood Dunes Preserve. 
(d)  Boat storage prohibited. No person shall leave, store or secure any vessel in the Elmwood Dunes Preserve or to any adjacent private property. 
(e)  Motorized vehicles and bicycles. 
(1)  No person shall drive, ride or otherwise operate any motorized vehicle, including, but not limited to, snowmobiles, in the Elmwood Dunes Preserve. 
(2)  No person shall drive, ride or otherwise operate a bicycle in the Elmwood Dunes Preserve. 
(f)  No swimming. No person shall bathe, swim, wade, float, splash in or otherwise enter the Lake Michigan waters adjacent to Elmwood Dunes Preserve for a distance of 300 feet from the water's edge. 
(g)  Alcoholic beverages and smoking. No person shall consume alcoholic beverages or smoke in the Elmwood Dunes Preserve. 
(h)  Fires. No person shall light, maintain, or make use of any fire in the Elmwood Dunes Preserve. 
(i)  Camping. No person shall place, erect, or use any hammock, swing, tent, shelter, or any other type of temporary or permanent housing or camping equipment in the Elmwood Dunes Preserve, or otherwise camp in any manner in the Elmwood Dunes Preserve unless a permit therefor has first been obtained from the village. Camping permits may be issued by the Village Manager or his designee only pursuant to rules and regulations governing camping promulgated by the village in an ordinance duly adopted by the Village President and Board of Trustees. 
(j)  Additional prohibited activities. The following additional activities are prohibited in the Elmwood Dunes Preserve: ice skating and sledding. 
(Code 1993, § 12-13.2.2; Ord. No. 2012-O-72, 12-11-2012; Ord. No. 2013-O-19, 5-14-2013) 
Sec. 12-232. - Liability of parent or guardian. 
    It is unlawful for the parent of a child under 18 years of age, or any other person having legal care and custody of said child, to allow or permit such child to go or be upon such public facilities, including Elmwood Dunes Preserve, or in or upon any building or structure situated thereon after dark when such facility is closed as provided in this section. 
(Code 1993, § 12-13.2.3; Ord. No. 2012-O-72, 12-11-2012; Ord. No. 2013-O-19, 5-14-2013) 
Sec. 12-233. - Authority of police to detain; notice to parent or guardian. 
    Any member of the Police Department is authorized to detain any child under the age of 18 years willfully violating the provisions of this section until the parent or guardian of said child shall take him into custody; provided that such officer shall immediately, upon taking custody of such child, notify such parent or guardian. 
(Code 1993, § 12-13.2.4; Ord. No. 2012-O-72, 12-11-2012) 
Sec. 12-234. - Trespass. 
    It is unlawful to enter upon the land or building, or any part thereof of another after receiving, immediately prior to such entry, notice from the owner or occupant that such entrance is forbidden, or to remain upon the land or building, or any portion thereof of another after receiving notice from the owner or occupant to depart. A person has received notice from the owner or occupant within the meaning of this section if he has been notified personally, either orally or in writing, or if a printed or written notice forbidding such entry has been conspicuously posted or exhibited at the main entrance of such land or building, or the forbidden part thereof. 
(Code 1993, § 12-14) 
Secs. 12-235-12-261. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - WEAPONS 

Sec. 12-262. - Concealed weapons. 
    It is unlawful for any person to carry any weapon concealed on their person in a manner prohibited under section 24-1(a) of the Illinois Criminal Code, 720 ILCS 5/24-1(a). This section shall not apply to peace officers and others so authorized by statute. 
(Code 1993, § 12-15.1) 
Sec. 12-263. - Discharge of firearms. 
    It is unlawful for any person, except as hereinafter provided, to discharge any firearm or air riffle, as defined in section 12-555, in the village. Any officer of the law may discharge a firearm in the performance of his duty. A citizen may discharge a firearm when lawfully defending his person or property. Persons may discharge firearms while engaged in skeet or target shooting at locations where skeet or target shooting is permitted in the village by the Board of Trustees. The Board may, upon the recommendation of the Chief of Police, issue a permit revocable at any time the Board may determine, to a group or club where skeet or target shooting is coincidental to the activities or operation of the group or club and where the group or club obtains and files with the village the written consent of all owners of improved properties within the village limits adjoining the club or other premises. 
(Code 1993, § 12-15.2; Ord. No. 2005-O-5, 2-22-2005) 
Secs. 12-264-12-289. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - WILMETTE PARK DISTRICT CODE 

Sec. 12-290. - Adoption by reference. 
    There is hereby adopted by reference by the village, for the purpose of village enforcement, certain sections of Park District Ordinance Code, 1981, as amended, as are enumerated below and the whole of the said sections, of which not less than three copies have been and now are filed in the office of the Village Clerk, and the same are hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein: sections 2.03, 2.04, 2.05, 2.06, 2.07, 2.08, 2.09, 2.10, 2.11, 2.12, 2.14, 2.19, 2.20, 2.26, 2.30, 2.31, 4.01, 4.02, 4.04, and 4.06 and 7.01. 
(Code 1993, § 12-16.1) 
Sec. 12-291. - Payment of penalties without prosecution. 
(a)  Any person who violates the following sections of the Wilmette Park District Code, heretofore adopted by reference by the village: sections 2.05, 2.06, 2.08, 2.10, 2.26, 2.30, 2.31, 4.01, 4.02, 4.04 and 4.06, shall be guilty of an ordinance violation, punishable by a fine of not less than $10.00 if paid within ten days after the date of said violation notice, and not less than $20.00 if paid more than ten days after the date of said violation notice. Any violator may avoid prosecution for violating any of said sections by surrendering the citation or other notice of violation and paying $10.00 to the Police Department within ten days from the date appearing on said violation notice; or $20.00 if paid more than ten days from the date of said violation notice, before legal action has been brought against the violator. Any person making such payment shall receive a receipt therefor from the Police Department. 
(b)  Any person who violates sections 2.09 and 2.19 of the Wilmette Park District Code, heretofore adopted by reference by the village, shall be guilty of an ordinance violation, punishable by a fine of not less than $25.00 if paid within ten days after the date of said violation notice, and not less than $35.00 if paid more than ten days after the date of said violation notice. Any violator may avoid prosecution for violating any of said sections by surrendering the citation or other notice of violation and paying $50.00 to the Police Department within ten days from the date appearing on said violation notice; or $70.00 if not paid within ten days from the date of said violation notice, before legal action has been brought against the violator. Any person making such payment shall receive a receipt therefor from the Police Department. 
(c)  Any person who violates section 2.03 of the Wilmette Park District Code, heretofore adopted by reference by the village, shall be guilty of an ordinance violation, punishable by a fine of not less than $50.00 if paid within ten days after the date of said violation notice, and not less than $60.00 if paid more than ten days after the date of said violation notice, except in the case of a violation of said section 2.03 based upon a person's permitting a dog to be off-leash and outside of a designated area in which dogs are permitted, in which case the fine shall be not less than $75.00 if paid within ten days after the date of said violation notice, and not less than $85.00 if paid more than ten days after the date of said violation notice. Any violator may avoid prosecution for violating said section by surrendering the citation or other notice of violation and paying $50.00 to the Police Department within ten days from the date appearing on said violation notice, or $60.00 if not paid within ten days from the date of said violation notice, before legal action has been brought against the violator, or in the case of a violation of said section 2.03 based upon a person's permitting a dog to be off-leash and outside of a designated area in which dogs are permitted, by paying to the Police Department $75.00 within ten days after the date of said violation notice, or $85.00 if paid more than ten days after the date of said violation notice, before legal action has been brought against the violator. Any person making such payment shall receive a receipt therefor from the Police Department. 
(Code 1993, § 12-16.2; Ord. No. 83-O-50, 9-6-1983; Ord. No. 96-O-29, 5-28-1996; Ord. No. 88-O-19, 5-17-1988; Ord. No. 96-O-29, 5-28-1996) 
Sec. 12-292. - Construction and interpretation. 
    In the event any of the aforesaid Park District Code sections hereby adopted are in conflict with the present or hereafter enacted provisions of this Code, then the provisions of this Code shall apply. 
(Code 1993, § 12-16.3; Ord. No. 70-O-18, 12-5-1970) 
Secs. 12-293-12-317. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - VANDALISM 

Sec. 12-318. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Graffiti means any symbol, announcement, insignia, name identification or similar marking which is painted, written, drawn, scratched or otherwise placed on property without the consent of the owner or person in control of the property and which defaces the property, except as authorized by law. 
    Legal guardian means and includes a person appointed guardian, or given custody, of a minor by a Circuit Court of this State, but does not include a person appointed guardian or given custody of a minor under the Illinois Juvenile Court Act. 
    Minor means a person who has attained 11 years of age, but who has not yet reached 18 years of age. 
    Person means and includes any individual and any public or private entity. 
    Property means and includes real property and tangible personal property, both private and public. 
    Vandalism means and includes the deliberate defacement, mutilation or destruction of property. 
(Code 1993, § 12-17.1; Ord No. 92-O-85, 11-17-1992) 
Sec. 12-319. - Offense. 
    It is unlawful and punishable as provided in section 12-320: 
(1)  To place graffiti on any property. 
(2)  To engage in any act of vandalism. 
(3)  To enter into or obtain control over any motor vehicle or water craft of another person without that person's consent. 
(Code 1993, § 12-17.2; Ord No. 92-O-85, 11-17-1992) 
Sec. 12-320. - Penalty. 
    Every person found guilty of a violation of section 12-319 shall be subject to either or both of the following penalties: 
(1)  A fine not in excess of $750.00; 
(2)  A period of conditional discharge not to exceed one year. 
(Code 1993, § 12-17.3; Ord. No. 96-O-11, 4-9-1996) 
Sec. 12-321. - Conditional discharge. 
(a)  Each conditional discharge shall require the defendant, as a condition to the discharge, to comply with both of the following requirements: 
(1)  Not to violate any criminal statute or quasi-criminal ordinance of any jurisdiction; and 
(2)  To report to and appear in person before such person or agency as directed by the court. 
(b)  Each conditional discharge may require the defendant, as a condition to the discharge, to comply with any one or more of the following requirements: 
(1)  To work or pursue a course of study or vocational training; 
(2)  To undergo medical or psychiatric treatment, or treatment for drug addiction or alcoholism; 
(3)  To make restitution or reparation in an amount not to exceed actual loss or damage to property and pecuniary loss; and 
(4)  If the defendant is a minor, to reside with his parent or legal guardian; attend school; attend a nonresidential program for youth; or contribute to his own support at home or in a foster home. 
(c)  When a court orders restitution or reparation as a condition for a conditional discharge, the court shall determine the amount and conditions of payment. When the conditions of payment have not been satisfied, the court, at any time prior to the expiration or termination of the period of conditional discharge, may impose an additional period of not more than two years. Only the conditions of payment shall continue to apply during such additional period. The court shall retain all of the incidents of the original sentence, including the authority to modify or enlarge the original condition and to revoke the penalty of conditional discharge if the conditions of payment are violated during such additional period. 
(d)  When a petition is filed charging a violation of a condition imposed for conditional discharge, the court: 
(1)  May order a summons to the offender to appear; or order a warrant for the offender's arrest where there is danger of his fleeing the jurisdiction or causing serious harm to others or when the offender fails to answer a summons. The issuance of such warrant or summons shall stay the sentence of conditional discharge until the final determination of the charge, and the term of conditional discharge shall not run so long as the offender has not answered the summons or warrant. 
(2)  Shall conduct a hearing of the alleged violation. The court may admit the offender to bail pending the hearing. 
(3)  Shall receive evidence in open court with the right of confrontation, cross-examination and representation by counsel. The village has the burden of going forward with the evidence and proving the violation by the preponderance of the evidence. 
(4)  Shall not revoke a conditional discharge for failure to comply with conditions of a sentence which imposes financial obligations upon the offender unless such failure is due to his willful refusal to pay. 
(5)  May modify the conditions of a conditional discharge on motion of the village or on its own motion or at the request of the offender after notice to all parties and a hearing. 
(e)  If the court finds that the offender has violated a condition at any time prior to the expiration or termination of the period, it may continue the offender on the existing period with or without modifying or enlarging the conditions, or may impose any other penalty that was available at the time of the initial penalty. 
(f)  A judgment revoking probation or conditional discharge is a final appealable order. 
(Code 1993, § 12-17.4) 
Sec. 12-322. - Liability of parent or legal guardian of minor offender. 
    The parent or legal guardian of a minor defendant who resides with such parent or legal guardian shall be jointly and severally liable for any fine or condition of restitution or reparation imposed by a court upon a minor for violation of this section, provided that payment may not be demanded of such parent or legal guardian unless and until the minor has not paid the fine or made restitution or reparation within the time ordered by the court; and provided that said parent or legal guardian has been served with summons or notice to appear in the original cause and all proceedings thereafter as provided by law. 
(Code 1993, § 12-17.5) 
Sec. 12-323. - Removal of graffiti. 
(a)  A person who is the owner of property or who is in control of property shall, at his own expense, promptly remove, cover or otherwise eradicate any graffiti which is placed on such property. 
(b)  A person who fails to take the action required by subsection (a) of this section within 14 days following written notification by the village to remove such graffiti shall be fined not less than $25.00 or more than $100.00 for each offense; and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. 
(c)  In addition to pursuing the remedy set forth in subsection (b) of this section, if a person who is the owner of property or who is in control of property fails to take the action required by subsection (a) of this section within 30 days following written notification by the village to remove such graffiti, the village may bring an action for an injunction requiring such person to remove the graffiti. 
(d)  The village's exercise of the remedies provided in this section shall not prevent the owner from recovering, through civil suit or otherwise, the cost of removal or other reparation from the person or persons responsible for placing the graffiti on his property. 
(Code 1993, § 12-17.6; Ord No. 92-O-85, 11-17-1992) 
Secs. 12-324-12-349. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIII. - MARIJUANA AND DRUG PARAPHERNALIA 

Sec. 12-350. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Cannabis shall have the meaning ascribed to it in section 3 of the Cannabis Control Act (ILCS ch. 720, act 550, § 1 et seq.) as if that definition were incorporated herein. 
    Controlled substance shall have the meaning ascribed to it in section 102 of the Illinois Controlled Substances Act as if that definition were incorporated herein (ILCS ch. 720, act 570, § 101 et seq.). 
    Deliver or delivery means the actual, constructive or attempted transfer of possession of cannabis or a controlled substance, with or without consideration, whether or not there is an agency relationship. 
    Drug paraphernalia means all equipment, products and materials of any kind which are peculiar to and marketed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing into the human body cannabis or a controlled substance in violation of the Cannabis Control Act or the Illinois Controlled Substances Act. It includes, but is not limited to: 
(1)  Kits peculiar to and marketed for use in manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing or preparing cannabis or a controlled substance; 
(2)  Isomerization devices peculiar to and marketed for use in increasing the potency of any species of plant which contains cannabis or a controlled substance; 
(3)  Testing equipment peculiar to and marketed for private home use in identifying or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of cannabis or controlled substances; 
(4)  Diluents and adulterants peculiar to and marketed for cutting cannabis or a controlled substance by private persons; 
(5)  Objects peculiar to and marketed for use in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing cannabis, cocaine, hashish, hashish oil or other controlled substances into the human body including, where applicable, the following items: 
a.  Water pipes; 
b.  Carburetion tubes and devices; 
c.  Smoking and carburetion masks; 
d.  Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials; 
e.  Carburetor pipes; 
f.  Electric pipes; 
g.  Air-driven pipes; 
h.  Chillums; 
i.  Bongs; 
j.  Ice pipes or chillers; 
(6)  Any item whose purpose, as announced or described by the seller, is for use in violation of this article. 
    Methamphetamine shall have the meaning ascribed to it in section 10 of the Methamphetamine Control and Community Protection Act (720 ILCS 646/10). 
(Code 1993, § 10-1) 
Sec. 12-351. - Offense. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to grow, possess, sell, give away, barter, deliver, exchange, distribute, or administer any marijuana in the village. This section shall not apply when the growth, possession, sale, delivery or distribution of cannabis is done so in compliance with the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Pilot Program Act, 410 ILCS 130/1 et. seq. 
(Code 1993, § 12-18.1) 
Sec. 12-352. - Penalty. 
    Any person who violates section 12-351 shall be fined not less than $200.00 nor more than $750.00. 
(Code 1993, § 12-18.2; Ord. No. 78-O-32, 8-15-1978; Ord. No. 91-O-74, 11-5-1991; Ord. No. 96-O-11, 4-9-1996) 
Secs. 12-353-12-377. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIV. - PROHIBITION AND PENALTY 

Sec. 12-378. - Offense. 
(a)  Any person who keeps for sale, offers for sale, sells or delivers for any commercial consideration any item which that person knows, or under all of the circumstances reasonably should have known, to be drug paraphernalia, commits a violation of this Code for which a fine of not less than $250.00 and not more than $1,000.00 shall be imposed for each such item. 
(b)  Any person who possesses an item of drug paraphernalia with the intent to use it in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing cannabis, a controlled substance, or methamphetamine into the human body, or under all of the circumstances reasonably should have known, to be drug paraphernalia, commits a violation of this Code for which a fine of not less than $50.00 and not more than $750.00 shall be imposed for each such item. 
(1)  This section does not apply to a person who is legally authorized to possess hypodermic syringes or needles under the Hypodermic Syringes and Needles Act. 
(c)  This section shall not apply when the, possession, sale, delivery or distribution of paraphernalia is done so in compliance with the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Pilot Program Act, 410 ILCS 130/1 et seq. 
(Code 1993, § 10-2.1) 
Sec. 12-379. - Public nuisance. 
    Any store, place or premises from which or in which any item of drug paraphernalia is kept for sale, offered for sale, sold or delivered for any commercial consideration is declared to be a public nuisance. 
(Code 1993, § 10-2.2) 
Sec. 12-380. - Enforcement. 
(a)  The Corporation Counsel of the village may commence an action to abate a public nuisance as described in this section in the name of the People of the Village of Wilmette in the Circuit Court. 
(b)  Upon being satisfied by affidavits or other sworn evidence that an alleged public nuisance exists, the court may, without notice or bond, issue a temporary injunction to enjoin any defendant from maintaining such nuisance and may issue an order restraining any defendant from removing or interfering with any property used in connection with the public nuisance. 
(c)  If during the proceedings and hearing upon the merits the existence of the nuisance is established, and it is established that such nuisance was maintained with the intentional, knowing, reckless or negligent permission of the owner, or an agent of the owner managing the premises, the court shall enter an order restraining all persons from maintaining or permitting such nuisance and from using the premises for a period of one year thereafter. However, an owner, lessee or other occupant thereof may use such premises if the owner gives bond with sufficient security or surety, in an amount between $5,000.00 and $10,000.00 approved by the court, payable to the People of the Village of Wilmette. Such bond shall include a condition that no offense specified in this article shall be committed at, in or upon the property described, and a condition that the principal obligor and surety assume responsibility for any fine, costs or damages incurred by any person resulting from such an offense. 
(Code 1993, § 10-2.3) 
Sec. 12-381. - Exemptions. 
(a)  This article shall not apply to: 
(1)  Items marketed for use in the preparation, compounding, packaging, labeling or other use of cannabis or a controlled substance as an incident to lawful research, teaching or chemical analysis and not for sale; or 
(2)  Items marketed for, or historically and customarily used in connection with the planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, or inhaling of tobacco or any other lawful substance. 
Items exempt under this subsection include, but are not limited to, garden hoes, rakes, sickles, baggies, tobacco pipes and cigarette-rolling papers. 
(3)  Items listed in section 12-351 which are marketed for decorative purposes, when such items have been rendered completely inoperable or incapable of being used for any illicit purpose prohibited by this article. 
(b)  In determining whether or not a particular item is exempt under this subsection, the trier of fact should consider, in addition to all other logically relevant factors, the following: 
(1)  The nature, design, mechanics and any peculiar or unusual characteristic of the device involved; 
(2)  The general, usual, customary and historical use to which the item involved has been put; 
(3)  Expert evidence concerning the ordinary or customary use of the item and the effect of any peculiarity in the design or engineering of the device upon its functioning; 
(4)  Any written instructions accompanying the delivery of the item concerning the purposes or uses to which the item can or may be put; 
(5)  Any oral instructions provided by the seller of the item at the time and place of sale or commercial delivery; 
(6)  Any newspaper or magazine article, or national or local advertising, concerning the design, purpose or use of the item involved, and the entire context in which such article or advertising occurs; 
(7)  The manner, place and circumstances in which the item was displayed for sale, as well as any item or items displayed for sale or otherwise exhibited upon the premises where the sale was made; 
(8)  Whether the owner or anyone in control of the object is a legitimate supplier of like or related items to the community, such as a licensed distributor or dealer of tobacco products; 
(9)  The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object in the community. 
(Code 1993, § 10-3) 
Sec. 12-382. - Penalties. 
(a)  All drug paraphernalia is subject to forfeiture. 
(b)  Property subject to forfeiture under this article may be seized by any peace officer upon process issued by any court having jurisdiction over the property. Seizure by a peace officer without process may be made: 
(1)  If the property subject to seizure has been the subject of a prior judgment in favor of the State in a criminal proceeding or in an injunction or forfeiture proceeding based upon this article; 
(2)  If there is probable cause to believe that the property is directly or indirectly dangerous to health or safety; or 
(3)  In accordance with the Code of Criminal Procedure, as amended. 
(c)  Property taken or detained under this section shall not be subject to replevin, but is deemed to be in the custody of the law enforcement department or agency employing the seizing officer, subject only to the order and judgments of the Circuit Court having jurisdiction over the forfeiture proceedings. When property is seized under this chapter, the chief administrative officer of the seizing department or agency may place the property under seal, or remove the property to a place designated by him. 
(d)  No disposition may be made of property under seal until the time for taking an appeal has elapsed or until all appeals have been concluded unless a court, upon application therefor, orders the sale of perishable substances and the deposit of the proceeds of the sale with the court. 
(e)  When property is forfeited under this chapter, the chief administrative officer of the seizing department or agency may retain it for official use, or forward it to the Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs, United States Department of Justice, or its successor agency, for disposition. 
(Code 1993, § 10-4) 
Secs. 12-383-12-407. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XV. - FIREWORKS 

Sec. 12-408. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Fireworks means and includes any explosive composition, or any substance or combination of substances, or article prepared for the purpose of producing a visible or audible effect of a temporary, exhibitional nature by explosion, combustion, deflagration or detonation, and shall include blank cartridges, toy cannons, in which explosives are used, the type of balloons which require fire underneath to propel the same, firecrackers, torpedoes, skyrockets, Roman candles, sparklers, bombs, or other fireworks of like construction and any fireworks containing any explosive compound, or any tablets or other device containing any explosive substance, or containing combustible substances producing visual effects; provided, however, that the term "fireworks" shall not include toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns or other devices in which paper or plastic caps containing 0.25 grains or less of explosive compound are used, providing they are so constructed that the hand cannot come in contact with the cap when in place for the explosion, and toy pistol paper or plastic caps which contain less than 0.20 grains of explosive mixture, the sale and use of which shall be permitted at all times. 
(Code 1993, § 12-19.1) 
Sec. 12-409. - Sale, use or explosion of fireworks prohibited; public displays; permits; insurance required. 
(a)  Except as hereinafter provided it shall be unlawful for any person, firm, co-partnership, or corporation to offer for sale, expose for sale, sell at retail, or use or explode any fireworks. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) of this section, the Fire Chief shall have the authority to adopt reasonable rules and regulations for the granting of permits for supervised public displays of fireworks. Every such display shall be handled by a competent individual designated by the local authorities herein specified and shall be of such a character and so located, discharged or fired, as not to be hazardous to property or endanger any person or persons. Application for permits shall be made in writing to the Fire Department at least 15 days in advance of the date of the display and action shall be taken on such application within 48 hours after such application is made. After such privilege shall have been granted, sales, possession, use and distribution of fireworks for such display shall be lawful for that purpose only. 
(1)  No permit granted hereunder shall be transferable. 
(2)  No permit shall be issued until the applicant has furnished satisfactory evidence of a general liability insurance policy in a face amount of not less than $5,000,000.00 with the village as an additional named insured; provided, however, that a public entity engaged in a supervised public display of fireworks may be issued a permit upon satisfactory evidence of liability insurance in the amount of not less than $3,750,000.00. 
(Code 1993, § 12-19.2; Ord. No. 86-O-34, 6-24-1986) 
Sec. 12-410. - Searches and seizures; forfeiture; destruction. 
    Whenever any officer of the village has reason to believe that any violation of this article has occurred within the jurisdiction within which such officer is authorized to act and that the person so violating the section has in his possession fireworks or combustibles, such officer may file a complaint in writing, verified by affidavit, with any circuit court within whose jurisdiction the premises to be searched are situated, stating the facts upon which such belief is founded, the premises to be searched, and the property to be seized, and procure a search warrant and execute the same. Upon the execution of such search warrant, the person executing the same shall make due return thereof to the court issuing the same, together with an inventory of the property taken thereunder. The court shall thereupon issue process against the owner of such property if he be known, otherwise against the party in whose possession the property so taken was found, if known. In case of inability to serve such process upon the owner or the person in possession of the property at the time of its seizure, as hereinbefore provided, notice of the proceedings before the court shall be given as required by the statutes of the State governing cases of attachment. Upon the return of the process duly served or upon the posting or publishing of notice made, as hereinabove provided, the court or jury, if a jury shall be demanded, shall proceed to determine whether or not such property so seized was held or possessed in violation of this article. In case of a finding that the fireworks or combustibles seized were possessed in violation of this article, judgment shall be entered confiscating and forfeiting the property and ordering its destruction. 
(Code 1993, § 12-19.3) 
Sec. 12-411. - Penalty. 
    Any person, firm or corporation convicted of a violation of this article shall be guilty of an ordinance violation punishable by a fine of not less than $50.00 nor more than $750.00 for each offense. 
(Code 1993, § 12-19.4; Ord. No. 96-O-11, 4-9-1996) 
Secs. 12-412-12-435. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XVI. - THEFT 

Sec. 12-436. - Offense. 
    No person shall commit theft. A person commits theft when he knowingly: 
(1)  Obtains or exerts unauthorized control over property of the owner; or 
(2)  Obtains by deception control over property of the owner; or 
(3)  Obtains by threat control over property of the owner; or 
(4)  Obtains control of stolen property knowing the property to have been stolen by another or under such circumstances as would reasonably induce him to believe that the property was stolen and: 
a.  Intends to deprive the owner permanently of the use or benefit of the property; or 
b.  Knowingly uses, conceals or abandons the property in such manner as to deprive the owner permanently of such use or benefit; or 
c.  Uses, conceals or abandons the property knowing such use, concealment or abandonment probably will deprive the owner permanently of such use or benefit. 
(Code 1993, § 12-20.1) 
Sec. 12-437. - Penalty. 
    Any person who violates any of the provisions of this section shall be subject to a fine of not less than $150.00 and not more than $750.00 for each violation; provided, however, if full restitution is made, the minimum fine shall be in the discretion of the court. 
(Code 1993, § 12-20.2; Ord. No. 82-O-39, 9-7-1982; Ord. No. 96-O-11, 4-9-1996) 
Secs. 12-438-12-457. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XVII. - THEFT OF LOST OR MISLAID PROPERTY 

Sec. 12-458. - Offense. 
    A person who obtains control over lost or mislaid property commits theft when he: 
(1)  Knows or learns the identity of the owner or knows, or is aware of, or learns of a reasonable method of identifying the owner; and 
(2)  Fails to take reasonable measures to restore the property to the owner; and 
(3)  Intends to deprive the owner permanently of the use or benefit of the property. 
(Code 1993, § 12-21.1) 
Sec. 12-459. - Penalty. 
    Any person who violates any of the provisions of this section shall be subject to a fine of not less than $150.00 and not more than $750.00 for each violation; provided, however, if full restitution is made, the minimum fine shall be in the discretion of the court. 
(Code 1993, § 12-21.2; Ord. No. 82-O-39, 9-7-1982; Ord. No. 96-O-11, 4-9-1996) 
Secs. 12-460-12-486. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XVIII. - THEFT OF PROPERTY, LABOR, OR SERVICES FOR HIRE 

Sec. 12-487. - Offense. 
    A person commits theft when he obtains the temporary use of property, labor or services of another which are available only for hire, by means of threat or deception or knowing that such use is without the consent of the person providing the property, labor or services. 
(Code 1993, § 12-22.1) 
Sec. 12-488. - Penalty. 
    Any person who violates any of the provisions of this section shall be subject to a fine of not less than $150.00 and not more than $750.00 for each violation; provided, however, if full restitution is made, the minimum fine shall be in the discretion of the court. 
(Code 1993, § 12-22.2; Ord. No. 82-O-39, 9-7-1982; Ord. No. 96-O-11, 4-9-1996) 
Secs. 12-489-12-514. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIX. - SMOKING REGULATIONS IN PUBLIC PLACES AND PLACES OF EMPLOYMENT 

Sec. 12-515. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Bar means an establishment that is devoted to the serving of alcoholic beverages for consumption by guests on the premises and that derives no more than ten percent of its gross revenue from the sale of food consumed on the premises. The term "bar" includes, but is not limited to, taverns, nightclubs, cocktail lounges, adult entertainment facilities, and cabarets. 
    Employee means a person who is employed by an employer in consideration for direct or indirect monetary wages or profits or a person who volunteers his services for a non-profit entity. 
    Employer means a person, business, partnership, association, or corporation, including a municipal corporation, trust, or non-profit entity, that employs the services of one or more individual persons. 
    Enclosed area means all space between a floor and a ceiling that is enclosed or partially enclosed with: 
(1)  Solid walls or windows, exclusive of doorways; or 
(2)  Solid walls with partitions and no windows, exclusive of doorways, that extend from the floor to the ceiling, including, without limitation, lobbies and corridors. 
    Enclosed or partially enclosed sports arena means any sports pavilion, stadium, gymnasium, health spa, boxing arena, swimming pool, roller rink, ice rink, bowling alley, or other similar place where members of the general public assemble to engage in physical exercise or participate in athletic competitions or recreational activities or to witness sports, cultural, recreational, or other events. 
    Gaming equipment or supplies means gaming equipment/supplies as defined in the Illinois Gaming Board Rules of the Illinois Administrative Code. 
    Gaming facility means an establishment utilized primarily for the purposes of gaming and where gaming equipment or supplies are operated for the purposes of accruing business revenue. 
    Healthcare facility means an office or institution providing care or treatment of diseases, whether physical, mental, or emotional, or other medical, physiological, or psychological conditions, including, but not limited to, hospitals, rehabilitation hospitals, weight control clinics, nursing homes, homes for the aging or chronically ill, laboratories, and offices of surgeons, chiropractors, physical therapists, physicians, dentists, and all specialists within these professions. The term "healthcare facility" means and includes all waiting rooms, hallways, private rooms, semiprivate rooms, and wards within healthcare facilities. 
    Place of employment means any area under the control of a public or private employer that employees are required to enter, leave, or pass through during the course of employment, including, but not limited to, entrances and exits to places of employment, including a minimum distance, as set forth in windows that open, and ventilation intakes that serve an enclosed area where smoking is prohibited; offices and work areas; restrooms; conference and classrooms; break rooms and cafeterias; and other common areas. A private residence or home-based business, unless used to provide licensed child care, foster care, adult care, or other similar social service care on the premises, is not a place of employment. 
    Private club means: 
(1)  A not-for-profit association that: 
a.  Has been in active and continuous existence for at least three years prior to the effective date of the amendatory Act of the 95th General Assembly, whether incorporated or not; and 
b.  Is the owner, lessee, or occupant of a building or portion thereof used exclusively for club purposes at all times; and 
c.  Is operated solely for a recreational, fraternal, social, patriotic, political, benevolent, or athletic purpose, but not for pecuniary gain; and 
d.  Only sells alcoholic beverages incidental to its operation. 
(2)  An organization that is managed by a board of directors, executive committee, or similar body chosen by the members at an annual meeting, has established bylaws, a constitution, or both to govern its activities, and has been granted an exemption from the payment of federal income tax as a club under 26 USC 501. 
    Private residence means the part of a structure used as a dwelling, including, without limitation means a private home, townhouse, condominium, apartment, mobile home, vacation home, cabin, or cottage. For the purposes of this definition, a hotel, motel, inn, resort, lodge, bed and breakfast or other similar public accommodation, hospital, nursing home, or assisted living facility shall not be considered a private residence. 
    Public place means that portion of any building or vehicle used by and open to the public, regardless of whether the building or vehicle is owned in whole or in part by private persons or entities, the State, or any other public entity and regardless of whether a fee is charged for admission, including a minimum distance, as set forth in section 12-516, of 15 feet from entrances, exits, windows that open, and ventilation intakes that serve an enclosed area where smoking is prohibited. The term "public place" does not include a private residence unless the private residence is used to provide licensed child care, foster care, or other similar social service care on the premises. The term "public place" includes, but is not limited to, hospitals, restaurants, retail stores, offices, commercial establishments, elevators, indoor theaters, libraries, museums, concert halls, public conveyances, educational facilities, nursing homes, auditoriums, enclosed or partially enclosed sports arenas, meeting rooms, schools, exhibition halls, convention facilities, polling places, private clubs, gaming facilities, all government owned vehicles and facilities, including buildings and vehicles owned, leased, or operated by the State or state subcontract, healthcare facilities or clinics, enclosed shopping centers, retail service establishments, financial institutions, educational facilities, ticket areas, public hearing facilities, public restrooms, waiting areas, lobbies, bars, taverns, bowling alleys, skating rinks, reception areas, and no less than 75 percent of the sleeping quarters within a hotel, motel, resort, inn, lodge, bed and breakfast, or other similar public accommodation that are rented to guests, but excludes private residences. 
    Restaurant means: 
(1)  An eating establishment, including, but not limited to, coffee shops, cafeterias, sandwich stands, and private and public school cafeterias, that gives or offers for sale food to the public, guests, or employees; and 
(2)  A kitchen or catering facility in which food is prepared on the premises for serving elsewhere; and 
(3)  A bar area within arestaurant. 
    Retail tobacco store means a retail establishment that derives more than 80 percent of its gross revenue from the sale of loose tobacco, plants, or herbs and cigars, cigarettes, pipes, and other smoking devices for burning tobacco and related smoking accessories and in which the sale of other products is merely incidental. The term "retail tobacco store" does not include a tobacco department or section of a larger commercial establishment or any establishment with any type of liquor, food, or restaurant license. 
    Smoke or smoking means the carrying, smoking, burning, inhaling, or exhaling of any kind of lighted pipe, cigar, cigarette, hookah, weed, herbs, or any other lighted smoking equipment. The term "smoke" or "smoking" also means the use of vaporizers which are intended to simulate smoking tobacco, electronic cigarettes (a/k/a e-cigs or e-cigarettes), or any electronic nicotine delivery system typically, but not necessarily battery powered, which produce an aerosol which delivers nicotine to the user by means of inhalation. 
(Code 1993, § 12-23.1; Ord. No. 2003-O-75, 11-11-2003; Ord. No. 2007-O-61, 9-11-2007; Ord. No. 2014-O-49, § 2, 9-9-2014) 
Sec. 12-516. - Smoking prohibited in public places and places of employment and government vehicles. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke in any public place or place of employment, or to smoke within 15 feet of any entrance to a public place or place of employment. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke anywhere within a distance of 15 feet from entrances, exits, windows that open, and ventilation intakes that serve an enclosed area where smoking is prohibited under this section, so as to ensure that tobacco smoke does not enter the area through entrances, exits, open windows, or other means. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke in any place designated as a "No Smoking Area," as provided in section 12-518. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke in any vehicle owned, leased or operated by the State or any political subdivision of the State, including, but not limited to, the village. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke in any portion of the living quarters, including, but not limited to, sleeping rooms, dining areas, restrooms, laundry areas, lobbies, and hallways, of a building used in whole or in part as a student dormitory that is owned and operated or otherwise utilized by a public or private institution of higher education. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for any employer to knowingly permit smoking in any enclosed area in any place of employment in violation of subsections (a), (b) or (c) of this section. 
(g)  It shall be unlawful for the owner, occupant or lessee, as the case may be, in control of a public place to knowingly permit smoking in any enclosed area in said public place in violation of subsections (a), (b) or (c) of this section. 
(h)  It shall be unlawful for an employer or for the owner, occupant or lessee, as the case may be, in control of a public place to fail to post any required signs or fail to remove ash trays, as provided in section 12-519. 
(Code 1993, § 12-23.2; Ord. No. 2003-O-75, 11-11-2003; Ord. No. 2007-O-61, 9-11-2007) 
Sec. 12-517. - Exemptions. 
    Notwithstanding any other provision of this article and the sections thereof, smoking is allowed in the following areas: 
(1)  Private residences or dwelling places, except when used as a child care, adult day care, or healthcare facility or any other home-based business open to the public. 
(2)  Retail tobacco stores as defined in section 12-515 in operation prior to January 1, 2008. Any retail tobacco store that begins operation after January 1, 2008 may only qualify for an exemption if located in a freestanding structure occupied solely by the business and smoke from the business does not migrate into an enclosed area where smoking is prohibited. In order to maintain an exemption under this section, a retail tobacco store shall annually file with the village's Department of Law no later than February 15 a copy of the affidavit filed by the retail tobacco store by January 31 of that same calendar year with the Illinois Department of Public Health pursuant to section 35 of the Smoke Free Illinois Act (P.A. 95-17, § 35; as amended) stating the percentage of its gross income during the prior calendar year that was derived from the sale of loose tobacco, plants, or herbs and cigars, cigarettes, pipes, or other smoking devices for smoking tobacco and related smoking accessories. 
(3)  Private and semi-private rooms in nursing homes and long-term care facilities that are occupied by one or more persons, all of whom are smokers and have requested in writing to be placed or to remain in a room where smoking is permitted and the smoke shall not infiltrate other areas of the nursing home. 
(4)  Hotel and motel sleeping rooms that are rented to guests and are designated as smoking rooms, provided that all smoking rooms on the same floor must be contiguous and smoke from these rooms must not infiltrate into nonsmoking rooms or other areas where smoking is prohibited. Not more than 25 percent of the rooms rented to guests in a hotel or motel may be designated as rooms where smoking is allowed. The status of rooms as smoking or nonsmoking may not be changed, except to permanently add additional nonsmoking rooms. 
(Code 1993, § 12-23.3; Ord. No. 2003-O-75, 11-11-2003; Ord. No. 2007-O-61, 9-11-2007) 
Sec. 12-518. - Designation of other no smoking areas. 
    Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, any employer, owner, occupant, lessee, operator, manager, or other person in control of any public place or place of employment may designate a non-enclosed area of a public place of place of employment, as an area where smoking is also prohibited, provided that such employer, owner, occupant, lessee, operator, manager or other person in control shall conspicuously post signs prohibiting smoking in the manner described in section 12-519. 
(Code 1993, § 12-23.4; Ord. No. 2003-O-75, 11-11-2003; Ord. No. 2007-O-61, 9-11-2007) 
Sec. 12-519. - Posting of signs and removal of ash trays. 
(a)  "No Smoking" signs or the international "No Smoking" symbol, consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a red bar across it, shall be clearly and conspicuously posted in each public place and place of employment where smoking is prohibited by this article by the owner, operator, manager, or other person in control of that place. 
(b)  Each public place and place of employment where smoking is prohibited by this article shall have posted at every entrance a conspicuous sign clearly stating that smoking is prohibited. 
(c)  All ashtrays shall be removed from any area where smoking is prohibited by this article by the owner, operator, manager, or other person having control of the area. 
(Code 1993, § 12-23.5; Ord. No. 2003-O-75, 11-11-2003; Ord. No. 2007-O-61, 9-11-2007) 
Sec. 12-520. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  A person, corporation, partnership, association or other entity who violates section 12-516 shall be fined pursuant to this section. Each day that a violation occurs is a separate violation. 
(b)  A person who smokes in an area where smoking is prohibited under sections 12-516(a) through (e) shall be fined in an amount that is not less than $100.00 and not more than $250.00. 
(c)  A person who owns, operates, or otherwise controls a public place or place of employment that violates sections 12-516(f) through (h) shall be fined: 
(1)  Not less than $250.00 for the first violation; 
(2)  Not less than $500.00 for the second violation within one year after the first violation; and 
(3)  Not less than $2,500.00 for each additional violation within one year after the first violation. 
(d)  In addition to any other penalty provided in this section, the village may apply to any court of competent jurisdiction for injunctive relief to require compliance with, or cease violations of, the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1993, § 12-23.6; Ord. No. 96-O-11, 4-9-1996; Ord. No. 2003-O-75, 11-11-2003; Ord. No. 2007-O-61, 9-11-2007) 
Sec. 12-521. - Inconsistency with Fire Prevention Code. 
    No portion of this article shall be deemed to supersede any portion of chapter 9, section 7, the Fire Prevention Code of the village, as adopted. In the event of any inconsistency between the provisions of this article and any of the provisions of section 9-7, the provisions of section 9-7 shall control. 
(Code 1993, § 12-23.7; Ord. No. 94-O-52, 10-11-1994; Ord. No. 2007-O-61, 9-11-2007; Ord. No. 2010-O-11, 5-11-2010) 
Sec. 12-522. - Inconsistency with Smoke Free Illinois Act. 
    No portion of this article shall be interpreted to regulate smoking in public places and places of employment in a manner that is less restrictive than that provided in the Smoke Free Illinois Act, P.A. 95-17, eff. Jan. 1, 2008, now or hereafter amended. 
(Code 1993, § 12-8; Ord. No. 2007-O-61, 9-11-2007) 
Sec. 12-523. - Responsibility of owner or occupant of any premises for unlawful assembly by minors. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person who has ownership or control of any motor vehicle, conveyance, vessel, house, apartment, room, hotel room, shed, yard, premises, or other area to suffer, permit or allow two or more persons under the age of 21 years to assemble or be assembled thereon when said person knows, or reasonably should know, that said persons under the age of 21 years located in such motor vehicle, conveyance, vessel, house, apartment, room, hotel room, shed, yard, premises, or other area are: 
(1)  In possession of any cannabis or controlled substance prohibited by state statute or village ordinance; or 
(2)  In possession of any alcoholic beverages, except that a person under the age of 21 years may be in possession of or consume alcoholic beverages in the performance of a bona fide religious service or ceremony. 
(Code 1993, § 12-25; Ord. No. 94-O-65, 9-13-1994) 
Secs. 12-524-12-554. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XX. - AIR RIFLES 

Sec. 12-555. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Air rifle means and includes any pneumatic gun, air gun, air pistol, spring gun, spring pistol, B-B gun, paintball gun, pellet gun or any similar device as defined in section 12-23, and which uses a spring, pneumatic device, compressed air or compressed gas to impel a pellet constructed of hard plastic, steel, lead or other hard materials with a force that reasonably is expected to cause bodily harm. 
    Department means the Wilmette Police Department. 
    Paintball gun means and refers to any air gun, air pistol or similar device that is designed and intended to use compressed air or gas to discharge a globular projectile filled with paint or similar marking liquid, or another liquid or substance. 
    Person means any individual, corporation, company, association, firm, partnership, club, society or joint stock company. 
(Code 1993, § 12-26.1; Ord. No. 2005-O-5, 2-22-2005) 
Sec. 12-556. - Air rifle sales prohibited; exceptions. 
(a)  No person shall engage in the business of selling any air rifle in the village and no business license shall be granted by the village for a purpose which includes selling air rifles. This provision does not apply to or affect sales of air rifles to peace officers or other public officers or employees, provided such air rifles are used only in the performance of their official duties. 
(b)  Penalties. Any person convicted of violating any provision of this section shall be fined not less than $100.00 or more than $500.00 for each such offense. 
(Code 1993, § 12-26.2; Ord. No. 2005-O-5, 2-22-2005) 
Sec. 12-557. - Public display of air rifles prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to brandish or openly display any air rifle while on the grounds of any public park or other public property, or while on any public street, public alley or other public right-of-way. This provision does not apply to or affect peace officers or other public officers or employees acting in the performance of their official duties. 
(b)  Penalties. Any person convicted of violating this section shall be fined no less than $50.00 or more than $500.00 for such offense. Any person convicted of a second or subsequent offense under this section shall be fined not less than $100.00 nor more than $500.00. 
(Code 1993, § 12-26.3; Ord. No. 2005-O-5, 2-22-2005) 
Secs. 12-558-12-577. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XXI. - AIR POLLUTION 

Sec. 12-578. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Air pollution means the discharging from stacks, chimneys, exhausts, vents, ducts, openings, buildings, structures, premises, open fires, portable boilers, vehicles, processes, or any other source of any smoke, soot, fly ash, dust, cinders, dirt, noxious or obnoxious acids, fumes, oxides, gases, vapors, odors, toxic or radioactive substances, waste, particulate, solid, liquid or gaseous matter, or any other materials in such place, manner, or concentration as to cause injury, detriment, nuisance, or annoyance to the public, or to endanger the health, comfort, repose, safety or welfare of the public or in such a manner as to cause, or to have a natural tendency to cause injury or damage to business or property. 
    Combustible refuse means any combustible waste material containing carbon in a free or combined state, other than liquids or gases. 
    Open burning means any fire from which the products of combustion are admitted directly into the open air. 
    Smoke means small gas-borne particles resulting from incomplete combustion consisting predominately of carbon and other combustible material and present in sufficient quantity to be observable independently of the presence of other solids. 
(Code 1993, § 3-1; Ord. No. 2010-O-09, 2-9-2010) 
Sec. 12-579. - Air pollution; nuisance. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to cause or permit the emission of air pollution, dense smoke or fumes from any source, including, but not limited to, any fire, chimney, engine, or oil burner so as to cause annoyance or discomfort to any individuals. 
(b)  The owner, proprietor, lessee or occupant of any building, or the person in charge of the furnace therein, who causes, permits or allows the emission of air pollution, dense smoke or fumes from the smokestack of any stationary furnace, or the chimney or smokestack of any building in the village, contrary to the provisions of this Code is guilty of creating a nuisance. 
(Code 1993, § 3-2; Ord. No. 2010-O-09, 2-9-2010) 
Sec. 12-580. - Open burning prohibited. 
(a)  The open burning of leaves, garbage, refuse, waste or other combustible material on any property, public or private, from any source whatsoever within the village is unlawful and is hereby prohibited. 
(b)  Except as otherwise prohibited, outdoor grills utilizing natural or propane gas, charcoal or other commercially available fuel intended for use in outdoor grills are allowed for cooking purposes only. 
(c)  Open burning is allowed in outdoor fireplaces and outdoor fire pits in compliance with the following regulations: 
(1)  The fireplace or fire pit shall not be located in the front yard, side yard adjoining a street, or rear yard of a double frontage lot now shall a fireplace or fire pit be operated within five feet of any property line and in accordance with the Fire Prevention Code. Any newly constructed fireplace with a foundation or that is embedded in the ground shall have a chimney and shall be located in compliance with the side yard setback required by appendix A of this Code and not less than five feet from a rear lot line. 
(2)  Outdoor fireplaces and fire pits shall be located on a non-combustible surface while in operation. 
(3)  Outdoor fireplaces and fire pits shall not contain a fire greater than three feet in diameter and two feet in height of pile size. 
(4)  Only charcoal, natural or propane gas, commercial fire logs or dry and seasoned firewood may be burned or used as a fuel in an outdoor fireplace or fire pit. 
(5)  No outdoor fireplace or fire pit may be operated without adult supervision and a readily available means for extinguishing burning materials. No outdoor fireplace or fire pit may be operated within ten feet of any combustible structure including a deck or within five feet of a fence. A fireplace or fire pit is considered to be operating at all times that open combustion is occurring. The fire shall be completely extinguished prior to leaving the fireplace or fire pit unsupervised. 
(Code 1993, § 3-3; Ord. No. 69-O-41, 11-18-1969; Ord. No. 2010-O-09, 2-9-2010) 
Sec. 12-581. - Penalties. 
    Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be subject to a fine of not less than $50.00 or more than $750.00 for each such violation. A separate and distinct offense shall be regarded as committed each day on which any such person shall continue or permit any such violation. The institution of any proceeding which does or could result in the imposition of any such fine for any violation of this article shall not impair or invalidate any other action for abatement of a nuisance. 
(Code 1993, § 3-4; Ord. No. 2010-O-09, 2-9-2010) 
Chapter 14 - MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 14-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Abandoned vehicle means any motor vehicle parked and left unattended on or about any alley, street or highway, or upon any parking lot owned or operated by the village, and that: 
(1)  Is an inoperable motor vehicle, as defined in this chapter; or 
(2)  Does not display a license plate or temporary registration certificate from the State as required by the Illinois Motor Vehicle Code, or from such other state of the United States as may be required by law; or 
(3)  Displays a license plate or temporary registration certificate from either the State or another state of the United States that is more than 30 days expired. 
    All-terrain vehicle means any motorized off-highway device 50 inches or less in width, having a manufacturer's dry weight of 600 pounds or less, traveling on three or more low-pressure tires, designed with a seat or saddle for operator use, and handlebars or steering wheel for steering control. 
    Alley means a public way within a block, generally giving access to the rear of lots or buildings and not used for general traffic circulation. 
    Authorized emergency vehicle means police vehicles, vehicles of the Fire Department or public service corporations as are designated or authorized by proper local authorities. 
    Bicycle means every device propelled exclusively by human power upon which any person may ride, having two tandem wheels, and including any device generally recognized as a bicycle though equipped with two front or two rear wheels. 
    Business district means the territory contiguous to and including a street when within any 600 feet along such street there are buildings in use for business or industrial purposes, including, but not limited to, hotels, banks or office buildings, railroad stations and public buildings which occupy at least 300 feet of frontage on one side or 300 feet collectively on both sides of the street. 
    Commercial vehicle means every vehicle designed, maintained, or used primarily for the transportation of property. 
    Controlled access highway means every street or highway in respect to which owners or occupants of abutting lands and other persons have no legal right of access to or from the same except at such points only as may be determined by the public authority having jurisdiction over such street or highway. 
    Crosswalk means that portion of a roadway ordinarily included within the prolongation or connection of the lateral lines of sidewalks at intersections, or any portion of a roadway distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the surface. 
    Driver or operator means every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a vehicle. 
    Improved highway means whenever the term improved highway is used in this chapter, it shall be construed to include roadways of concrete, brick, or asphalt. 
    Inoperable motor vehicle means any motor vehicle from which, for a period of at least seven days, the engine, wheels or other parts have been removed, or on which the engine, wheels or other parts have been altered, damaged or otherwise so treated that the vehicle is incapable of being driven under its own motor power. The term "inoperable motor vehicle" shall not include a motor vehicle which has been rendered temporarily incapable of being driven under its own motor power in order to perform ordinary service or repair operations. 
    Intersection means the area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the lateral curb lines, or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the roadways of two streets which join one another at, or approximately at, right angles, or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different streets joining at any other angle may come in conflict. Where a street includes two roadways 40 feet or more apart, then every crossing of each roadway of such divided street by an intersecting street shall be regarded as a separate intersection. 
    Lane control signal means an electrically controlled and illuminated signal of a square or rectangular design and employing distinctive colors or symbols used to control the direction of vehicular flow on the particular lane to which the indication applies. 
    Laned roadway means a roadway which is divided into two or more clearly marked lanes for vehicular traffic. 
    Loading zone means the space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or merchandise. 
    Low speed vehicles means any four-wheeled vehicle with a maximum speed greater than 20 miles per hour but not greater than 25 miles per hour that conforms with the federal motor vehicle safety standards set forth in 49 CFR part 571.500 as defined in section 1-140.7 of the Illinois Vehicle Code. 
    Merging traffic means a maneuver executed by the drivers of vehicles on converging roadways to permit simultaneous or alternate entry into the junction, wherein the driver of each vehicle involved is required to adjust his vehicular speed and lateral position so as to avoid a collision with another vehicle. 
    Motorcycles means every motor vehicle having a saddle for the use of the rider and designed to travel on not more than three wheels in contact with the ground, but excluding a tractor. 
    Motor vehicle means every vehicle which is self-propelled and every vehicle which is propelled by electric power obtained from overhead trolley wires, but not operated upon rails. 
    Negligent means without due care and caution, or without due regard to the width, grade, curves, corners, traffic and other attendant conditions of streets, highways, roads, or other ways used for vehicular traffic within the village limits. 
    Non-highway vehicles means a motor vehicle not specifically designed to be used on a public highway, including: 
(1)  An "all-terrain vehicle," as defined by section 1-101.8 of the Illinois Vehicle Code; 
(2)  A "golf cart," as defined by section 1-123.9 of the Illinois Vehicle Code; 
(3)  A "neighborhood vehicle," as defined by section 1-148.3m of the Illinois Vehicle Code; and 
(4)  An "off-highway motorcycle," as defined by section 1-153.1 of the Illinois Vehicle Code. 
    Official traffic-control devices means all signs, signals, markings and devices not inconsistent with this chapter placed or erected by authority of the public body or official having jurisdiction, for the purpose of regulating, warning, or guiding traffic. 
    Owner means a person who holds the legal title of a vehicle or in the event a vehicle is the subject of an agreement for the conditional sale or lease thereof with the right of purchase upon performance of the condition stated in the agreement and with an immediate right of possession vested in the conditional vendee or lessee, or in the event a mortgagor of a vehicle is entitled to possession, then such conditional vendee or lessee or mortgagor shall be deemed the owner for the purposes of this chapter. 
    Park or parking means when prohibited means the standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, other than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading. 
    Pedestrian means every natural person, firm, copartnership, association or corporation. 
    Police officer means every officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations. 
    Private road or driveway means every way or place in private ownership and used for vehicular traffic by the owner and those having expressed or implied permission from the owner but not by other persons. 
    Railroad means a carrier of persons or property upon cars, other than street cars, operated upon stationary rails. 
    Railroad signs or signal means any sign, signal or device created in accordance with the laws governing the same and intended to give notice of the presence of railroad tracks or the approach of a railroad train. 
    Railroad train means a steam engine, electric or other motor, with or without cars coupled thereto, operated upon rails. 
    Residence district means the territory contiguous to and including a street not comprising a business district when the property on such street for a distance of 300 feet or more is, in the main, improved with residences or residences and buildings in use for business. 
    Reversible lane means a lane of a two- or more-laned roadway upon which traffic may be directed to move in either direction by means of lane control signals, or other devices, in conjunction with official signs. 
    Right-of-way means the privilege of the immediate use of the street. 
    Roadway means that portion of a street improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel, exclusive of the berm or shoulder. In the event a street includes two or more separate roadways, the term "roadway", as used herein, shall refer to any such roadway separately, but not to all such roadways collectively. 
    School bus means every motor vehicle owned by a public or governmental agency and operated for the transportation of children to or from school or privately owned and operated for compensation for the transportation of children to or from school. 
    Sidewalk means that portion of a street between the curb lines, or the lateral lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines intended for the use of pedestrians. 
    State highways. Whenever the term "state highways" is used in this chapter, it shall be construed to include the state highways as defined in the Illinois Highway Code as the same may from time to time be amended. 
    Stop , when required, means complete cessation of movement. 
    Stop, stopping, or standing , when prohibited, means any stopping or standing of a vehicle whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic-control sign or signal. 
    Street or highway means the entire width between property lines of every way or place of whatsoever nature when any part thereof is open to the use of the public, as a matter of right, for the purposes of vehicular traffic. 
    Subdivision districts means that portion of the village, other than the business and residence districts. 
    Through street means every street or portion thereof at the entrance to which vehicular traffic from intersecting streets is required by law to stop before entering or crossing the same and when stop signs are erected as provided in this chapter. 
    Traffic means pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles and other conveyances, either singly or together, while using any street for the purposes of travel. 
    Traffic-control signal means any device, whether manually, electrically, or mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and to proceed. 
    Traffic signs or signals means all signs, signals, markings, and devices which conform with the state manual and not inconsistent with this act, placed or erected by authority of a public body or official having jurisdiction, for the purpose of regulating, warning, or guiding traffic. 
    Urban district means the territory contiguous to and including any street which is built up with structures devoted to business, industry, or dwelling houses situated at intervals of less than 100 feet for a distance of a quarter of a mile or more. 
    Vehicle means every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon the street, except devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. The term "vehicle" does not include an electrically-motorized device used to provide mobility for a person with a mobility-limiting disability, including, but not limited to, motorized wheelchairs. 
    Yield right-of-way means when required by an official sign, means the act of granting the privilege of the immediate use of the intersecting roadway to traffic within the intersection and to vehicles approaching from the right or left. When the roadway is clear, the person yielding the right-of-way may proceed into the intersection. 
(Code 1993, § 13-1; Ord. No. 98-O-22, 4-28-1998; Ord. No. 77-0-37, 9-20-1977; Ord. No. 87-0-58, 11-3-1987; Ord. No. 2003-O-66, 10-14-2003; Ord. No. 2010-O-14, 2-9-2010) 
Sec. 14-2. - Illinois Vehicle Code adopted. 
(a)  The Illinois Vehicle Code is hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter by reference and shall be applicable within the village. 
(b)  To the extent the Illinois Vehicle Code is contrary to any other provision within this chapter, the provisions of this chapter shall control. 
(c)  The Corporation Counsel is hereby authorized to prosecute misdemeanor offenses under the Illinois Vehicle Code in Cook County Circuit Court as petty offenses, at its discretion. 
(Code 1993, § 13-1.1; Ord. No. 2017-O-62, 10-24-2017) 
Secs. 14-3-14-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - VEHICLE LICENSES 

Sec. 14-23. - License required. 
    Any person, firm or corporation shall pay to the village each year a tax or license fee for the use of each motor vehicle owned or leased by such person, firm or corporation which is registered with the office of the Secretary of the State to an address within the village. Each state registration shall be deemed prima facie evidence that such vehicle shall require a village vehicle license. Every person shall pay the village each year a tax or license fee for the use of each motor bus or motor coach owned or leased by such person and used on any regularly scheduled service on any public street or highway in the village. 
(Code 1993, § 13-2.1; Ord. No. 78-0-15, 3-21-1978) 
Sec. 14-24. - Application; issuance. 
    Every owner or operator of a motor vehicle or motor bicycle desiring a license for a vehicle as required in the preceding section shall file an application with the village, upon a form to be provided, setting forth the name and address of the applicant and a description of the vehicle thereof for which the license is desired. Upon the payment by the applicant of the license fee provided in the following section, the village shall issue or cause to be issued a license authorizing the use of such motor vehicle or other vehicle within the village until the expiration of such license. 
(Code 1993, § 13-2.2) 
Secs. 14-25-14-51. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FEES 

Sec. 14-52. - Motorcycles and passenger vehicles. 
(a)  For motorcycles and non-commercial vehicles classified as "passenger" vehicles by the Illinois Secretary of State, the annual vehicle license fee shall be: 
(1)  Motorcycles with or without sidecar: $25.00. 
(2)  Motor vehicles which are not freight-carrying or do not carry passengers for hire: $80.00. 
(b)  Low-income senior discount. In addition to any applicable discount provided for in this subsection, any applicant for a license provided for in subsection (a) of this section shall, upon proof of age 65 or over and an annual household income at or below the low income guidelines of the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, shall be eligible for a $10.00 reduction in the license fee. 
(Code 1993, § 13-2.3.1; Ord. No. 2006-O-77, 9-26-2006; Ord. No. 2007-O-82, 11-27-2007; Ord. No. 2008-O-88, 12-9-2008) 
Sec. 14-53. - Commercial and other vehicles. 
    For commercial vehicles and other vehicles not classified as passenger vehicles by the Illinois Secretary of State, the annual vehicle license fee shall be: 
(1)  Freight-carrying vehicles, or vehicles designed to carry goods or merchandise or other articles, of a capacity of not more than two tons (as classified by the Secretary of State as Class B, RV, FH, TX, LV or CV): $80.00. 
(2)  All other classes of motor vehicles registered with the Secretary of State: $95.00. 
(Code 1993, § 13-2.3.2; Ord. No. 88-0-35, 8-2-1988; Ord. No. 90-0-89, 12-18-1990; Ord. No. 94-0-26, 4-26-1994; Ord. No. 2000-O-18, 3-28-2000; Ord. No. 2002-O-100, 12-10-2002; Ord. No. 2004-O-104, 11-22-2004; Ord. No. 2006-O-77, 9-26-2006; Ord. No. 2007-O-82, 11-27-2007; Ord. No. 2008-O-88, 12-9-2008) 
Sec. 14-54. - Time of payment; duration. 
    The vehicle license fee or tax is due and payable annually in advance on the 15 th day of April of each year, and the license shall be for 12 months, provided that the owner of such vehicle coming into possession of the same after the expiration of six months of the license year shall pay one-half of the annual fee. Where the owner of a vehicle required to obtain a vehicle license required by section 14-23 on or before the 15 th day of April fails to do so before the 15 th day of May, or within 30 days of otherwise being required to obtain a vehicle license under section 14-23, the vehicle license fee set forth in section 14-53 shall be increased by 100 percent of the amount of the vehicle license fee past due. 
(Code 1993, § 13-2.4; Ord. No. 87-0-39, 8-4-1987; Ord. No. 95-O-33, 5-9-1995; Ord. No. 2006-O-94, 11-28-2006; Ord. No. 2009-O-72, 11-24-2009) 
Sec. 14-55. - Dealers' licenses. 
    The license plates issued to dealers in motor vehicles for vehicles held for sale and used only for demonstrations may be transferred to any other vehicle so held and used by the same dealer in the village, but such dealer shall procure one license for each motor vehicle so held by him at any one time during the year. 
(Code 1993, § 13-2.5) 
Sec. 14-56. - Village labels, stickers. 
    Every owner of a motor vehicle or other vehicle who procures a vehicle license therefor shall receive at the time of payment of the fee a village label, sticker or tag without extra charge therefor; such label, sticker or tag shall be numbered serially, and bear the number and the year for which issued. Each such label, sticker or tag shall be kept attached to the front of the vehicle for which it was issued on the lower left-hand corner of the windshield, so as to be readily readable at all times at which such vehicle is operated on any public street or other highway in the village. Before affixing such label, sticker or tag to the windshield as aforesaid, the owner shall remove any village label, sticker or tag which was issued for any preceding calendar year. 
(Code 1993, § 13-2.6) 
Sec. 14-57. - Transfer of license. 
(a)  When any owner who has paid the license fee for which provision is made in this article sells his vehicle prior to the date at which such license expires, such vendor shall remove the license tag from such vehicle and immediately notify the Village Clerk of such sale giving the village and state license number of the car so sold, the date of sale, and the name and address of the purchaser, and whether it is the desire of the vendor to transfer such license to the purchaser. In the event that the vendor indicates such desire, it is the duty of the purchaser to make application for such transfer, and upon the payment of $1.00, the Village Clerk shall transfer the license to such purchaser. 
(b)  Where a vehicle licensed hereunder is sold during the year for which the license is issued, and the former owner desires to have the license transferred to a new vehicle purchased by him, he shall make application therefor to the village. The application shall give a detailed description, including the horsepower of the newly purchased vehicle to which the license is to be transferred. If the license is to be transferred to a vehicle of the same class as that for which the license was originally issued, the village shall transfer the license for use upon the new vehicle upon the payment of a fee of $1.00. If the license is to be transferred from a vehicle of one class to a vehicle of a class for which the payment of a greater fee is required by this article, before the transfer shall be effected the owner shall pay to the village the difference between the amount previously paid and the amount due upon the new vehicle, except that if the transfer is made after the expiration of six months of the license year, one-half of the difference between such amount shall be paid. If the license is to be transferred from a vehicle of one class to a vehicle of a class for which payment of a lesser fee is required by this article, the village shall transfer the license for use upon the new vehicle without the payment of any further fee. 
(Code 1993, § 13-2.7) 
Sec. 14-58. - Exemptions. 
    All vehicles owned or operated by the village, consuls representing foreign nations or officers of foreign legations, and antique vehicles as defined in ILCS ch. 625, act 5, § 1-102.1, shall be exempt from provisions of this article; provided, however, that each and every vehicle in this classification shall be required to have a vehicle license according to its proper classification, and such license shall be issued to the applicant upon the proper application without fee. 
(Code 1993, § 13-2.8; Ord. No. 75-0-44, 11-18-1975) 
Secs. 14-59-14-89. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OPERATION OF VEHICLES 

Sec. 14-90. - Driving while under the influence of alcohol, other drug, or combination thereof. 
(a)  A person shall not drive or be in actual physical control of any vehicle within this village while: 
(1)  The alcohol concentration in such person's blood or breath is 0.08 or more based on the definition of blood and breath units in ILCS ch. 625, act 5, § 11-501.1; or 
(2)  Under the influence of alcohol; or 
(3)  Under the influence of any other drug or combination of drugs to a degree which renders such person incapable of safely driving; or 
(4)  Under the combined influence of alcohol and other drug or drugs to a degree which renders such person incapable of safely driving; or 
(5)  There is any amount of a drug, substance or compound in such person's blood or urine resulting from the unlawful use or consumption of cannabis listed in the Cannabis Control Act, as now or hereafter amended or a controlled substance listed in the Illinois Controlled Substance Act as now or hereafter amended. 
(b)  The fact that any person charged with violating this section is or has been legally entitled to use alcohol, or other drugs, or any combination of both, shall not constitute a defense against any charge of violating this section. 
(c)  Upon the trial of any civil or criminal action or proceeding arising out of acts alleged to have been committed by any person while driving or in actual physical control of a vehicle while under the influence of alcohol, the concentration of alcohol in the person's blood or breath at the time alleged as shown by analysis of the person's blood, urine, breath, or other bodily substance shall give rise to the following presumptions: 
(1)  If there was at that time an alcohol concentration of 0.05 or less, it shall be presumed that the person was not under the influence of alcohol. 
(2)  If there was at that time an alcohol concentration in excess of 0.05 but less than 0.08, such fact shall not give rise to any presumption that the person was or was not under the influence of alcohol, but such fact may be considered with other competent evidence in determining whether the person was under the influence of alcohol. 
(3)  If there was at that time an alcohol concentration of 0.08 or more, it shall be presumed that the person was under the influence of alcohol, other drug, or combination thereof. 
(d)  The foregoing provisions of this section shall not be construed as limiting the introduction of any other relevant evidence bearing upon the question whether the person was under the influence of alcohol. 
(e)  If a person under arrest refuses to submit to a chemical test under the provisions of ILCS ch. 625, act 5, § 11-501.1, evidence of refusal shall be admissible in any civil or criminal action or proceeding arising out of acts alleged to have been committed while the person under the influence of alcohol, or other drugs or combination of both was driving or in actual physical control of a motor vehicle. 
(f)  A violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $750.00 and/or imprisonment for not more than six months, for the first offense. A second or subsequent conviction of violating this section or a similar provision of a local ordinance committed within five years of a previous violation of this section or a similar provision of a local ordinance shall be punishable by a minimum of 48 consecutive hours of imprisonment or assigned to a minimum of ten days of community service as may be determined by the court. The imprisonment or assignment shall not be subject to suspension nor shall the person be eligible for probation in order to reduce the sentence or assignment. 
(Code 1993, § 13-3.1; Ord. No. 84-0-6, 3-6-1984; Ord. No. 96-O-11, 4-9-1996; Ord. No. 2001-O-8, 2-27-2001) 
Sec. 14-91. - Reckless driving. 
(a)  Any person who drives any vehicle with a willful or wanton disregard for the safety of persons or property is guilty of reckless driving. 
(b)  Every person convicted of reckless driving shall be fined not less than $25.00 nor more than $750.00. 
(Code 1993, § 13-3.2; Ord. No. 96-O-11, 4-9-1996) 
Sec. 14-92. - Negligent driving. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle upon a public way, negligently, heedlessly, and without due caution in a manner so as to endanger or be likely to endanger any person or property. 
(Code 1993, § 13-3.3) 
Secs. 14-93-14-112. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - GENERAL SPEED RESTRICTIONS 

Sec. 14-113. - Reasonable speed. 
    No person shall drive any vehicle upon any public highway of this village at a speed which: 
(1)  Is greater than is reasonable and proper with regard to traffic conditions and the use of the highway, or endangers the safety of any person or property; or 
(2)  Is greater than the applicable maximum speed limit established by this section or by a regulation or ordinance made pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. The fact that the speed of a vehicle does not exceed the applicable maximum speed limit does not relieve the driver from the duty to decrease speed when approaching and crossing an intersection, when approaching and going around the curve, when approaching a hill crest, when traveling upon any narrow or winding roadway, or when special hazard exists with respect to pedestrians or other traffic or by reason of weather or highway conditions; the speed shall be decreased as may be necessary to avoid colliding with any person or vehicle on or entering the highway in compliance with legal requirements and the duty of all persons to use due care. 
(Code 1993, § 13-3.4.1) 
Sec. 14-114. - Maximum speeds. 
(a)  V illage-wide speed limit of 25 mph on local streets. Except for collector streets defined in subsection (b) of this section, major streets defined in subsection (c) of this section, and the Edens Expressway, all streets of the village are defined as local streets, upon which the speed limit shall be 25 mph. The Village Engineer is authorized to post signs at the village's jurisdictional boundaries, which indicate a village-wide speed limit of 25 mph unless otherwise posted. Such signs shall be posted in accord with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. 
(b)  Collector streets. The following streets are defined as collector streets, upon which the maximum speed limit shall be 30 mph unless, in accordance with engineering criteria such as those developed by the Illinois Department of Transportation, a different maximum speed limit is established and posted with appropriate signs giving notice of such different limit by authorities having jurisdiction over the collector street: 
(1)  Illinois Road, from the north village limits to Wilmette Avenue. 
(2)  Laramie Avenue, from the north to the south village limits. 
(3)  Hibbard Road, from Skokie Boulevard to Old Glenview Road. 
(4)  Wilmette Avenue, from Hibbard Road to Glenview Road. 
(5)  Wilmette Avenue, from Green Bay Road to Elmwood Avenue. 
(6)  Tenth Street, from Elmwood Avenue to Sheridan Road. 
(7)  Old Glenview Road, from Hibbard Road to Wilmette Avenue. 
(8)  Locust Road, from Lake Avenue to Glenview Road. 
(9)  Hunter Road, from the north village limits to Wilmette Avenue. 
(10)  Isabella Street, from Sterling Lane to the east village limits. 
(11)  Linden Avenue, from Green Bay Road to Sheridan Road. 
(12)  Central Avenue, from Park Avenue to Sheridan Road. 
(13)  Twelfth Street, from Lake Avenue to Central Avenue. 
(14)  Park Avenue, from Wilmette Avenue to Central Avenue. 
(15)  Fourth Street, from Isabella Street to Lake Avenue. 
(c)  Major streets. The following streets area defined as major streets, upon which the maximum speed limit shall be 30 miles per hour unless, in accordance with engineering criteria such as those developed by the Illinois Department of Transportation, a different maximum speed limit is established and posted with appropriate signs giving notice of such different limit by authorities having jurisdiction over the major street: 
(1)  Lake Avenue, from the west village limits to Sheridan Road. 
(2)  Skokie Boulevard, from the north village limits to the south village limits. 
(3)  Hibbard Road, from Illinois Road to Skokie Boulevard. 
(4)  Glenview Road, from the west village limits to Wilmette Avenue. 
(5)  Wilmette Avenue, from Glenview Road to Green Bay Road. 
(6)  Crawford Avenue, from Wilmette Avenue to the south village limits. 
(7)  Ridge Road, from the north village limits to the south village limits. 
(8)  Green Bay Road, from the north village limits to the south village limits. 
(9)  Sheridan Road, from the north village limits to the south village limits. 
(d)  Alleys. The maximum speed limit in all alleys in the village shall be 15 miles per hour. 
(Code 1993, § 13-3.4.2; Ord. No. 93-0-51, 7-27-1993; Ord. No. 2014-O-6, 2-11-2014) 
Sec. 14-115. - Special speed limit while passing schools. 
(a)  No person shall drive a motor vehicle at a speed in excess of 20 mph while passing the school zone or while traveling upon any public thoroughfare on or across which children pass going to or from school during school days when school children are present. 
(b)  This section shall not be applicable unless appropriate signs are posted upon streets and highways under their respective jurisdiction and maintained by the village wherein the zone is located. Such signs shall give proper due warning that a school zone is being approached and shall indicate the school zone and the maximum speed limit in effect during school days when school children are present. 
(Code 1993, § 13-3.4.3) 
Sec. 14-116. - Minimum speed regulations. 
    No person shall drive a vehicle at such a slow speed as to impede or block the normal and reasonable movement of traffic, except when reduced speed is necessary for safe operation of his vehicle or in compliance with law. 
(Code 1993, § 13-3.4.4) 
Sec. 14-117. - Drive on right side of roadway; exceptions. 
(a)  Upon roadways of sufficient width a vehicle shall be driven upon the right half of the roadway, except as follows: 
(1)  When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction under the rules governing such movements; 
(2)  When the right half of a roadway is closed to traffic while under construction or repair; 
(3)  Upon a roadway divided into three marked lanes for traffic under the rules applicable thereon; 
(4)  Upon a roadway designated and signposted for one-way traffic. 
(b)  Whenever there is a single track paved road on one side of the public highway and two vehicles meet thereon, the driver on whose right is the wider shoulder shall give the right-of-way on such pavement to the other vehicle. 
(Code 1993, § 13-3.5) 
Sec. 14-118. - Passing vehicles proceeding in opposite directions. 
    Drivers of vehicles proceeding in opposite directions, except as provided in section 14-117, shall pass each other to the right and upon roadways having width for not more than one line of traffic in each direction each driver shall give to the other at least one-half of the main traveled portion of the roadway as nearly as possible. 
(Code 1993, § 13-3.6) 
Sec. 14-119. - Overtaking a vehicle on the left. 
    The following rules govern the overtaking and passing of vehicles proceeding in the same direction, subject to those limitations, exceptions and special rules hereinafter: 
(1)  The driver of a vehicle overtaking another vehicle proceeding in the same direction shall pass to the left thereof at a safe distance and shall not again drive to the right side of the roadway until safely clear of the overtaken vehicle. 
(2)  Except when overtaking and passing on the right is permitted, the driver of an overtaken vehicle shall give way to the right in favor of the overtaking vehicle on audible and/or visible signal and shall not increase the speed of his vehicle until completely passed by the overtaking vehicle. 
(Code 1993, § 13-3.7) 
Sec. 14-120. - Limitations on overtaking on the left. 
(a)  No vehicle shall be driven to the left side of the center of the roadway in overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction unless such left side is clearly visible and is free of oncoming traffic for a sufficient distance ahead to permit such overtaking and passing to be completely made without interfering with the safe operation of any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction or any vehicle overtaken. In every event the overtaking vehicle must return to the right-hand side of the roadway before coming within 100 feet of any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction. 
(b)  No vehicle shall, in overtaking and passing another vehicle or at any other time, be driven to the left side of the roadway under the following conditions: 
(1)  When approaching the crest of a grade or upon a curve in the highway. 
(2)  When approaching within 100 feet of any bridge, viaduct or tunnel or when approaching within 100 feet of or traversing any intersection or railroad grade crossing. 
(3)  Where official signs are in place directing that traffic keep to the right, or a distinctive center line is marked, which distinctive line also so directs traffic as declared in the sign manual adopted by section 14-199. 
(Code 1993, § 13-3.8) 
Sec. 14-121. - When overtaking on the right is permitted. 
(a)  The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass upon the right of another vehicle which is making or about to make a left turn. 
(b)  The driver of a vehicle may overtake and, allowing sufficient clearance, pass another vehicle proceeding in the same direction either upon the left or upon the right on a roadway with unobstructed pavement of sufficient width for four or more lines of moving traffic when such movement can be made in safety. No person shall drive off the pavement or upon the shoulder of the roadway in overtaking or passing on the right. 
(Code 1993, § 13-3.9) 
Sec. 14-122. - One-way roadways and rotary traffic islands. 
(a)  Upon a roadway designated and signposted for one-way traffic a vehicle shall be driven only in the direction designated. 
(b)  A vehicle passing around a rotary traffic island shall be driven only to the right of such island. 
(Code 1993, § 13-3.10) 
Sec. 14-123. - Driving on roadways laned for traffic. 
    Whenever any roadway has been divided into three or more clearly marked lanes for traffic, the following rules in addition to all others consistent herewith apply: 
(1)  A vehicle shall be driven as nearly as practical entirely within a single lane and shall not be moved from such lane until the driver has first ascertained that such movement can be made with safety. 
(2)  Upon a roadway which is divided into three lanes a vehicle shall not be driven in the center lane except when overtaking and passing another vehicle where the roadway is clearly visible and such center lane is clear of traffic within a safe distance or in preparation for a left turn or where such center lane is at the time allocated exclusively to traffic moving in the direction the vehicle is proceeding and is signposted to give notice of such allocation. 
(3)  Official signs may be erected directing slow-moving traffic to use a designated lane or allocating specified lanes to traffic moving in the same direction and drivers of vehicles shall obey the directions of every such sign. 
(Code 1993, § 13-3.11) 
Sec. 14-124. - Driving on one-way streets and alleys. 
    Upon one-way streets or alleys vehicular traffic shall move only in the direction designated when signs indicating the direction of traffic are erected and maintained at every intersection where movement in the opposite direction is prohibited. 
(Code 1993, § 13-3.12) 
Sec. 14-125. - Following too closely. 
    The driver of a motor vehicle shall not follow another vehicle more closely than is reasonable and prudent, having due regard for the speed of such vehicles and the traffic upon and the condition of the highway. "Reasonable and prudent" shall be determined in the light of weather conditions, traffic conditions, time of day, and condition of the roadway. 
(Code 1993, § 13-3.13) 
Sec. 14-126. - Required position and method of turning at intersections. 
    The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall do so as follows: 
(1)  Both the approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be made as close as practical to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway. 
(2)  At any intersection where traffic is permitted to move in both directions on each roadway entering the intersection, an approach for a left turn shall be made in that portion of the right half of the roadway nearest the center line thereof and by passing to the right of such center line where it enters the intersection and after entering the intersection, the left turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection to the right of the center line of the roadway being entered. Whenever practicable the left turn shall be made in that portion of the intersection to the left of the center of the intersection. 
(3)  At any intersection where traffic is restricted to one direction on one or more of the roadways, the driver of a vehicle intending to turn left at any such intersection shall approach the intersection in the extreme left-hand lane lawfully available to traffic moving in the direction of travel of such vehicle and after entering the intersection, the left turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection, as nearly as practicable, in the left-hand lane lawfully available to traffic moving in such direction upon the roadway being entered. 
(Code 1993, § 13-3.14) 
Sec. 14-127. - Starting parked vehicle. 
    No person shall start a vehicle which is stopped, standing or parked unless and until such movement can be made with reasonable safety. 
(Code 1993, § 13-3.15) 
Sec. 14-128. - When signal required. 
(a)  No person shall turn a vehicle from a direct course upon a highway unless and until such movement can be made with reasonable safety and then only after giving a clearly audible signal by sounding the horn if any pedestrian may be affected by such movement or after giving an appropriate signal in the manner provided by state law in the event any other vehicle may be affected by such movement. 
(b)  A signal of intention to turn right or left shall be given during not less than the last 100 feet traveled by the vehicle before turning. 
(c)  No person shall stop or suddenly decrease the speed of a vehicle without first giving an appropriate signal in the manner provided by state law to the driver of any vehicle immediately to the rear when there is opportunity to give such signal. 
(Code 1993, § 13-3.16) 
Sec. 14-129. - Limitations on turning around. 
    The driver of any vehicle shall not turn such vehicle so as to proceed in the opposite direction upon any street in a business district and shall not upon any other street so turn a vehicle unless such movement can be made in safety and without interfering with other traffic. 
(Code 1993, § 13-3.17) 
Sec. 14-130. - Right-of-way rules; vehicles approaching or entering intersection. 
    Except as hereinafter provided motor vehicles traveling upon public highways shall give the right-of-way to vehicles approaching along intersecting highways from the right and shall have the right-of-way over those approaching from the left. 
(Code 1993, § 13-3.18) 
Sec. 14-131. - Vehicle turning left. 
    The driver of a vehicle intending to turn to the left within an intersection or into an alley, private road, or driveway shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction which is so close as to constitute an immediate hazard, but said driver, having so yielded may proceed at such time as a safe interval occurs. 
(Code 1993, § 13-3.19) 
Sec. 14-132. - Emerging from alley or private driveway. 
    The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, driveway or building shall stop the vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or onto the sidewalk area extending across any alleyway, yielding the right-of-way to any pedestrian as is necessary to avoid collision, and upon entering the roadway shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on that roadway. 
(Code 1993, § 13-3.20) 
Sec. 14-133. - Stop when traffic obstructed. 
    No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle he is operating without obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic-control signal indication to proceed. 
(Code 1993, § 13-3.21) 
Sec. 14-134. - Obedience to signal indicating approach of railroad train. 
(a)  When any person driving a vehicle approaches a railroad grade crossing under any of the circumstances stated in this section, the driver of the vehicle shall stop not less than ten feet from the nearest rail of the railroad, and shall not proceed until he can do so safely. The foregoing requirements apply when: 
(1)  A clearly visible electric or mechanical signal device gives warning of the immediate approach of a railroad train; 
(2)  A crossing gate is lowered or when a human flagman gives or continues to give a signal of the approach or passage of a railroad train. 
(b)  No person shall drive any vehicle through, around or under any crossing gate or barrier at a railroad grade crossing while the gate or barrier is closed, or when a flagman is giving a signal of the approach or passage of a train. 
(Code 1993, § 13-3.22) 
Sec. 14-135. - Operation of vehicles on approach of authorized emergency vehicles. 
(a)  Upon the immediate approach of an authorized emergency vehicle, when the driver is giving audible signal by siren, exhaust whistle, bell, or light, the driver of every other vehicle shall yield the right-of-way and shall immediately drive to a position parallel to, and as close as possible to the right-hand edge or curb of the highway clear of any intersection and shall stop and remain in such position until the authorized emergency vehicle has passed, except when otherwise directed by a police officer. 
(b)  This section does not relieve the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons using the highway. 
(Code 1993, § 13-3.23) 
Sec. 14-136. - Overtaking and passing school bus. 
(a)  The driver of a vehicle upon meeting or overtaking any school bus which has stopped on the highway for the purpose of receiving or discharging any school children shall immediately stop his vehicle and shall not pass such school bus while such school children are alighting therefrom and embarking thereon. 
(b)  This section is not applicable unless the school bus shall bear upon the front and rear thereon a plainly visible sign containing the words "School Bus" in letters not less than four inches in height which can be removed or covered when the vehicle is not in use as a school bus. 
(c)  The driver of a vehicle upon a highway having four or more lanes which permits at least two lanes of traffic to travel in opposite directions need not stop such vehicle upon meeting a school bus which is stopped in the opposing roadway; and need not stop such vehicle when driving upon a controlled access highway when passing a school bus traveling in either direction that is stopped in a loading zone adjacent to the surfaced or improved part of the controlled access highway where pedestrians are not permitted to cross. 
(Code 1993, § 13-3.24) 
Sec. 14-137. - Vehicles at certain railroad crossings. 
    When approaching an at-grade railroad crossing, regardless of whether the at-grade crossing is protected by any railroad sign or signal, unless directed to do so by a police officer or other person authorized to and directing traffic, or by authorized temporary signs, no vehicle 30 feet or more in length, except emergency vehicles, may: 
(1)  Proceed westbound on Oakwood Avenue, Linden Avenue, Forest Avenue or Elmwood Avenue across an at-grade crossing east of Green Bay Road; or 
(2)  Proceed westbound on Wilmette Avenue, Central Avenue or Lake Avenue past the easternmost set of crossing gates protecting an at-grade crossing east of Green Bay Road, regardless of whether the gates are raised or lowered, unless a green traffic signal is displayed for westbound traffic at Green Bay Road. 
(Code 1993, § 13-3.25) 
Sec. 14-138. - Low speed vehicles and non-highway vehicles prohibited. 
(a)  Except as provided in this Code, no person shall operate any low speed vehicle or non-highway vehicle on any public street or highway, roadway, or alley. 
(b)  Golf carts, as defined in the Illinois Vehicle Code, shall be permitted to temporarily cross a public street, highway, roadway, alley, or sidewalk as necessary to travel from one portion of a golf course to another portion of the same golf course. 
(Code 1993, § 13-3.26; Ord. No. 2010-O-14, 2-9-2010) 
Sec. 14-139. - Size, weight and load regulations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to operate on any street, highway, roadway, alley, and bridge under the jurisdiction of the village, any vehicle or combination of vehicles exceeding the size and weight limitations provided in ILCS ch. 625, act 5, § 15-102 (width), ILCS ch. 625, act 5, § 15-103 (height), ILCS ch. 625, act 5, § 15-107 (length), and ILCS ch. 625, act 5, § 15-111 (weight). 
(b)  Where lower size and weight limits or other restrictions are imposed by ordinance under authority of ILCS ch. 625, act 5, §§ 15-316 and 5/15-317, and signs indicating such limitations or restrictions are posted, it shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle or combination of vehicles in excess of the adopted size or weight limitations found in this chapter. 
(c)  Exceptions. The provisions of this chapter governing weight do not apply to the following: 
(1)  Emergency vehicles; 
(2)  Vehicles owned and operated by governmental agencies; 
(3)  Vehicles owned and operated by private utilities; 
(4)  Buses; 
(5)  Vehicles engaged in the collection and removal of garbage or refuse; 
(6)  Snow removal vehicles engaged in snow removal functions on private property or for the village; 
(7)  Tow trucks; 
(8)  Vehicles operating under the terms of a valid oversize permit issued by the Illinois Department of Transportation and the village; or only a village permit if an Illinois Department of Transportation permit is not required by the department; 
(9)  Any other vehicles that meet the criteria for an exception to this chapter pursuant to the Illinois Vehicle Code; 
(10)  All vehicles shall have access within one road-mile from I-94 that use the most reasonable and practicable route to their destination. 
(d)  Village streets with designated size and weight limits. 
(1)  Except as otherwise set forth in this chapter, the maximum size and weight limits set forth by the Illinois Vehicle Code shall apply to all village streets. 
(2)  Vehicles required to obtain a permit pursuant to this section shall be restricted to operating on collector streets and major streets as defined in sections 14-114(b) and (c), except where otherwise allowed by this chapter or expressly allowed in the route designated in the permit. 
(3)  No vehicle or combination of vehicles equipped with pneumatic tires shall be operated upon any street or bridge in violation of the following weight limitations: 
a.  No vehicle or combination of vehicles shall be operated, unladen or with load, upon the bridge located between 128 W. Linden and 200 W. Linden when the gross weight including load on the road surface exceeds ten tons. 
b.  No vehicle or combination of vehicles shall be operated, unladen or with load, upon the bridge located on 128 W. Maple and 200 W. Maple when the gross weight including load on the road surface exceeds 15 tons. 
c.  No vehicle or combination of vehicles shall be operated, unladen or with load, upon the bridge located between 590 N. Sheridan and 610 N. Sheridan when the gross weight including load on the road surface exceeds 74,880 pounds. 
(e)  Posting of signs. Where size and weight limitations are imposed by ordinance that are different from the standards adopted in subsection (a) of this section, the Director of Engineering and Public Works or any other person designated by the Village President and Board of Trustees shall post or cause to be posted suitable signs designating weight limitations established by this chapter. 
(f)  Violations; penalties (weight). 
(1)  Fines. Whenever a vehicle or combination of vehicles is operated in violation of the weight restrictions set forth in this chapter; the owner or driver, or both shall be deemed guilty of such violation; and either the owner or driver, or both may be prosecuted for such violation. Any person, firm, or corporation convicted of any violation of the weight restrictions set forth in this chapter shall be fined in an amount equal to the following: 
Up to and including 2,000 pounds overweight The fine is $100.00 From 2,001 through 2,500 pounds overweight The fine is $270.00 From 2,501 through 3,000 pounds overweight The fine is $330.00 From 3,001 through 3,500 pounds overweight The fine is $520.00 From 3,501 through 4,000 pounds overweight The fine is $600.00 From 4,001 through 4,500 pounds overweight The fine is $850.00 From 4,501 through 5,000 pounds overweight The fine is $950.00 From 5,001 or more pounds overweight The fine shall be computed by assessing $1,500.00 for the first 5,000 pounds overweight and $150.00 for each additional increment of 500 pounds overweight or fraction thereof.  
(2)  Liability if street or structure damaged. Any person driving any vehicle or combination of vehicles upon any street is liable for any and all damages which the street or structure may sustain as a result of any illegal operation. 
(3)  Any person, firm, business, or corporation that owns and operates the transporting vehicle or that operates the vehicle under a bona fide lease agreement who violates any of the weight restrictions of this section, may avoid prosecution for violating any of this section by surrendering the citation or other notice of violation and paying to the Police Department within ten days from the date appearing on said violation notice, the applicable minimum fine as indicated in subsection (f)(1) of this section. Any person making such payment shall receive a receipt therefor from the Police Department. 
(g)  Violations; penalties (non-weight violations). 
(1)  Whenever a vehicle or combination of vehicles is operated in violation of any restrictions set forth in this chapter other than a weight restriction; the owner or driver, or both shall be deemed guilty of such violation; and either the owner or driver, or both may be prosecuted for such violation. Any person, firm, or corporation convicted of any violation of any restrictions set forth in this chapter other than the weight restriction shall be fined in an amount not less than $250.00 and not more than $1,000.00. 
(2)  Liability if street or structure damaged. Any person driving any vehicle or combination of vehicles upon any street is liable for any and all damages which the street or structure may sustain as a result of any illegal operation. 
(3)  Any person, firm, business, or corporation that owns and operates the transporting vehicle or that operates the vehicle under a bona fide lease agreement who violates any of the non-weight restrictions of this section, may avoid prosecution for violating any of said this section by surrendering the citation or other notice of violation and paying to the Police Department within ten days from the date appearing on said violation notice, the sum of $250.00. Any person making such payment shall receive a receipt therefor from the Police Department. 
(Code 1993, § 13-3.27; Ord. No. 2010-O-42, 7-13-2010; Ord. No. 2011-O-42, 7-12-2011) 
Sec. 14-140. - Overweight and oversized permits. 
(a)  Permits required. 
(1)  A permit shall be required for the movement of any vehicle or combinations of vehicles, which is non-divisible or is carrying a load that is non-divisible, while operating on roadways and bridges within the jurisdiction of the village which exceeds the following limits: 
a.  Maximum gross weight of more than 80,000 pounds; 
b.  Maximum gross length of 42 feet for single vehicles; 
c.  Maximum gross length of more than 55 feet for tractor-semitrailer combinations; 
d.  Maximum gross length of more than 60 feet for all other combinations; 
e.  Maximum gross width of more than eight feet, six inches; 
f.  Maximum gross height of more than 13 feet, six inches; 
g.  Maximum single axle weight of more than 20,000 pounds; 
h.  Maximum tandem axle weight of more than 34,000 pounds; 
i.  Axle weights or series of axle weights that exceed the maximum limits set forth in ILCS ch. 62, act 5, § 15-111(f). 
(2)  Exempt from permits are the following: 
a.  Emergency vehicles; 
b.  Vehicles owned and operated by governmental agencies; 
c.  Vehicles owned and operated by private utilities; 
d.  Buses; 
e.  Vehicles engaged in the collection and removal of garbage or refuse; 
f.  Snow removal vehicles engaged in snow removal functions on private property or for the village; 
g.  Tow trucks; 
h.  Any other vehicles that meet the criteria for an exception to this chapter pursuant to the Illinois Vehicle Code; 
i.  All vehicles shall have access within one road-mile from I-94 that use the most reasonable and practicable route to their destination. 
(3)  Permits shall be issued only in the name of a person, firm, business, or corporation that owns and operates the transporting vehicle or that operates the vehicle under a bona fide lease agreement. 
(4)  When necessary, the village may require separate permits for both size and weight of the vehicle, including payment of the appropriate fees. 
(5)  Permits for vehicles that are both overweight and/or oversize are valid as follows: 
a.  Single trip permit: one trip from the point of origin to the point of destination. Any additional stops between the point of origin and the point of destination are expressly prohibited. Single trip permits are valid for five consecutive dates from the date of issuance unless otherwise directed by the Police Department. 
b.  Round-trip permit: two trips over the same route in opposite directions. Round-trip permits are valid for ten consecutive days from the date of issuance unless otherwise directed by the Police Department. 
(6)  Permits are non-transferable and apply only to the permittee. 
(7)  The village may issue revisions to permits: 
a.  To correct an error attributed to the village; 
b.  To correct an error attributed to the applicant, discovered before the move; 
c.  To adjust weights, dimension or routes as issued on the permit, before the move is made. 
(8)  The permit, when issued, constitutes an agreement between the permittee and the village that the move described in the application will take place only as described. The permittee has the responsibility to report to the Police Department any inaccuracies or errors on the part of either the village or the permittee before starting any move. Undertaking the move is prima facie evidence of acceptance of the permit as issued and its terms. 
(9)  The routing prescribed in the permit constitutes the sole extent of the authority granted by the permit for the use of roads within the jurisdiction of the village, and any vehicle and/or load found to be off route will be considered off route and without a permit. Permits shall be in the drivers possession at all times unless otherwise directed by the Police Department and presented upon demand to any and all police officers for the purpose of inspection. 
(10)  Any vehicles and/or load found to be divisible will render the permit null and void. The entire gross weight and axles weights of the vehicles with the load are subject to weight limits prescribed by state statutes. It is the duty of the applicant to verify the non-divisibility of the vehicles before making application for the permit. The permit application itself is prima facie evidence that the applicant confirmed the vehicles and/or load were non-divisible. 
(11)  If required, arrangement shall be made by the permittee to have the proper utilities notified, property moved, bridge or highway analysis performed and completed in advance of any permit movement. 
(12)  All movements under the permit shall be made in accordance with all applicable federal, state and local laws, ordinances, rules and regulations. 
(13)  Permits are null and void if altered for the purpose of deception. The permits issued under this article constitute the grant of a privilege by the village and may be denied or suspended for such reasons as the village may deem rationally related to its governmental interests, including, but not limited to: 
a.  A permittee knowingly providing incorrect information in an application for a permit; 
b.  A permittee, its agents, or employees operating on a permit which has been altered for the purposes of deception; 
c.  Non-compliance by permittee, its agents or employees with federal, state, or local ordinances pertaining to the transport of goods or operation of a vehicle engaged in the transport of goods; 
d.  Moving on village streets without a valid permit as required under this article. 
(14)  All single-trip or round-trip permits are limited to, movements on assigned routes only. 
(15)  All quarterly or annual overweight permits are restricted to the following maximum limitations and routing: 
a.  12 feet in width; 
b.  13 feet six inches in height; 
c.  115 feet in length; 
d.  May not move across bridges or structures that are posted or listed as having a lower weight limit than permitted per the permit; 
e.  May not move on a "no-truck" route that is posted or listed as such, without written permission from a member of the Police Department; 
f.  May not use any village street as a cut-thru to avoid using a state, county, or township highway. 
(b)  Applications for permit. 
(1)  All applications for permits shall be given full consideration. Permits for proposed moves may be issued: 
a.  When the village roadways and bridges will not be unduly damaged; and 
b.  When the safety of the traveling public will be adequately protected. 
(2)  Applications for a permit to move an oversized and/or overweight vehicle, and/or load, must be made to the Police Department. The following information shall be included on the permit application: 
a.  Company name; 
b.  Company address; 
c.  Company fax and telephone numbers; 
d.  Description of hauling vehicle or power unit; 
e.  Description of load to be moved and if the load is carrying an attachment; 
f.  Maximum dimensions, gross weight, and axle weights of vehicle including load; 
g.  Roads under the jurisdiction of the village to be traveled; 
h.  Any special conditions. 
(c)  Police escorts. Police escorts are required for certain vehicles and loads as indicated in this chapter. The total number of officers necessary to provide for a safe move shall be determined by the Police Department, based upon the size and weight of the permit move. Fees for escorts shall be in addition to the permit fees set forth herein. Escort fees shall provide for a minimum of two hours of service calculated by the most current overtime rate established by the Police Department. 
(d)  Indemnification and insurance. 
(1)  The permittee shall assume total liability for any and all damages to streets, bridges, village owned appurtenances and private or public property while engaged in a permit move. The measure of liability is the cost for all repairs or replacement of property damaged by the permittee. 
(2)  The permittee shall indemnify and hold harmless the village from any costs, judgments or settlements, including attorney's fees, arising from physical injuries, including loss of life, or damage to or loss of property related to acts or omissions by permittee, its officers, agents, or employees pursuant to the permit. 
(3)  Upon application for a permit each applicant shall provide evidence of a valid comprehensive general liability insurance policy, with an insurance company approved by the village, for protection against personal injury or property damage in the amount of $1,000,000.00 per occurrence. The village shall be listed as a certificate holder on the policy. 
(e)  Suspension and reinstatement. 
(1)  Suspension of a current permit shall be for the time determined appropriate by the Police Department; however, reinstatement may be made upon conditions determined by the village and payment of all outstanding settlements or judgments. 
(2)  The Chief of Police or designee shall administer and enforce this section and shall have the authority to grant, deny, suspend, or reinstate permits. Any applicant or permittee denied a permit or who has had a permit suspended, upon request, shall be given a hearing before the Chief of Police. 
(3)  No permits shall be issued to an applicant or company who has outstanding fees or payments due to the village. 
(f)  Permit fee schedules. 
(1)  The village with respect to streets under its jurisdiction shall collect a fee as shown herein from applicants for the issuance of a permit to operate or move a vehicle or combination of vehicles, and/or loads, which fit the categories shown. Any axle or gross weight greater than the maximum weights set forth in the fee schedule are subject to special assessment and investigation to determine appropriate fees. 
(2)  Fee schedule. 
a.  The fee schedule for single vehicles shall be as follows: 
Category Gross weight range (lbs) Single trip Round trip Quarterly Annual 1A 80,000-99,999 $35.00 $65.00 $205.00 $820.00 2A 100,000-119,999 $45.00 $85.00 $235.00 $940.00 3A 120,000+ $50.00 $95.00 $250.00 $1,000.00  
b.  The fee schedule for over dimension (oversized vehicles) shall be as follows: 
Category Max size Escort Single trip Round trip Quarterly Annual 1B Width: 10' Height: 13'6" Length: 115' no $15.00 $25.00 $75.00 $300.00 2B Width: 12' Height: 13'6" Length: 115' no $20.00 $40.00 $120.00 $480.00 3B Width: 14' Height: 13'6" Length: 115' no $30.00 $55.00 $165.00 $660.00 4B Width: 18' Height: 16' Length: 135' yes $50.00 $95.00 X X 5B Width: >18' Height: >16' Length: >135' yes $100.00 $195.00 X X  
(g)  Violations, penalties. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any of the requirements set forth in this section. Furthermore, it shall be unlawful for any person issued a permit under this section, or any employee or agent of such person, to violate any of the terms or conditions of the permit. The penalty for any such violation shall be a fine in an amount not less than $250.00 and not more than $750.00. Penalties for any violation of this section shall be in addition to any penalties imposed for the violation of any other section of this chapter. 
(2)  Any person, firm, business, or corporation that owns and operates the transporting vehicle or that operates the vehicle under a bona fide lease agreement who violates any of the provisions of this section, may avoid prosecution for violating any of this section by surrendering the citation or other notice of violation and paying to the Police Department within ten days from the date appearing on said violation notice, the sum of $250.00. Any person making such payment shall receive a receipt therefor from the Police Department. 
(Code 1993, § 13-3.28; Ord. No. 2010-O-42, 7-13-2010; Ord. No. 2011-O-42, 7-12-2011) 
Secs. 14-141-14-163. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - MISCELLANEOUS DRIVING RULES 

Sec. 14-164. - Unattended motor vehicles. 
(a)  No person driving or in charge of a motor vehicle shall permit it to stand unattended in any public place, or on any used or new car lot, without first stopping the engine, locking the ignition, removing the ignition key from the vehicle, effectively setting the brake thereon and, when standing upon any grade, turning the front wheels to the curb or side of the highway. 
(b)  Whenever any police officer shall find a motor vehicle standing unattended with the ignition key in the vehicle, in violation of this section, such police officer is authorized to remove such key from such vehicle and to deliver such key to the police officer in charge of the nearest police station. 
(c)  The registered owner of a vehicle found in violation of this section shall be held prima facie responsible for any such violation. 
(Code 1993, § 13-4.1) 
Sec. 14-165. - Following fire apparatus prohibited. 
    The driver of any vehicle, other than one on official business, shall not follow any fire apparatus traveling in response to a fire alarm or other emergency closer than 500 feet or drive into or park such vehicle within the block where fire apparatus has stopped in answer to a fire alarm or other emergency. 
(Code 1993, § 13-4.2) 
Sec. 14-166. - Crossing fire hose. 
    No vehicle shall drive over any unprotected hose of a Fire Department when laid down on any street or private driveway, to be used at any fire or alarm of fire, without the consent of the Fire Department official in command. 
(Code 1993, § 13-4.3) 
Sec. 14-167. - Driving through funeral or other processions. 
    No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral or other authorized procession while they are in motion and when such vehicles are conspicuously designated as required in this chapter. This section does not apply at intersections where traffic is controlled by police officers. 
(Code 1993, § 13-4.5) 
Sec. 14-168. - Duty of drivers in a procession. 
    Each driver in a funeral or other procession shall drive as near to the right-hand edge of the roadway as practical and shall follow the vehicle ahead as closely as is practical and safe. 
(Code 1993, § 13-4.6) 
Sec. 14-169. - Funeral processions to be identified. 
    A funeral composed of a procession of vehicles shall be identified as such by the display upon the outside of each vehicle of a pennant or other identifying insignia and by having the headlights of each vehicle lighted. 
(Code 1993, § 13-4.7) 
Sec. 14-170. - Driving on sidewalks. 
    The driver of a vehicle shall not drive within any sidewalk area except at a permanent or temporary driveway. 
(Code 1993, § 13-4.8) 
Sec. 14-171. - Open door in traffic lane. 
    No person shall open the door of a vehicle on the side available to moving traffic unless and until it is reasonably safe to do so and can be done without interfering with the movement of other traffic, nor shall any person leave a door open on the side of a vehicle available to moving traffic for a period of time longer than necessary to load and unload passengers. 
(Code 1993, § 13-4.9) 
Sec. 14-172. - Limitations on backing. 
    The driver of a vehicle shall not back the same unless such movement can be made with reasonable safety and without interfering with other traffic. 
(Code 1993, § 13-4.10) 
Sec. 14-173. - Riding on motorcycles. 
    A person operating a motorcycle shall not ride other than upon the permanent and regular seat attached thereto or carry any other person nor shall any other person ride upon such motorcycle other than upon a firmly attached seat to the rear or side of the operator. 
(Code 1993, § 13-4.11) 
Sec. 14-174. - Driving vehicle onto or from limited access roadways. 
    No person shall drive a vehicle onto or from any limited access roadway except at such entrances and exits as are established by the proper authorities. 
(Code 1993, § 13-4.12) 
Sec. 14-175. - Obstruction to driver's view or driving mechanism. 
(a)  No person shall drive a vehicle when it is so loaded, or when there are in the front seat such number of persons, exceeding three, as to obstruct the view of the driver to the front or sides of the vehicle, or as to interfere with the driver's control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle. 
(b)  No passenger in a vehicle shall ride in such position as to interfere with the driver's view ahead or to the sides, or to interfere with his control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle. 
(Code 1993, § 13-4.13) 
Sec. 14-176. - Clinging to moving vehicles. 
    It is unlawful for any person riding upon any motorcycle, coaster, sled, roller skates or any toy vehicle to attach the same or himself to any moving vehicle upon any roadway, and it is unlawful for any person operating or driving an automobile, truck, motorcycle or other vehicle to knowingly allow any person traveling upon a bicycle, motorcycle, sled, skis, coaster, skates or any toy vehicle to cling or attach himself or his vehicle to any moving automobile, truck, motorcycle or other vehicle upon any street. 
(Code 1993, § 13-4.14) 
Sec. 14-177. - Loud or unnecessary noise. 
    It is unlawful for any person to operate a vehicle which causes unusually loud or unnecessary noise. 
(Code 1993, § 13-4.15) 
Sec. 14-178. - Vehicles imitating public vehicles. 
    No vehicle shall have applied any paint, decal or insignia, or be equipped with any siren, whistle, horn, bell, or lights so as to imitate any official vehicle of the village. 
(Code 1993, § 13-4.16) 
Sec. 14-179. - Vehicles emitting gas or smoke. 
    It is unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle which emits such an amount of smoke or vapor as to be dangerous to the health of persons in the vicinity of the vehicle or as to make dangerous the operation of other vehicles on the street. 
(Code 1993, § 13-4.17) 
Sec. 14-180. - Obstructing fire station driveways. 
(a)  The Village Engineer is authorized to install such signs or pavement markings as the Village Engineer may find necessary and appropriate to designate the portion of a street adjoining a village fire station driveway that is to be kept clear of stopped, standing or parked vehicles in order to permit the unobstructed exit of emergency vehicles from said fire station driveway. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person operating a vehicle to stop, stand or park said vehicle anywhere in the portion of a street adjoining a fire station driveway that has been signed or marked as provided in subsection (a) of this section, or to in any other manner, obstruct or block such fire station driveway. This shall include stopping a vehicle in such a marked area while waiting at a traffic signal or railroad crossing signal. 
(c)  The minimum fine for a violation of this subsection (b) of this section is $100.00. 
(Code 1993, § 13-4.18; Ord. No. 99-O-74, 9-28-1999) 
Secs. 14-181-14-198. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES 

Sec. 14-199. - State sign manual. 
    All traffic-control signs, signals and devices shall conform to the manual and specifications approved by the Illinois Department of Transportation. All signs and signals required hereunder for a particular purpose shall so far as practicable be uniform as to type and location throughout the village. All traffic-control devices so erected and not inconsistent with the provisions of state law or this chapter shall be official traffic-control devices. 
(Code 1993, § 13-5.1) 
Sec. 14-200. - Obedience to traffic-control devices. 
    No driver of a vehicle shall disobey the instruction of any official traffic-control device placed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, unless at the time otherwise directed by a police officer, subject to the exceptions granted the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle in this chapter. 
(Code 1993, § 13-5.2) 
Sec. 14-201. - Official traffic-control devices, presumption of legality. 
    Any official traffic-control device placed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and purporting to conform to the lawful requirements pertaining to such devices shall be presumed to comply with requirements of this chapter, unless the contrary shall be established by competent evidence. 
(Code 1993, § 13-5.3) 
Sec. 14-202. - Traffic-control signal legend. 
    Whenever traffic is controlled by traffic-control signals exhibiting the words "Go," "Caution" or "Stop," or exhibiting different colored lights successively the following colors only shall be used and such terms and lights shall indicate as follows: 
(1)  Green alone or "Go." 
a.  Vehicular traffic facing the signal may proceed straight through or turn right or left unless a sign at such place prohibits either such turn. But vehicular traffic shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles and to pedestrians lawfully within the intersection at the time such signal is exhibited. 
b.  Pedestrians facing the signal may proceed across the roadway within any marked or unmarked crosswalk. 
(2)  Yellow or "Caution" when shown following the green or "Go" signal. 
a.  Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop before entering the nearest crosswalk at the intersection, but if such stop cannot be made in safety, a vehicle may be driven cautiously through the intersection. 
b.  No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the roadway until a green or "Go" signal is shown alone, unless authorized to do so by a pedestrian "Walk" signal. 
(3)  Red alone or "Stop." 
a.  Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop before entering the nearest crosswalk at an intersection or at such other point as may be indicated by a clearly visible line and shall remain standing until green or "Go" is shown alone, except that where not prohibited pursuant to subsection (6) of this section, vehicles may make a right turn, in which event such vehicular traffic may cautiously enter the intersection only to make the turn indicated by such sign but shall not interfere with other traffic or endanger pedestrians lawfully within a crosswalk. 
b.  No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the roadway until a green or "Go" signal is shown alone, unless authorized to do so by a pedestrian "Walk" signal. 
(4)  Red with green arrow. 
a.  Vehicular traffic facing such signal may cautiously enter the intersection only to make the movement indicated by such arrow but shall not interfere with other traffic or endanger pedestrians lawfully within a crosswalk. 
b.  No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the roadway until the green or "Go" signal is shown alone unless authorized to do so by a pedestrian "Walk" signal. 
(5)  Signals maintained at places other than intersections. In the event an official traffic-control signal is erected and maintained at a place other than an intersection, the provisions of this section shall be applicable except as to those provisions which by their nature can have no application. Any stop required shall be made at a sign or marking on the pavement indicating where the stop shall be made, but in the absence of any such sign or marking, the stop shall be made at the signal. 
(6)  The Illinois Vehicle Code, section 11-306, permits a right turn against a red light unless the village shall determine such turning movement to be hazardous. The Village Engineer and Chief of Police are authorized to determine and designate intersections where such a turning movement is considered hazardous. The following intersections shall be posted with the following sign: "No Right Turn on Red": 
a.  Green Bay Road, north and south bound, at Lake Avenue. 
b.  Ridge Road, north and south bound, at Lake Avenue. 
c.  Lake Avenue, east and west bound, at Sheridan Road when pedestrians are present. 
(Code 1993, § 13-5.4; Ord. No. 74-0-3, 1-2-1974) 
Sec. 14-203. - Pedestrian walk-or-wait signals. 
    Whenever special pedestrian-control signals exhibiting the words "Walk" or "Wait" are in place such signals indicate as follows: 
(1)  Walk. Pedestrians facing such signal may proceed across the roadway in the direction of the signal and shall be given the right-of-way by the drivers of all vehicles. 
(2)  Wait. No pedestrian shall start to cross the roadway in the direction of such signal, but any pedestrian who has partially completed his crossing on the "Walk" signal shall proceed to a sidewalk or safety zone while the "Wait" signal is showing. 
(Code 1993, § 13-5.5) 
Sec. 14-204. - Flashing signals. 
    Whenever flashing red or yellow signals are used they require obedience by vehicular traffic as follows: 
(1)  Flashing red (stop signal). When a red lens is illuminated by rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles shall stop before entering the nearest crosswalk at an intersection or at a limit line when marked, and the right to proceed shall be subject to the rules applicable after making a stop at a stop sign. 
(2)  Flashing yellow (caution signal). When a yellow lens is illuminated with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles may proceed through the intersection or past such signal only with caution. 
(Code 1993, § 13-5.6) 
Sec. 14-205. - Display of unauthorized signs, signals or markings. 
    No person shall place, maintain or display upon or in view of any highway an unauthorized sign, signal, marking or device which purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles an official traffic-control device or railroad sign or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic. No person shall place, maintain or display upon or in view of any highway any other sign which hides from view or interferes with the movement of traffic or the effectiveness of any traffic-control device or any railroad sign or signal. No person shall place or maintain upon any highway any traffic sign or signal bearing thereon any commercial advertising. The Police Department may remove or cause to be removed any such signs or signals. 
(Code 1993, § 13-5.7) 
Sec. 14-206. - Interference with official traffic-control devices or railroad signs or signals. 
    No person shall without lawful authority attempt to or in fact alter, deface, injure, knock down or remove any traffic-control device, or any railroad sign or signal or any inscription, shield or insignia thereon or any other part thereof. 
(Code 1993, § 13-5.8) 
Sec. 14-207. - Designation of crosswalks, establishment of safety zones and marking of traffic lanes. 
    The Village Engineer and Chief of Police are authorized: 
(1)  To designate and maintain, by appropriate devices, marks or lines upon the surface of the roadway, crosswalks at intersections where, in their opinion, there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway and at such other places as they deem necessary. 
(2)  To establish safety zones of such kind and character and at such places as they deem necessary for the protection of pedestrians. 
(3)  To mark lanes for traffic on street pavements at such places as they deem advisable, consistent with the traffic ordinances of the village. 
(4)  To mark lanes for parking on street pavements at such places as they deem advisable, consistent with the state traffic laws, this chapter or any other traffic ordinances of the village. 
(Code 1993, § 13-5.9) 
Sec. 14-208. - Markers, buttons or signs indicating course to be traveled at intersections. 
(a)  The Village Engineer and Chief of Police are authorized to place markers, buttons or signs within or adjacent to intersections indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning at such intersections, and such course to be traveled as so indicated may conform to or be other than as prescribed by this chapter. 
(b)  When authorized markers, buttons or other indications are placed within an intersection indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning thereat, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of such indications. 
(Code 1993, § 13-5.10) 
Sec. 14-209. - Signs restricting right, left or U-turns. 
    The Village Engineer and Chief of Police are authorized to determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right, left or U-turn, except that U-turns at intersections in the business district shall not be permitted, and shall place proper signs at such intersections. The making of such turns may be prohibited between certain hours of any day and permitted at other hours, in which event the same shall be plainly indicated on the signs or they may be removed when such turns are permitted. 
(Code 1993, § 13-5.11) 
Sec. 14-210. - Obedience to no-turn signs. 
    Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right, left or U-turn is permitted, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of any such sign. 
(Code 1993, § 13-5.12) 
Sec. 14-211. - One-way streets and alleys. 
(a)  Whenever any ordinance of the village designates any one-way street or alley the Village Engineer and Chief of Police shall place and maintain signs giving notice thereof, and no such regulation shall be effective unless such signs are in place. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall be placed at every intersection where movement of traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited. 
(b)  Upon those streets and parts of streets and in those alleys described in Schedule I in section 14-652, and upon such streets and alleys as shall hereafter be made one-way streets or alleys, vehicular traffic shall move only in the indicated direction when signs indicating the direction of traffic are erected and maintained at every intersection where movement in the opposite direction is prohibited. It is unlawful for any vehicular traffic to disobey such signs. 
(Code 1993, § 13-5.13) 
Sec. 14-212. - Stop and yield signs. 
(a)  Whenever any ordinance of the village designates and describes a through street, it is the duty of the Village Engineer and Chief of Police to place and maintain a stop or yield sign on each and every street intersecting such through street or intersecting that portion thereof described and designated as such by any ordinance of the village. 
(b)  The Village Engineer and Chief of Police are authorized to determine and designate intersections where a particular hazard exists upon other than through streets and to determine whether vehicles shall stop or yield at one or more entrances to any such hazardous intersection, and shall erect a stop or yield sign at every place where required. 
(c)  When stop or yield signs are erected as herein provided at or near the entrance to any intersection, every driver of a vehicle operated upon the streets of the village shall stop or yield such vehicle at such sign or at a clearly marked stop line before entering the intersection except when directed to proceed by a police officer or traffic-control signal. 
(Code 1993, § 13-5.14) 
Secs. 14-213-14-232. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - PEDESTRIAN'S RIGHTS AND DUTIES 

Sec. 14-233. - Subject to traffic-control signals. 
    Pedestrians are subject to traffic-control signals as heretofore declared in this chapter, but at all other places pedestrians are granted those rights and are subject to the restrictions stated in this chapter. 
(Code 1993, § 13-6.1) 
Sec. 14-234. - Right-of-way at crosswalk. 
(a)  Where traffic-control signals are not in place or in operation, the driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way, slowing down or stopping if need be to so yield to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within any marked crosswalk or within any unmarked crosswalk at an intersection, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. No pedestrian shall suddenly leave a curb or other place of safety and walk or run into the path of a vehicle, which is so close that it is impossible for the driver to yield the right-of-way. 
(b)  Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk or at any unmarked crosswalk at an intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross the roadway, the driver of any other vehicle approaching from the rear shall not overtake and pass the stopped vehicle. 
(Code 1993, § 13-6.2) 
Sec. 14-235. - To use right half of crosswalk. 
    Pedestrians shall move, whenever practicable, upon the right half of crosswalks. 
(Code 1993, § 13-6.3) 
Sec. 14-236. - Crossing at other than crosswalks. 
(a)  Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a marked crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway. 
(b)  Any pedestrian crossing a roadway at a point where a pedestrian tunnel or overhead pedestrian crossing has been provided shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway. 
(c)  Between any intersections whenever the Village Engineer and the Chief of Police determine upon the basis of an engineering or traffic investigation upon any street, that crossing between intersections shall be prohibited in the interest of public safety, pedestrians shall not cross at any place except in a marked crosswalk or an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection. Such prohibition shall be effective when appropriate signs giving notice thereof are erected. 
(d)  Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, every driver of a vehicle shall exercise due care and avoid colliding with any pedestrian upon any roadway and shall give warning by sounding the horn when necessary and shall exercise proper precaution upon observing any child or any confused or incapacitated person upon a roadway. 
(Code 1993, § 13-6.4) 
Sec. 14-237. - Visually impaired persons; right-of-way. 
    Any visually impaired person who is carrying in a raised or extended position a cane or walking stick which is white in color or white tipped with red, or who is being guided by a dog, shall have the right-of-way in crossing any street or highway, whether or not traffic on such street or highway is controlled by traffic signals, anything in this chapter to the contrary notwithstanding. The driver of every vehicle approaching the place where a visually impaired person, so carrying such a cane or walking stick or being so guided, is crossing a street or a highway shall bring his vehicle to a full stop and before proceeding shall take such precautions as may be necessary to avoid injury to the visually impaired person. The provisions of this section shall not apply to a visually impaired person who is not so carrying such a cane or walking stick or who is not guided by a dog, but the other provisions of this act relating to pedestrians shall then be applicable to such person. However, the failure of a visually impaired person to so use or carry such a cane or walking stick or to be guided by a guide dog when walking on streets, highways or sidewalks shall not be considered evidence of contributory negligence. 
(Code 1993, § 13-6.5) 
Sec. 14-238. - Walking along or standing on roadways. 
(a)  Where sidewalks are provided, it is unlawful for any pedestrian, including jogger or runner, to walk, jog, or run along and upon an adjacent roadway. 
(b)  Where sidewalks are not provided, any pedestrian, jogger, or runner walking, jogging, or running along and upon a street shall, when practicable, walk, jog, or run only on the left side of the roadway or its shoulder facing traffic which may approach from the opposite direction. 
(c)  No person shall stand upon any sidewalk except as near as is reasonably possible to the curb line, if standing interferes with the use of the sidewalk by other pedestrians. 
(Code 1993, § 13-6.6; Ord. No. 85-0-41, 9-17-1985) 
Sec. 14-239. - Hitchhiking. 
    No person shall stand in any portion of the public street between the property lines thereof for the purpose of soliciting a ride from the driver of any private vehicle. 
(Code 1993, § 13-6.7) 
Secs. 14-240-14-256. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - ACCIDENTS 

Sec. 14-257. - Accidents involving death or personal injuries. 
    The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury to or death of any person shall immediately stop such vehicle at the scene of such accident or as close thereto as possible but shall then immediately return to and in every event shall remain at the scene of the accident until he has fulfilled the requirements of section 14-259. Every such stop shall be made without obstructing traffic more than necessary. 
(Code 1993, § 13-7.1) 
Sec. 14-258. - Accidents involving damage to vehicle. 
    The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting only in damage to a vehicle which is driven or attended by any person shall immediately stop such vehicle at the scene of such accident or as close thereto as possible but shall immediately return to and in every event shall remain at the scene of such accident until he has fulfilled the requirements of section 14-259. Every such stop shall be made without obstructing traffic more than is necessary. 
(Code 1993, § 13-7.2) 
Sec. 14-259. - Duty to give information and render aid. 
    The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury to or death of any person or damage to any vehicle which is driven or attended by any person shall give his name, address, and a registration number of the vehicle he is driving and shall, upon a request and if available, exhibit his driver's license to the person struck or the driver or occupant or person attending any vehicle collided with and shall render to any person injured in such accident reasonable assistance, including the carrying or the making of arrangements for the carrying of such person to a physician, surgeon, or hospital for medical or surgical treatment, if it is apparent that such treatment is necessary or if such carrying is requested by the injured person. If none of the persons entitled to information pursuant to this section is in condition to receive and understand such information and no police officer is present, said driver after rendering reasonable assistance shall forthwith report such accident to the Police Department, disclosing the information required by this section. 
(Code 1993, § 13-7.3) 
Sec. 14-260. - Duty upon striking unattended vehicle. 
    The driver of any vehicle which collides with any vehicle which is unattended shall immediately stop and shall then and there either locate and notify the operator or owner of such vehicle of the name and address of the driver and the owner of the vehicle striking the unattended vehicle or shall leave in a conspicuous place in the vehicle struck a written notice giving the name and address of the driver and of the owner of the vehicle doing the striking and a statement of the circumstances thereof. 
(Code 1993, § 13-7.4) 
Sec. 14-261. - Duty upon striking fixture or other property upon a highway. 
    The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting only in damage to fixtures or other property legally upon or adjacent to a highway shall take reasonable steps to locate and notify the owner or persons in charge of such property of such fact and of his name and address and of the registration number of the vehicle he is driving and shall, upon request and if available, exhibit his driver's license. 
(Code 1993, § 13-7.5) 
Sec. 14-262. - Duty to report to police. 
    The driver of any vehicle involved in any accident within the village resulting in injury to or the death of any person or damage to any other vehicle or damage to any public property, real or personal, shall immediately stop such vehicle at the scene of the accident or as close thereto as possible, and shall immediately return to and in every event shall remain at the scene of the accident until he has given his name, address, and registration number of the vehicle he is driving to a police officer. 
(Code 1993, § 13-7.6) 
Sec. 14-263. - Immediate notice of accident. 
    The driver of a vehicle which is in any manner involved in an accident shall immediately and by the fastest means of communication submit notice of the accident to the Police Department. 
(Code 1993, § 13-7.7) 
Sec. 14-264. - False reports. 
    Any person who provides information in an oral or written report as required by this article with knowledge or reason to believe that such information is false shall, upon conviction, be fined not to exceed $750.00. 
(Code 1993, § 13-7.8; Ord. No. 96-O-11, 4-9-1996) 
Sec. 14-265. - When driver fails to report. 
    Whenever the driver of a vehicle is physically incapable of making a required accident report and if there was another occupant in the vehicle at the time of the accident capable of making a report, such occupant shall make or cause to be made said report. If such driver fails for any reason to make such report, the owner of the vehicle involved in such accident shall, as soon as he learns of the accident, make a report to the Police Department. 
(Code 1993, § 13-7.9) 
Sec. 14-266. - Accident reports confidential. 
    All required accident reports and supplemental reports shall be without prejudice to the individual so reporting and shall be for the confidential use of the Police Department except that the department may disclose the identity of a person involved in an accident when such identity is not otherwise known or when such person denies his presence at such accident. No report shall be used as evidence in any trial, civil or criminal, arising out of an accident, except that the department shall furnish upon demand of any person who has, or claims to have made such a report, or upon demand of any court, a certificate showing that a specified accident report has or has not been made to the Police Department solely to provide a compliance or a failure to comply with the requirement that such a report be made to the department. 
(Code 1993, § 13-7.10) 
Secs. 14-267-14-295. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - GENERAL PARKING REGULATIONS 

Sec. 14-296. - Stopping, standing and parking. 
    Every vehicle stopped or parked upon a roadway where there is an adjacent curb shall be so stopped or parked with the right-hand wheels of such vehicle parallel with and within 12 inches of the right-hand curb, except as otherwise provided in the following subsections: 
(1)  Upon streets which have been marked or signed for angle parking, vehicles shall be parked at the angle to the curb indicated by such marks or signs; 
(2)  Upon one-way streets or any alley where signs have been erected indicating that parking is permitted upon the left-hand side of any such street or alley, vehicles parked in such area shall be parked with the left-hand wheels of such vehicle parallel with and within 12 inches of the left-hand curb; 
(3)  In places where and at hours when stopping and loading or unloading of merchandise or materials is permitted, vehicles used for the transportation of merchandise and materials may back into the curb to take on or discharge loads when the owner of such vehicle holds a permit granting such privilege. Such permit shall be either in the possession of the driver or on the vehicle at the time such vehicle is backed against the curb to take on or discharge a load; 
(4)  The Village Engineer and Chief of Police are authorized to issue special permits to permit the backing of a vehicle to the curb for the purpose of loading or unloading merchandise or materials, subject to the terms and conditions of the permit. The permits may be issued either to the owner or lessee of real property or to the owner of the vehicle and shall grant to that person the privilege as therein stated and authorized herein. It is unlawful for any permittee or other person to violate any of the special terms or conditions of any of the permits. 
(Code 1993, § 13-8.1) 
Sec. 14-297. - Parking prohibited in specified places. 
    No person shall park a vehicle, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with law or the directions of a police officer or traffic control device, in any of the following places: 
(1)  On a sidewalk; 
(2)  In front of a public or private driveway; 
(3)  Within an intersection; 
(4)  Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant; 
(5)  On a crosswalk; 
(6)  Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection; 
(7)  Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop sign or traffic control signal located at the side of a roadway; 
(8)  Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 30 feet of a point on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless the Village Engineer and Chief of Police indicate a different length by signs or markings; 
(9)  Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing; 
(10)  Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic; 
(11)  On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a street; 
(12)  Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or within a highway tunnel; 
(13)  At any place where official signs prohibit parking; 
(14)  In or on any portion of a street between the curb line and the adjacent property line; 
(15)  Within eight feet of the approach or within eight feet beyond a public alley or public driveway; 
(16)  Displays license plate with no or expired registration or a temporary registration certificate from a state that is more than 30 days expired. 
(Code 1993, § 13-8.2) 
Sec. 14-298. - Parking in alleys. 
    When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle in an alley which lies within an area which is zoned as NR Neighborhood Retail Business District, VC Village Center Business District, GC-1 General Commercial District, PCD-1 Planned Commercial Development District, PCD-2 Planned Commercial Development District, or PCD-3 Planned Commercial Development District, under appendix A, the zoning ordinance of the village. In all other instances, no person shall park a vehicle within an alley in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten feet of the width of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic, and no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within such alley in such position as to block the driveway or walkway entrance to any abutting property. 
(Code 1993, § 13-8.3; Ord. No. 85-0-5, 3-5-1985) 
Sec. 14-299. - All-night parking. 
(a)  The Transportation Commission is authorized to direct the erection or removal of signs indicating no parking upon a street between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. of any day, except physicians on emergency calls. In deciding whether to direct the erection or removal of signs, the Transportation Commission shall consider the desires of the adult occupants of the premises along the street and block affected, the availability to such occupants of off-street parking, and the special need to clear the street regularly because of volume of traffic thereon. At least 15 days before any Transportation Commission meeting at which the erection or removal of signs will be considered, the Transportation Commission shall cause written notice thereof to be delivered to the premises along the affected street or block, and the premises on the cross streets at either end for two blocks in each direction. Except for a proceeding to consider erection or removal initiated by the Transportation Commission on its own initiative or at the request of the Village Engineer or Chief of Police, no request for erection or removal shall be entertained by the Transportation Commission unless it is supported by a petition signed by at least 50 percent of the adult occupants of the premises along the street and block affected. 
(b)  When official signs prohibiting all-night parking are erected as authorized herein, no person shall park a vehicle upon that street in violation of any sign. 
(Code 1993, § 13-8.4; Ord. No. 85-0-5, 3-5-1985; Ord. No. 87-0-5, 1-20-1987; Ord. No. 2008-O-1, 1-22-2008) 
Sec. 14-300. - Parking for the purpose of sale, etc., prohibited. 
    No person shall park a vehicle upon any roadway for the principal purpose of: 
(1)  Displaying the vehicle for sale; 
(2)  Washing, greasing or repairing the vehicle, except repairs necessitated by an emergency; 
(3)  Selling merchandise from such vehicle. 
(Code 1993, § 13-8.5) 
Sec. 14-301. - Parking adjacent to schools. 
(a)  The Village Engineer and Chief of Police are authorized to erect signs indicating no parking upon either or both sides of any street adjacent to any school property when such parking would, in their opinion, interfere with traffic or create a hazardous situation. 
(b)  When official signs are erected indicating no parking upon either or both sides of a street adjacent to any school property, no person shall park a vehicle in any such designated place. 
(Code 1993, § 13-8.6; Ord. No. 85-0-5, 3-5-1985) 
Sec. 14-302. - Parking prohibited on narrow streets. 
    The Village Engineer and Chief of Police are authorized to erect signs indicating no parking upon any street whose width does not exceed 20 feet, or upon one side of a street whose width does not exceed 27 feet, when such parking would, in their opinion, interfere with traffic or create a hazardous situation. 
(Code 1993, § 13-8.7; Ord. No. 85-0-5, 3-5-1985) 
Sec. 14-303. - Standing or parking on one-way streets. 
    The Village Engineer and Chief of Police are authorized to erect signs upon the left-hand side of any one-way street to prohibit the standing or parking of vehicles, and when the signs are in place, no person shall stand or park a vehicle upon such left-hand side in violation of the sign. 
(Code 1993, § 13-8.8) 
Sec. 14-304. - Standing or parking on one-way roadways. 
    In the event a highway includes two or more separate roadways and traffic is restricted to one direction upon each roadway, no person shall stand or park a vehicle upon the left-hand side of that one-way roadway unless signs are erected to permit the standing or parking. The Village Engineer and Chief of Police are authorized to determine when standing or parking may be permitted upon the left-hand side of any one-way roadway and to erect signs giving notice thereof. 
(Code 1993, § 13-8.9) 
Secs. 14-305-14-326. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - WINTER PARKING REGULATIONS 

Sec. 14-327. - Street parking prohibited during snowstorms and snow removal. 
    No person shall park any vehicle on any street at any time during a snowfall after such time as the snow accumulating on said streets equals or exceeds two inches in depth, and for an additional period of 24 hours after the snowfall stops or until village snow removal operations are completed, whichever is sooner. 
(Code 1993, § 13-8.10.1; Ord. No. 2002-O-100, 12-10-2002; Ord. No. 2015-O-46, 9-8-2015) 
Sec. 14-328. - Parking on narrow streets prohibited during winter precipitation events. 
(a)  Streets that are 27 feet or less in width may, when necessary in the reasonable judgement of the Village Engineer to permit proper snow removal or application of salt or other road surface treatments during winter precipitation events, have signs placed on one side thereof at the Village Engineer'ss direction prohibiting the parking of vehicles on that side of the street during or after winter precipitation events. Whenever practicable, the side of the street so designated and signed at the direction of the Village Engineer shall be the side on which fire hydrants are located. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, the term "winter precipitation event" means any event of snowfall, sleet, freezing rain or ice, regardless of the amount of accumulation. 
(c)  No person shall park any vehicle on the side of any street designated and signed so as to give reasonable notice that parking is prohibited during winter precipitation events, both during any such winter precipitation event and for an additional period of 24 hours after the winter precipitation event stops or until village snow removal or street treating operations are completed, whichever is sooner. 
(Code 1993, § 13-8.10.2; Ord. No. 99-O-72, 9-28-1999; Ord. No. 2002-O-100, 12-10-2002; Ord. No. 2015-O-46, 9-8-2015) 
Secs. 14-329-14-359. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - CURB LOADING ZONES 

Sec. 14-360. - Permits for curb loading zones. 
    The Village Engineer and Chief of Police may designate or sign any curb loading zone upon special request of any person who makes application for a permit for the zone. 
(Code 1993, § 13-8.11) 
Sec. 14-361. - Standing in curb loading zones. 
    No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or period of time other than for the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers or materials in any place marked as a curb loading zone during hours when the regulations applicable to that zone are in effect, and then only for a period not to exceed 30 minutes. 
(Code 1993, § 13-8.12) 
Sec. 14-362. - Designating public carrier stands. 
    The Village Engineer and Chief of Police are authorized and required to establish bus stops and taxicab stands and stands for other public passenger vehicles on public streets in such places and in such number as they shall determine to be of the greatest benefit and convenience to the public. Every bus stop, public passenger vehicle stand or other stand shall be designated by appropriate signs. 
(Code 1993, § 13-8.13; Ord. No. 2017-O-51, 9-26-2017) 
Sec. 14-363. - Taxicab stand use; prohibited conduct. 
(a)  Taxicab stands shall be used by the different drivers on a first come, first served basis. The driver shall pull onto the taxicab stand from the rear and shall advance forward as the taxicabs ahead pull off. Drivers shall stay within the immediate vicinity of their taxicabs except when absent while actually engaged in the operation of their taxicab business. 
(b)  Drivers shall not engage in any of the following conduct while at the taxicab stand or in the immediate vicinity of the taxicab stand, whether on public or private property: 
(1)  Solicitation of passengers. 
(2)  Dumping or disposal of garbage on public rights-of-way, on public property or on private property without the express permission of the property owner. 
(3)  Maintenance or service of motor vehicles. 
(4)  Dumping or spillage of motor oil, gasoline, radiator coolant/antifreeze, or other motor vehicle fluids on public or private property, down storm drains or into sewers. 
(5)  Defecation or urination out-of-doors, or in or about public parking lots, or on public or private property, except in an indoor restroom that the driver has permission from the property owner to use. 
(6)  Indecent conduct or exposure, as prohibited by chapter 12. 
(7)  Loud or boisterous talk, playing of loud music or otherwise creating unnecessary noise sufficient to disturb the peace. 
(8)  Parking or standing a taxicab outside the designated area of the open stand. 
(9)  Parking or standing a taxicab so as to exceed the number of taxicabs permitted to occupy the open stand. 
(c)  Only taxicabs shall be allowed to occupy the space upon the streets that have been established as taxicab stands. Private or other vehicles for hire that are not taxicabs shall not at any time occupy the space upon the streets that have been established as taxicab stands. 
(d)  Violation of the provisions governing use of taxicab stands as set forth in this section shall constitute a separate offense subject to prosecution punishable by a minimum fine of $100.00 to a maximum fine of $750.00. 
(e)  Nothing in this section shall be construed as preventing a passenger from boarding the cab of the passenger's choice that is parked at taxicab stands. 
(Code 1993, § 13-8.13.1; Ord. No. 2017-O-51, 9-26-2017) 
Sec. 14-364. - Restricted use of bus and public carrier stand. 
    No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle other than a bus in a bus stop, or stop, stand or park a vehicle other than a public passenger vehicle in a public carrier stand, when any such stop or stand has been officially designated and appropriately signed, except that the driver of a passenger vehicle may temporarily stop therein for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers when the stopping does not interfere with any bus or public passenger vehicle waiting to enter or about to enter such zone. 
(Code 1993, § 13-8.14) 
Sec. 14-365. - Parking of trucks, tractors, buses, etc., regulated. 
    No person shall stand or park any truck, tractor, semi-trailer, trailer, bus or public passenger vehicle on any street for a longer period than is necessary for reasonably expeditious loading or unloading of such vehicle except as otherwise provided in this article. This prohibition shall include but not be limited to, a camping trailer, a house painting trailer, a construction trailer, a boat trailer and a snowmobile trailer, but it shall not include a van or truck used for noncommercial purposes. 
(Code 1993, § 13-8.15; Ord. No. 85-0-5, 3-5-1985) 
Sec. 14-366. - Parking on private property. 
    No person shall stand or park a vehicle on any private lot or lot area without the expressed or implied consent of the owner thereof. Whenever signs or markings have been erected on any lot or lot area, contiguous or adjacent to a street, thoroughfare, or alley indicating that no vehicles are permitted to stand or park thereon, it shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle across any curb or lot line or over any driveway from the street or alley into such lot or area for the purpose of standing or parking such vehicle, or for any person to stop, stand or park any vehicle in such lot or lot area. 
(Code 1993, § 13-8.16) 
Sec. 14-367. - Impoundment of vehicles. 
(a)  The parking of any motor vehicle in a manner described in the following enumerated subparagraphs of this paragraph is unlawful and shall constitute a separate offense under this chapter. Members of the Police Department are authorized to remove a vehicle from a street or highway to the nearest garage or other place of safety, or to a garage designated or maintained by the Police Department, or otherwise maintained by the village under the circumstances hereinafter enumerated: 
(1)  When a vehicle upon a roadway constitutes an obstruction to traffic and no person in charge of said vehicle is present or able to remove it. 
(2)  When any vehicle is left unattended in violation of any one of the following sections of this chapter: 14-298, 14-327, 14-328, 14-362, 14-366, and 14-368. 
(3)  When any vehicle is parked on private property without the expressed or implied consent of the owner of the property. 
(4)  When a vehicle is parked on or occupies any portion of a parking lot operated by the village contrary to the provisions of article XIV of this chapter for a longer interval than is permitted by that article. 
(5)  When any abandoned vehicle or inoperable motor vehicle is found upon any public alley, street, or highway, or upon any parking lot owned or operated by the village. 
(6)  When a vehicle was in the course of being operated by a person not the vehicle's registered owner who has been arrested for a violation of section 14-90 or of section 11-501 of the Illinois Vehicle Code (ILCS ch. 625, act 5, § 11-501) or its successor statute providing an offense for driving a vehicle under the influence of alcohol, another drug, or combination thereof. 
(b)  When an officer removes a vehicle from a street as authorized in this section and the officer knows or is able to ascertain from the registration records in the vehicle the name and address of the owner thereof, the officer shall immediately give or cause to be given notice in writing to the owner of the fact of the removal and the reasons therefor and of the place to which the vehicle has been removed. In the event the vehicle is stored in a public garage, a copy of the notice shall be given to the proprietor of that garage. In addition thereto, the violator shall be liable to the village for any towing charges incurred by the village if the removal of the vehicle by towing is deemed necessary by the Chief of Police or his authorized agent. 
(c)  When an officer removes a vehicle from a street under this section and does not know and is not able to ascertain the name of the owner, or for any other reason is unable to give the notice to the owner as provided in this section and in the event the vehicle is not returned to the owner within a period of three days, then and in that event the officer shall immediately send or cause to be sent a written report of the removal by mail to the Secretary of State and shall file a copy of the notice with the proprietor of any public garage in which the vehicle may be stored. The notice shall include a complete description of the vehicle, the date, time and place from which removed, the reason for the removal and the name of the garage or place where the vehicle is stored. 
(Code 1993, § 13-8.17; Ord. No. 85-0-5, 3-5-1985; Ord. No. 94-O-65, 9-13-1994; Ord. No. 98-O-22, 4-28-1998) 
Sec. 14-368. - Inoperable motor vehicles as a nuisance; removal thereof. 
(a)  Any "inoperable motor vehicle," as defined in section 14-1, whether on public or private property, and in view of the general public is declared to be a nuisance and the owner or person in control thereof may be fined for failure to obey a notice from the village to dispose of such vehicle or vehicles under that person's control. 
(b)  Failure to comply with the said notice within seven days after issued is a violation of this Code and punishable by a fine of not less than $100.00 for a first offense and not less than $200.00 for a second or subsequent offense. 
(c)  Failure to comply within seven days after issuance of the notice will authorize the Police Department to remove the inoperable motor vehicle or parts thereof. 
(d)  However, nothing in this section shall apply to any motor vehicle that is kept within a building when not in use, or, if not on public property, to operable historic vehicles over 25 years of age, or, if not on public property, to a motor vehicle on the premises of a place of business engaged in the wrecking or junking of motor vehicles. 
(Code 1993, § 13-8.18; Ord. No. 87-0-58, 11-3-1987) 
Sec. 14-369. - Parking limitations on certain streets. 
(a)  The provisions of this article prohibiting the standing or parking of a vehicle apply to all times or at those times specified in this section or as indicated on official signs except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or official traffic-control device. 
(b)  The provisions of this article imposing a time limit on parking do not relieve any person from the duty to observe other and more restrictive provisions prohibiting or limiting the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles in specified places or at specified times. 
(Code 1993, § 13-8.19) 
Sec. 14-370. - Parking prohibited at all times. 
    When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any street so posted. 
(Code 1993, § 13-8.19.1) 
Sec. 14-371. - Parking prohibited during certain hours. 
    When signs are erected in each block giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle between the hours specified on said sign any day except Sundays and public holidays upon any street so posted. 
(Code 1993, § 13-8.19.2) 
Sec. 14-372. - Parking time limited. 
    When signs are erected in a block giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle on any day except Sundays and public holidays upon any street so posted for a longer period of time than that specified on said sign. 
(Code 1993, § 13-8.19.3; Ord. No. 71-0-10, 3-16-1971) 
Secs. 14-373-14-402. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIII. - SPECIAL REGULATIONS APPLICABLE TO VILLAGE CENTER TIME LIMIT PARKING ZONE 

Sec. 14-403. - Definition. 
    The Village Center Time Limit Parking Zone shall be regarded as all on-street parking subject to time limitations on the following streets: 
(1)  Central Avenue, between Eleventh Street and Park Avenue; 
(2)  Eleventh Street, between Greenleaf Avenue and Lake Avenue; 
(3)  Green Bay Road, between Linden Avenue and Lake Avenue; 
(4)  Greenleaf Avenue, between Poplar Avenue and Eleventh Street; 
(5)  Twelfth Street, between Central Avenue and Lake Avenue; 
(6)  Washington Avenue, between Park Avenue and Twelfth Street; and 
(7)  Wilmette Avenue, between Park Avenue and Lake Avenue. 
(Code 1993, § 13-8.19.3.1.1; Ord. No. 2004-O-33, 4-13-2004) 
Sec. 14-404. - Violations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle on any street in the Village Center Time Limit Parking Zone for a longer period of time than the maximum amount specified on signs posted by the village on that block of the Village Center Time Limit Parking Zone. 
(b)  Upon the expiration of the maximum amount of permitted parking time, as posted by the village on signs in the Village Center Time Limit Parking Zone, the operator of the motor vehicle so parked shall promptly remove said motor vehicle from the Village Center Time Limit Parking Zone. No person shall move said vehicle directly to another parking space in the Village Center Time Limit Parking Zone, or otherwise park said vehicle for a consecutive period of time elsewhere in the Village Center Time Limit Parking Zone. 
(c)  Nothing in this article, or the subsections thereof, shall relieve any person from the duty to obey other and more restrictive provisions prohibiting or limiting the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles in specified places or at specified times, as provided in this chapter or as may be indicated on official signs posted by the village. 
(Code 1993, § 13-8.19.3.1.2; Ord. No. 2004-O-33, 4-13-2004) 
Sec. 14-405. - Stopping, standing and parking prohibited during certain hours. 
    When signs are erected in each block giving notice thereof, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle between the hours specified on said sign any day except Sundays and public holidays upon any street so posted. 
(Code 1993, § 13-8.19.4; Ord. No. 71-0-10, 3-16-1971) 
Sec. 14-406. - At all times except Sunday. 
    When signs are erected in each block giving notice thereof, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle, whether attended or unattended, between the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., except on Sundays, upon the paved or improved or main traveled part of any street so posted. 
(Code 1993, § 13-8.19.5) 
Secs. 14-407-14-425. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIV. - PARKING METERS 

Sec. 14-426. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Parked means a vehicle placed, left or permitted to remain in any parking space within a parking meter zone. 
    Restricted and regulated parking time means those hours of weekdays, including Saturdays, as specified in this section during which the parking of vehicles in parking meter zones is restricted and regulated by the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1993, § 13-8.20.1) 
Sec. 14-427. - Parking meters in certain parking lots. 
(a)  The parking of vehicles upon certain premises owned, leased, operated, or controlled by the village as designated herein, shall be regulated by parking meters. The restricted and regulated parking time for the metered parking zones shall be Monday through Friday during and between the hours of 6:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m., except national holidays. 
(b)  Metered parking zones shall include the following areas and premises: Union Pacific right-of-way adjacent to the east side of the 600 block of Green Bay Road; east side of Union Pacific right-of-way between Central Avenue and Lake Avenue; Union Pacific right-of-way adjacent to the west side of 400 block of Poplar Drive; Union Pacific right-of-way adjacent to the west side of 500 block of Poplar Drive. 
(Code 1993, § 13-8.20.2; Ord. No. 2013-O-42, 9-24-2013; Ord. No. 2014-O-31, 6-10-2014) 
Sec. 14-428. - Installation in parking lots; hours of operation. 
(a)  There shall be installed in the metered areas set forth and described in this section in the zones therein described, as an aid to the regulation of vehicular parking in those zones, parking meters. The meters shall operate upon the insertion of $2.00 for 12 hours at the parking lots on premises located at Union Pacific right-of-way adjacent to the west side of the 400 block of Poplar Drive, and Union Pacific right-of way adjacent to the west side of the 500 block of Poplar Drive, and east side of Union Pacific right-of-way between Central Avenue and Lake Avenue, and Union Pacific right-of-way adjacent to the east side of the 600 block of Green Bay Road. 
(b)  Each meter shall be so designed and constructed that upon the expiration of the time interval registered by the insertion of currency or debit card in the amount as above provided, it will indicate by appropriate sign or signal that the lawful parking meter period has expired and, during that interval of time and prior to the expiration thereof, will indicate the interval of time which remains of the period. 
(Code 1993, § 13-8.20.3; Ord. No. 79-0-15, 4-3-1979; Ord. No. 91-0-53, 8-6-1991; Ord. No. 2002-O-60, 9-10-2002; Ord. No. 2005-O-44, 4-26-2005; Ord. No. 2009-O-1, 1-27-2009; Ord. No. 2013-O-42, 9-24-2013) 
Sec. 14-429. - Use of slugs. 
    It is unlawful for any person to deposit, or cause to be deposited, in any parking meter any slug, device or substitute for a coin of the United States. 
(Code 1993, § 13-8.20.4) 
Sec. 14-430. - Tampering with meters. 
    It is unlawful for any person to defect, injure, tamper with, open or willfully break or destroy any parking meter, or impair the usefulness of any parking meter installed under this section. 
(Code 1993, § 13-8.20.5; Ord. No. 96-O-11, 4-9-1996; Ord. No. 2015-O-46, 9-8-2015) 
Sec. 14-431. - Maximum parking time. 
    No vehicle shall be parked in any one parking area within the parking meter zones designated in this Code, for more than 12 consecutive hours irrespective of the number of coins inserted in the parking meter and irrespective of any parking space permit. 
(Code 1993, § 13-8.20.6) 
Sec. 14-432. - Overtime parking. 
    No person shall permit any vehicle within his control to be parked in any parking space in a parking meter zone during the restricted and regulated parking time while the parking meter for that space registers by sign, signal or other device, that the legal parking time therein has expired; however, this provision does not apply to the act of parking a vehicle nor to the interval of time required for any such person, acting with diligence, to insert a coin in such parking meter. 
(Code 1993, § 13-8.20.7) 
Sec. 14-433. - Restrictions as to vehicles operated by persons with disabilities. 
    A motor vehicle operated by a person with a disability, or transporting a person with a disability, and properly displaying official license plates, placard or other indicia of same, shall be exempted from the deposit of currency or debit card otherwise required pursuant to this article, to the extent provided in section 11-1301.1 of the Illinois Motor Vehicle Code (ILCS ch. 625, act 5, 11-1301.1), now or hereafter amended. 
(Code 1993, § 13-8.20.8; Ord. No. 2003-O-66, 10-14-2003) 
Sec. 14-434. - Prohibited acts generally. 
    The following acts in respect to the driving, operation, control or parking of any vehicle within a parking meter zone of the village are forbidden: 
(1)  The placement, parking or leaving of any vehicle in any parking space within a parking meter zone beyond the lawful parking period, as prescribed by this section or any other ordinance, or police regulation of the village. 
(2)  The deposit in a parking meter of a coin for the purpose of extending or continuing the parking time of a vehicle in a parking space for a period of time longer than is permitted by this section or any other ordinance or police regulation of the village. 
(3)  The stopping, placement or parking of any vehicle in any space in a parking meter zone of the village at a time when the meter for that space registers illegal parking without immediately thereafter inserting a coin in the meter as provided by this section. 
(4)  The placement, parking, leaving or permitting to remain of any vehicle in any parking space within a parking meter zone, except as follows: 
a.  Where the parking space is parallel to the curb, the vehicle shall be placed, parked, left or permitted to remain with the right side approximately parallel to the curb, with both front and rear wheels and all other parts of the vehicle within a single space designated and marked for parking purposes, and with the front, engine or driver's end of the vehicle opposite or near the parking meter placed adjacent to such space for the purpose of measuring the time that space is occupied by vehicles using the same; and 
b.  Where the parking space is diagonal to the curb, the vehicle shall be placed, parked, left or permitted to remain on a diagonal position to the curb, with the right side of the front engine or driver's end of the vehicle approximately parallel to the sides of the diagonal space. 
(5)  The placement, parking, leaving or permitting to remain of any vehicle so that any part of the vehicle occupies more than one parking space, or protrudes beyond the space in which its wheels are located except that, the use of more than one parking space in a parking meter zone by a vehicle which is of a size too large to be used, placed, parked, left or permitted to remain in a single parking space, is permitted if the person driving, operating, parking, controlling or in charge of the vehicle, places a coin in the meter of each space occupied by the vehicle in the same manner and as is required in the case of other vehicles parking in or using such space. 
(6)  The foregoing provisions of this section apply only during the hours of any day that parking is restricted and regulated within a parking meter zone by the foregoing provisions of this section. 
(Code 1993, § 13-8.20.9) 
Secs. 14-435-14-451. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XV. - RESIDENTIAL PERMIT PARKING 

Sec. 14-452. - Transportation Commission to survey. 
    The Transportation Commission is authorized to cause traffic surveys to be made on streets in residential areas which are situated adjacent to a Business District or a Commercial District or a public or private school or college or university, all as defined in appendix A, the Zoning Ordinance. 
(Code 1993, § 13-8.21.1; Ord. No. 2008-O-1, 1-22-2008) 
Sec. 14-453. - Residential streets may be posted. 
(a)  Survey required. 
(1)  When 67 percent of the households of an affected street sign a petition requesting that said street be designated "Resident Parking Only: Permit Required," the Transportation Commission may authorize a survey of the affected street. 
(2)  If a survey taken by the Transportation Commission pursuant to this article for two consecutive hours over two to three weekdays discloses that the number of legally and illegally parked vehicles is greater than or equal to 70 percent of the legal capacity of a street and if, during that highest two-hour period, a license plate check shows that 30 percent or more of the parked vehicles are from outside the neighborhood and are therefore presumably using the facilities of the Business District or the Commercial District or the school, college or university, or of a mass transit facility located within one-half mile of such street, the block may be posted for "Resident Parking Only: Permit Required." Such posting shall state the hours of the day and days of the week when the permit requirement shall apply. 
(b)  Exceptions to survey requirement. When 67 percent of the households of an affected street sign a petition requesting that said street be designated "Resident Parking Only: Permit Required," the Transportation Commission may designate the block in question for resident permit parking without benefit of a parking survey only when: 
(1)  The block in question is presently posted in such a manner as to prohibit all parking whatsoever during times of day for which residential permit parking is proposed to be established; or 
(2)  Upon the prior written report and affirmative recommendation of both the Chief of Police and the Village Engineer, the Transportation Commission finds by a two-thirds majority of all its members that the need to establish the residential permit parking area in question is manifest from the evidence available to the commission and that delaying action to conduct a survey would result in the creation of a substantial and unusual hardship to the households on the affected street. 
(c)  Residents of a single side of a block on a major street defined by section 14-114(c) that has a 24-hour parking restriction and that experience a parking hardship created by a street designated as resident permit parking under this section may petition the Transportation Commission for an exception to this section. The exception will allow residents of the major street to park on the street designated resident permit parking, if the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The petition shall be signed by 67 percent of the households on one side of the major street requesting an exception for resident permit parking. The petition shall clearly reference the block in which they are seeking permit parking privileges; and 
(2)  A Transportation Commission meeting will be scheduled and the neighbors of both the major street and the block with a resident permit parking designation shall be notified at least one week prior to the meeting that the Transportation Commission will be reviewing the petition seeking an exception of this section. 
(Code 1993, § 13-8.21.2; Ord. No. 89-0-40, 8-15-1989; Ord. No. 94-O-42, 7-12-1994; Ord. No. 2007-O-20, 3-13-2007; Ord. No. 2008-O-1, 1-22-2008) 
Sec. 14-454. - Factors considered; notice to be given. 
    The Transportation Commission shall consider the availability of other parking to the operators of vehicles using the facilities of the Business or Commercial District or public or private schools, college or university involved, but shall not permit such institutions to make their own parking needs into problems of the community. At least 15 days before any Transportation Commission meeting at which the posting of a street will be considered, the Transportation Commission shall cause written notice thereof to be delivered to the premises along the affected street and block, and the premises on the cross streets at either end, for two blocks in each direction, and to the places of business, or public or private school or college or university within 1,000 feet of the street to be posted. 
(Code 1993, § 13-8.21.3; Ord. No. 89-0-40, 8-15-1989; Ord. No. 94-O-42, 7-12-1994; Ord. No. 2008-O-1, 1-22-2008) 
Sec. 14-455. - Permits; fees. 
    Permits may be issued to persons who are residents on the street so posted for every vehicle owned by those persons and registered in the village. Visitor passes may be obtained from the village. 
(Code 1993, § 13-8.21.4; Ord. No. 89-0-40, 8-15-1989; Ord. No. 94-O-42, 7-12-1994; Ord. No. 2008-O-1, 1-22-2008) 
Sec. 14-456. - Unlawful to violate. 
    It shall be unlawful and punishable by a fine as provided herein for any person to park a vehicle on the posted residential streets without such a permit. 
(Code 1993, § 13-8.21.5; Ord. No. 2008-O-1, 1-22-2008) 
Sec. 14-457. - Review, rescission, or modification by Transportation Commission. 
(a)  When the Transportation Commission has previously determined pursuant to section 14-453 that a street shall be posted as, "Resident Parking Only - Permit Required," the Transportation Commission may, on its own initiative or at the request of the Village Engineer, initiate a review of whether said street should continue to be so posted, or whether the Transportation Commission's prior determination should be rescinded or modified. 
(b)  In reviewing a previous decision to designate residential permit-only parking pursuant to section 14-453, the Transportation Commission may, in the exercise of its sound discretion, rescind or modify its previous decision upon a reasonable finding that: 
(1)  Since the original decision by the Transportation Commission to implement residential permit-only parking, the area so designated no longer satisfies the criteria set forth in section 14-453(a) for such designation; or 
(2)  The original decision by the Transportation Commission to implement residential permit-only parking has created hardship unforeseen at the time of the original decision; or 
(3)  Since the original decision by the Transportation Commission to implement residential permit-only parking, material change has occurred in or about the areas so designated such that the continuation of the existing parking restriction is no longer reasonable. Such changed facts and circumstances may include, but are not limited to: 
a.  Changes in prevailing types of land uses in the area; 
b.  Changes in the prevailing intensity of land uses in the area; 
c.  Changes in prevailing traffic conditions or parking practices in the area; 
d.  Changes in parking regulations in nearby areas that require consistency with regulation in the area in question; 
(4)  The continuation of residential permit-only parking in the area in question is otherwise no longer consistent with sound traffic or parking management or engineering practices; or 
(5)  The original decision by the Transportation Commission to implement residential permit-only parking was improvidently made due to procedural defect, or due to mistake of material fact. 
(c)  Procedure. After determining that it wishes to review whether a street previously designated under section 14-453 as residential permit-only parking, the Transportation Commission shall set a date for a meeting at which it shall receive public comment on the possible modification or rescission of said residential permit-only parking prior to its taking final action. Prior notice of said meeting shall be provided in the same manner as set forth in section 14-453. At the scheduled Transportation Commission meeting, the Transportation Commission shall make a presentation to justify the reasons for the possible modification or rescission, followed by a period for public comment. The Transportation Commission may, in its discretion, recess and reconvene the meeting on additional days if necessary to provide reasonable time for public comment or discussion by the commission, or to obtain additional evidence. 
(d)  Action by the Transportation Commission. At the conclusion of such meeting, the Transportation Commission may then vote to: 
(1)  Rescind the designation of the area in question for residential permit-only parking; or 
(2)  Modify the prior designation of the area in question, or portions thereof, for residential permit-only parking; or 
(3)  Make no change to the prior designation of the area in question for residential permit-only parking; or 
(4)  A motion to either rescind or modify, as described in subsections (d)(1) and (2) of this section, shall not be deemed passed unless supported by the affirmative vote of at least two-thirds of the members of the Transportation Commission then holding office. 
(Code 1993, § 13-8.21.7; Ord. No. 2008-O-1, 1-22-2008) 
Sec. 14-458. - Parking space permits. 
(a)  In areas where so posted, persons who have a parking space permit from the village may park therein. Permits may be issued in such number for such areas and to such classes of vehicles and applicants as may be determined by the Village Manager. A person desiring to procure a parking space permit shall make application to the village. Payment shall be made for the permit at the rate of $4.50 per week. The permit shall extend for a three month period or as determined by the Village Manager. The parking space permit shall be numbered and show the date the permit expires. The permit shall be attached to the rear window of the vehicle of the applicant in such a manner that it may readily be read from the outside of the vehicle. 
(b)  A parking space permit may not be sold, assigned or transferred. It may be revoked at any time by the village, in which event a rebate shall be prorated for the unexpired term. 
(c)  The issuance of a parking space permit shall constitute a rental of vacant space and neither the village nor any of its officers nor employees shall be liable for any loss or damage to the vehicle or contents, or for the loss or theft of the same. 
(Code 1993, § 13-8.22; Ord. No. 78-0-38, 7-18-1978) 
Sec. 14-459. - Covering parked vehicles prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any motor vehicle to be parked on any public street, alley or right-of-way, if such motor vehicle is covered, in whole or in part, with a tarpaulin, car cover, canvass or any similar covering. 
(b)  The owner of a motor vehicle parked in violation of this section, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine of not less than $35.00 nor more than $750.00. 
(Code 1993, § 13-8.23; Ord. No. 2004-O-55, 5-25-2004; Ord. No. 2009-O-72, 11-24-2009) 
Sec. 14-460. - Parking violations; penalties. 
(a)  Any person violating the provisions of sections 14-296 through 14-459 shall be guilty of an offense punishable by a penalty as provided in subsections (b), (c) and (d) of this section. Any violator may avoid prosecution for violating any of said subsection, by surrendering the citation or other notice of violation, and paying to the Police Department, within ten days from the date appearing on said violation notice, the penalties provided in subsections (b), (c) and (d) of this section. Any person making such payment shall receive a receipt therefor from the Police Department. 
(b)  The penalty for violations of section 14-404 shall be as follows: 
(1)  For a first offense or second offense occurring within one year: $35.00; 
(2)  For a third or fourth offense occurring within one year: $70.00; and 
(3)  For a fifth or subsequent offense within one year: $140.00. 
(c)  The penalty for violations of article XI of this chapter shall be not less than $30.00 nor more than $750.00. 
(d)  Any person who violates, causes or consents to a violation of sections 14-429 and 14-430, upon conviction, shall be punished by a penalty of not less than $35.00 nor more than $750.00. 
(e)  Any person who violates any provisions of sections 14-452 through 14-457 shall be guilty of an ordinance violation punishable by a fine as provided for in section 2-1305 of this Code. 
(f)  Any person who pays a penalty under this subsection is liable for any service fee or charge imposed by a third party in processing the payment and shall pay such service charge at the time of payment of the penalty. Such service charge shall be in addition to the penalty. 
(Code 1993, § 13-8.24; Ord. No. 2015-O-46, 9-8-2015) 
Secs. 14-461-14-488. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XV. - BICYCLES 

Sec. 14-489. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Dealers in bicycles means any person engaged in the sale of bicycles at retail or wholesale. 
    Licensee means any person who procures from the village a license decal for a bicycle, together with a registration card accompanying the decal. 
    Rental agency means any person engaged in the business of offering for rental and renting bicycles for use by the public. 
(Code 1993, § 13-9.1; Ord. No. 77-0-37, 9-20-1977) 
Sec. 14-490. - License required. 
    Every owner of a bicycle, except a dealer in bicycles, who resides within the village shall obtain from the village a bicycle license for each bicycle owned. An application for a bicycle license shall be on the form prescribed by the village and shall be issued upon approval by the Chief of Police. There shall be no fee for this license. 
(Code 1993, § 13-9.2; Ord. No. 77-0-37, 9-20-1977; Ord. No. 91-0-30, 4-16-1991) 
Sec. 14-491. - Record of licenses. 
    The village shall keep a record of the date of issuance of each bicycle license, to whom issued, the number thereof and the number of the bicycle frame. 
(Code 1993, § 13-9.3) 
Sec. 14-492. - Licenses generally. 
(a)  Every person who procures a bicycle license shall receive a license decal together with a registration card. The license decal and registration card shall bear consecutive numbers, or combinations of letters with numbers, and shall have stamped thereon the name "Wilmette." The license shall be attached by the licensee to a clear and unobstructed location on the bicycle, shall so remain during the life of the license and shall at all times be kept clean. Each bicycle license, when issued, shall be effective until it is revoked or until the licensee shall sell or transfer the title to the bicycle, whichever event first occurs after the license is issued. 
(b)  If, after the issuance of a license, the licensee thereafter for any reason needs a new license decal, he shall procure it from the village within ten days. 
(Code 1993, § 13-9.4; Ord. No. 77-0-37, 9-20-1977; Ord. No. 91-0-30, 4-16-1991) 
Sec. 14-493. - Relicensing. 
    Bicycles licensed under the provisions of this article shall be relicensed within ten days after sale or transfer to a new owner who resides within the village. 
(Code 1993, § 13-9.5) 
Sec. 14-494. - Inspection prior to issuance of license. 
    The Chief of Police may inspect bicycles previous to the issuance of a license therefor, and he may refuse to approve any bicycle which is not equipped as required by this article or is otherwise in an unsafe condition. 
(Code 1993, § 13-9.6) 
Sec. 14-495. - Removing, destroying, mutilating frame numbers or license decals. 
    It is unlawful for any person, willfully or maliciously, to remove, destroy, mutilate or alter the number of any bicycle frame of a bicycle licensed pursuant to this chapter; also to remove, destroy, mutilate or alter any license decal during the time for which the license decal is in force. 
(Code 1993, § 13-9.7) 
Sec. 14-496. - Stamping of numbers on frame by Chief of Police. 
    This chapter does not prohibit the Chief of Police from stamping, in a distinguishing manner, numbers on the frame of a bicycle upon which no serial number can be found, or upon which the serial number is illegible or insufficient for identification purposes. 
(Code 1993, § 13-9.8) 
Sec. 14-497. - Requirements of rental agencies. 
    Bicycles offered for rent by a rental agency shall be equipped by the rental agency with the lights and other safety equipment required by this article and shall be kept in good and safe working order. Rental agencies shall comply, in all respects, with all of the provisions of this article and shall be responsible for the condition of the bicycles they rent. The Chief of Police shall make periodic inspections of rental agencies, to ascertain that they are complying with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1993, § 13-9.9) 
Sec. 14-498. - Riding restrictions. 
(a)  Abreast; single file. When two or more persons in a group are operating bicycles, they shall not ride abreast, but shall ride in single file. 
(b)  Clinging to vehicles. It is unlawful for any person operating a bicycle within the village to cling or attach himself or his bicycle to any other moving vehicle. 
(c)  Emerging from alley, driveway or building. The operator of a bicycle emerging from an alley, driveway or building shall, upon approaching a sidewalk or the sidewalk area extending across any alleyway, yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians approaching on said sidewalk or sidewalk area, and upon entering the roadway shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on said roadway. 
(d)  Extra passengers. It is unlawful for any person operating a bicycle within the village to carry another person on the same bicycle. This restriction does not apply to tandem bicycles. 
(e)  Carrying articles. No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle or article in any manner which interferes with or prevents the safe operation of the bicycle. 
(f)  Under influence of liquor or drugs. It is unlawful for any person to operate a bicycle within the village while under the influence of liquor or drugs. 
(g)  Lights. No bicycle shall be operated within the village between 30 minutes after sunset and 30 minutes before sunrise, without a clear, white, properly lighted headlight, visible under normal atmospheric conditions from the front thereof for not less than 500 feet and firmly attached to the bicycle, or without a red reflector firmly attached to the bicycle, which is clearly visible in the headlight beam of an automobile for a distance of 500 feet to the rear of the bicycle. 
(h)  Place of operation. Bicycles may be operated on sidewalks provided that due care is at all times exercised by the rider. Under all circumstances the rider shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians using the sidewalks. The Chief of Police and the Traffic Engineer are authorized to erect on certain streets signs prohibiting bicycles riding on those streets. Upon the erection of such signs it shall be unlawful to operate a bicycle on said streets. 
(i)  Parking bicycles. Bicycles, when parked in the business district, shall be parked in zones officially designated for that purpose. Bicycles shall not, at any time, in any place, be indiscriminately parked by anyone along buildings, in such a manner as to interfere with pedestrians, or along roadways where they may interfere with traffic, or with persons getting into or out of automobiles. No person shall move, or in any manner interfere with any bicycle which is properly parked, nor shall any person interfere with, or, in any manner, hinder any person from properly parking a bicycle, except that members of the Police Department or Fire Department may move or, in proper cases prevent the parking of a bicycle, when, in the judgment of the police officer or firefighter, the action is necessary, in order properly to safeguard persons or property. 
(j)  Keeping to right. All bicycles shall be operated as nearly as practicable at the right-hand edge of the roadway or sidewalk. 
(k)  Signaling device. It is unlawful for any person to operate a bicycle within the village, which is not equipped with a signaling device, in good working order and audible at a distance of 100 feet when sounded. 
(l)  Speed. No bicycle shall be operated faster than is reasonable and proper, and every bicycle shall be operated with reasonable regard for the safety of the rider and of other persons and property. 
(m)  Observation of traffic regulations. Every person operating a bicycle within the village shall observe all traffic rules and regulations applicable to motor vehicles under this chapter, except those provisions of this chapter which by their nature can have no application and except as otherwise provided by this section. 
(n)  Trick riding. It is unlawful for any person operating a bicycle within the village to guide the bicycle in any manner except through the use of both hands upon the handlebars thereof, or otherwise to indulge in any kind of trick or unsafe riding. 
(o)  Turns. The operator of a bicycle on a roadway, when making a right turn, shall follow the right-hand lane next to the right-hand edge of the roadway. No operator of a bicycle shall suddenly start, slow down, stop or attempt to turn without first giving the standard signal required by state law for motor vehicles under the same circumstances. The operator of a bicycle on a roadway intending to turn left shall follow a course described in this subsection (o): 
(1)  The operator of a bicycle intending to turn left at any intersection shall approach the intersection in the extreme left-hand lane lawfully available to traffic moving in the direction of travel of such bicycle, and after entering the intersection, the left turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection in a lane lawfully available to traffic moving in such direction upon the roadway being entered. Whenever practicable the left turn shall be made in that portion of the intersection to the left of the center of the intersection; or 
(2)  The operator of a bicycle intending to turn left shall approach the turn as close as practicable to the right curb or edge of the roadway. After proceeding across the intersecting roadway, the turn shall be made as close as practicable to the curb or edge of the roadway on the far side of the intersection. After turning, the operator of the bicycle shall comply with any official traffic-control device or police officer regulating traffic on the highway along which he intends to proceed. 
(Code 1993, § 13-9.11; Ord. No. 76-0-42, 9-7-1976; Ord. No. 77-0-37, 9-20-1977; Ord. No. 77-0-37, 9-24-1977; Ord. No. 82-0-15, 4-6-1982) 
Secs. 14-499-14-519. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XVII. - SKATEBOARD AND ROLLER SKATE REGULATIONS 

Sec. 14-520. - Prohibited in certain areas. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person riding upon or by means of any roller skate (including in-line roller skates), coaster, skateboard or similar device to: 
(1)  Go upon any roadway, sidewalk or other public property in the Central Business District bounded by Park Avenue, Wilmette Avenue (west of Green Bay Road), Greenleaf (east of Green Bay Road), 11th Street and Washington and the easterly extension thereof; or 
(2)  Go upon any roadway or sidewalk in an area zoned VC, GC-1, GC-2, NR, PCD-1 or PCD-2, where such area has been posted with signs prohibiting such activity; or 
(3)  Go upon any parking lot owned by or operated by the village which has been posted with signs prohibiting such activity. 
(b)  The Chief of Police and the Village Engineer are authorized, in their discretion, to post the areas described in this section with appropriate signs as required herein. 
(Code 1993, § 13-9.12.1.; Ord. No. 97-O-2, 3-18-1997) 
Sec. 14-521. - Penalty. 
    Every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this article shall be punished by a fine of not less than $10.00 nor more than $200.00. 
(Code 1993, § 13-9.12.2; Ord. No. 87-0-6, 2-3-1987) 
Secs. 14-522-14-550. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XVIII. - EQUIPMENT 

Sec. 14-551. - Scope and effect of equipment requirements. 
    It is unlawful for any person to drive or move or for the owner to cause or normally permit to be driven or moved on any highway any vehicle or combination of vehicles which is in such unsafe condition as to endanger any person or property, or which does not contain those parts or is not at all times equipped with such lamps and other equipment in proper condition and adjustment as required by this article or which is equipped in any manner in violation of this section, or for any person to do any act forbidden or fail to perform any act required under this section. 
(Code 1993, § 13-10.1) 
Sec. 14-552. - When lighted lamps are required. 
    When upon any highway in the village, during the period from sunset to sunrise, or at any other time when visibility is so limited as to require the use of lights for safety, every motorcycle shall carry and exhibit one lighted lamp commonly known as a driving light and every motor vehicle two such lighted lamps showing white lights, or lights of a yellow or amber tint, visible at least 500 feet in the direction toward which each motorcycle or motor vehicle is proceeding, and each motor vehicle, trailer, or semi-trailer shall also exhibit at least one lighted lamp which shall be so situated as to throw a red light visible for at least 500 feet in a reverse direction, provided that every trailer having a gross weight of 3,000 pounds or more including the weight of the trailer and maximum load shall be equipped with two lighted lamps one on each side of the rear of such trailer which shall be so situated as to throw a red light visible for at least 500 feet in the reverse direction. 
(Code 1993, § 13-10.2) 
Sec. 14-553. - Lamps or flags on projecting loads. 
    Whenever the load upon any vehicle extends to the rear four feet or more beyond the bed or body of such vehicle, there shall be displayed at the extreme rear end of the load, at the time specified in section 14-552, a red light or lantern plainly visible from a distance of at least 500 feet to the sides and rear. The red light or lantern required under this section shall be in addition to the red rear light required upon every vehicle. At any other time there shall be displayed to the extreme rear end of such load a red flag or cloth not less than 16 inches square. 
(Code 1993, § 13-10.3) 
Sec. 14-554. - Lamps on other vehicles and equipment. 
    All vehicles, not herein before specifically required to be equipped with lamps, shall at the time specified in section 14-552, be equipped with at least one lighted lamp or lantern exhibiting a white light visible from a distance of 500 feet to the front of such vehicle and with a lamp or lantern exhibiting a red light visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear. 
(Code 1993, § 13-10.4) 
Sec. 14-555. - Spotlights and auxiliary private lamps. 
(a)  Any motor vehicle may be equipped with not to exceed one spot lamp and every lighted spot lamp shall be so aimed and used upon approaching another vehicle that no part of the hi-intensity portion of the beam will be directed to the left of the prolongation of the extreme left side of the vehicle nor more than 100 feet ahead of the vehicle. 
(b)  Any motor vehicle may be equipped with not to exceed three auxiliary driving lamps mounted on the front at a height of not less than 12 inches nor more than 42 inches above the level surface upon which the vehicle stands. 
(Code 1993, § 13-10.5) 
Sec. 14-556. - Signal lamps and signal devices. 
(a)  Every motor vehicle and trailer, having a gross weight of at least 3,000 pounds, including the weight of the trailer and the maximum load, shall be equipped with a signal lamp or a signal device constructed and located on the vehicle so as to give a red or yellow signal of intention to stop, and signals of the intention to turn right or left. All of these signals shall be plainly visible and understandable in normal sunlight and at night from a distance of 100 feet to the front and rear. These signals shall not project a glaring or dazzling light. Every new motor vehicle designed for pulling or carrying freight, or designed to carry more than seven people, shall be equipped with a signal device for indicating intent to turn to the right or left. Any trailer with a gross weight of less than 3,000 pounds, including the weight of the trailer and maximum load, need not be equipped with such turn signal device unless the distance from the center of the steering wheel of the towing vehicle to the left-hand inside limits of such trailer body exceeds 24 inches. 
(b)  All mechanical signal devices shall be self-illuminated when in use at the times mentioned in section 14-552. 
(Code 1993, § 13-10.6) 
Sec. 14-557. - Additional lighting equipment. 
(a)  Any motor vehicle may be equipped with not more than two side cowl or fender lamps which shall emit an amber or white light without glare. 
(b)  Any motor vehicle may be equipped with not more than one running board courtesy lamp on each side thereof which shall emit a white or amber light without glare. 
(c)  Any motor vehicle may be equipped with a back-up lamp either separately or in combination with another lamp; except that no such back-up lamp shall be continuously lighted when the motor vehicle is in forward motion. 
(Code 1993, § 13-10.7) 
Sec. 14-558. - Special restrictions on lamps. 
(a)  No person shall drive or move any vehicle or equipment upon any street or highway with any lamp or device thereon displaying a red light visible from directly in front thereof. 
(b)  Flashing lights are prohibited on motor vehicles, except as a means for indicating a right or left turn or stop or hazard. 
(c)  The provisions of subsections (a) and (b) of this section shall not apply to authorized emergency vehicles or to vehicles designated for towing or hoisting disabled vehicles while actually being used for such purposes, or the motor vehicles or equipment of contractors while engaged in maintenance or construction operations within the limits of construction projects. However, only police or fire vehicles shall be equipped with red, blue or white flashing lights. All other vehicles, such as towing trucks, shall be equipped with a yellow light. 
(Code 1993, § 13-10.8) 
Sec. 14-559. - Special lighting equipment on school buses. 
    Every bus used for the transportation of school children to and from school, in addition to any other equipment and distinctive markings required by this chapter, shall be equipped with signal lamps mounted as high and as widely spaced laterally as practicable, which shall be capable of displaying to the front two alternately flashing yellow lights located at the same level, and to the rear two alternately flashing red lights located at the same level, and these lights shall have the sufficient intensity to be visible at 500 feet in normal sunlight. Such signal lamps shall be connected to the brake pedal by means of a toggle switch and shall be disconnected when pupils are not being transported to or from their homes or school. 
(Code 1993, § 13-10.9) 
Sec. 14-560. - Brakes. 
(a)  Every motor vehicle, other than a motorcycle, when operated upon a street shall be equipped with brakes adequate to control the movement of and to stop and hold such vehicle, including two separate means of applying the brakes, each of which means shall be effective to apply the brakes to at least two wheels. If these two separate means of applying the brakes are connected in any way, they shall be so constructed that failure of any one part of the operating mechanism shall not leave the motor vehicle without brakes on at least two wheels. 
(b)  Every motorcycle or bicycle with motor attached, when operated upon a street, shall be equipped with at least one brake, which may be operated by hand or foot. 
(c)  Every trailer or semi-trailer of a gross weight of 3,000 pounds or more when operated upon a street shall be equipped with brakes adequate to control the movement of and to stop and to hold such vehicle and so designed as to be applied by the driver of the towing motor vehicle from its cab, and the said brakes shall be so designed and connected that in case of an accidental breakaway of the towed vehicle, the brakes shall be automatically applied. 
(d)  Every motor vehicle, trailer, or semi-trailer, hereafter operated upon a street shall be equipped with brakes upon all wheels, except any motorcycle, and except any semi-trailer of less than 1,500 pounds gross weight not originally equipped with brakes; provided, however, that any motor vehicle and truck-tractor having three or more axles need not have brakes on the front wheels, except when such vehicles are equipped with at least two steerable axles, the wheels of one such axle need not be equipped with brakes. 
(Code 1993, § 13-10.10) 
Sec. 14-561. - Horns and warning devices. 
(a)  Every motor vehicle when operated upon a street or highway shall be equipped with a horn in good working order and capable of emitting sound audible under normal conditions from the distance of not less than 200 feet, but no horn or other warning device shall emit an unreasonably loud or harsh sound or a whistle. The driver of a motor vehicle shall, when reasonably necessary to ensure safe operation, give audible warning with his horn but shall not otherwise use such horn when upon a street or highway. 
(b)  No vehicle shall be equipped nor shall any person use upon a vehicle any siren, whistle or bell, except as otherwise provided in this subsection. Any authorized emergency vehicle may be equipped with a siren, whistle or bell, capable of emitting sound audible under normal conditions from a distance of not less than 500 feet, but such siren, whistle or bell, shall not be used except when such vehicle is operated in response to an emergency call or in the immediate pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law in which such latter events the driver of such vehicle shall sound such siren, whistle or bell, when necessary to warn pedestrians and other drivers of the approach thereof. 
(Code 1993, § 13-10.11) 
Sec. 14-562. - Mufflers, prevention of noise. 
    Every motor vehicle shall at all times be equipped with a muffler in good working order and in constant operation to prevent excessive or unusual noise and annoying smoke, and no person shall use a muffler cut-out, bypass or similar device upon a motor vehicle on a highway. 
(Code 1993, § 13-10.12) 
Sec. 14-563. - Tires. 
    It shall be unlawful to operate on any street or highway any motor vehicle which is not equipped with tires conforming to the requirements of the State Traffic Law. 
(Code 1993, § 13-10.13) 
Secs. 14-564-14-589. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIX. - ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT AND OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC REGULATIONS 

Sec. 14-590. - Enforcement of chapter by Police Department. 
    The Police Department is authorized to enforce the street traffic regulations of the village and all of the State vehicle laws applicable to street traffic in the village, to make arrests for traffic violations, to investigate accidents and to cooperate with the Traffic Engineer and other officers of the village in the administration of the traffic laws and in developing ways and means to improve traffic conditions. 
(Code 1993, § 13-11.1) 
Sec. 14-591. - Obedience to traffic regulations. 
(a)  It is unlawful and, unless otherwise declared in this chapter with respect to particular offenses, it is a violation of this Code for any person to do any act forbidden or to fail to perform any act required in this chapter. 
(b)  No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of any police officer or school crossing guard invested by law with authority to direct, control, or regulate traffic. A school crossing guard shall be plainly identified by a uniform or other insignia or sign. 
(Code 1993, § 13-11.2; Ord. No. 79-0-17, 4-3-1979) 
Sec. 14-592. - Authority of Police and Fire Department officials to direct traffic. 
(a)  Officers of the Police Department or such officers as are assigned by the Chief of Police are hereby authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand, or signal in conformance with traffic laws, provided that, in the event of a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the Police Department may direct traffic as conditions may require notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Officers of the Fire Department, when at the scene of a fire, or other emergency, may direct or assist the police in directing traffic at or in the immediate vicinity of the scene of the fire or other emergency. 
(Code 1993, § 13-11.3) 
Sec. 14-593. - Public officers and employees to obey act. 
(a)  The provisions of this chapter applicable to the drivers of vehicles upon the streets and highways shall apply to the drivers of all vehicles owned or operated by the United States, the State, county, or village, or any other political subdivision, except as provided in this section and subject to such specific exceptions as are set forth in this chapter with reference to authorized emergency vehicles. 
(b)  The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to persons, motor vehicles and other equipment while actually engaged in work upon the surface of the street or highway but shall apply to such persons and vehicles traveling to or from such work. 
(Code 1993, § 13-11.4) 
Sec. 14-594. - Exemptions to authorized emergency vehicles. 
(a)  The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle when responding to an emergency call upon approaching a red or stop signal or any stop sign, shall slow down as necessary for safety but may proceed cautiously past such red or stop signal or any stop sign. At other times drivers of authorized emergency vehicles shall stop in obedience to a stop sign or signal. 
(b)  The prima facie speed limitations set forth in this chapter shall not apply to authorized emergency vehicles when responding to emergency calls if the drivers thereof sound audible or visible signal by bell, siren, or light. This section shall not relieve the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons using the street, nor shall it protect the driver of any such vehicle from the consequence of a reckless disregard of the safety of others. 
(c)  No driver of any authorized emergency vehicle shall assume any special privilege under this article except when such vehicle is operated in response to an emergency call or in the immediate pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law. 
(Code 1993, § 13-11.5) 
Secs. 14-595-14-621. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XX. - PROCEDURE UPON ARREST; PENALTIES 

Sec. 14-622. - Procedure upon arrest. 
    Any officer, upon making an arrest for violation of the state traffic laws, this chapter or any other traffic ordinances of the village, shall take the name, address and operator's license number of the alleged violator and the registered number of the motor vehicle involved and shall issue to him in writing on a form prescribed by the Chief of Police a notice to answer to the charge against him at a place and at a time specified in the notice. 
(1)  When a person is arrested for an alleged violation of any of the provisions of the State traffic laws, this chapter or any other traffic ordinances of the village, the arresting officer may require the alleged violator to come to the police station and deposit with the police officer then in charge at the police station bail in such amount as is determined by the rule of the Circuit Court of Cook County or, in lieu thereof, to deposit the alleged violator's driver's or chauffeur's license; 
(2)  When a person is arrested for an alleged violation of any of the provisions of the Illinois Vehicle Code, ILCS ch. 625, and any amendments thereto now or hereafter adopted, as enacted by the people of the State represented in the general assembly, the arresting officer may require the alleged violator to come to the police station and deposit with the police officer than in charge at the police station bail in such amount as is determined by the rules of the Circuit Court of Cook County, except that when any statute of the State permits the depositing of an operator's or chauffeur's license in lieu of bail, such license may be accepted. 
(3)  Any person, pursuant to the issuance of a compliance citation, who is accused of violating certain sections of the Illinois Vehicle Code, as adopted in its entirety by this section, and described in subsection (4) of this section may settle and compromise the claim against him by paying to the village: 
a.  Within ten days of the time such alleged offense was committed, the sum of $35.00, and by presenting to the village proof of compliance, which in appropriate cases may be by documentation, with the section allegedly violated; or 
b.  If after ten days but before 30 days after such alleged offense was committed, the sum of $40.00, and by presenting to the village proof of compliance with the section allegedly violated. 
(4)  The following violations of the Illinois Vehicle Code, ILCS ch. 625, act 5, § 1-100 et seq., adopted in its entirety by section 14-2, shall be subject to the procedures described in subsection (3) of this section: 
a.  3-112 Failure to transfer title. 
b.  3-401 No valid registration. 
c.  3-413(1) Operation of vehicle with expired registration plates or sticker. 
d.  3-416 Failure to notify the Secretary of State of a change of address/name, (registration). 
e.  3-701 No valid registration. 
f.  5-202(e) Failure to display "Tow-Truck" plate (towed vehicle). 
g.  6-101 No valid drivers license (expired less than six months). 
h.  6-116 Failure to notify the Secretary of State of a change of name/address (drivers license). 
i.  6-303 Driving with a suspended license. Administrative suspensions for emission control violations only. 
j.  11-1401 Unattended motor vehicle left illegally. 
k.  11-1403(c) Illegal handlebars on a motorcycle. 
l.  11-1404 Riding a motorcycle without special equipment. 
m.  11-1405 No passenger footrests on a motorcycle. 
n.  11-1406 Driving view or driving mechanism obstructed. 
o.  11-1413 Depositing injurious material on a roadway. 
p.  12-201(a) Driving without a lighted headlamp, (motorcycle). 
q.  12-201(b) Driving without lights when required, no taillights, or only one taillight. 
r.  12-201(c) No rear registration plate light. 
s.  12-202 Insufficient clearance, identification, or side marker lights. 
t.  12-210 Failure to dim headlights. 
u.  12-211 Improper lighting; only one headlight. 
v.  12-401 Use of illegal tires (studded). 
w.  12-405(c) Use of unsafe tire (bald). 
x.  12-503(a) Obstructed windshield or front side windows. 
y.  12-503(c) Obstructed rear window. 
z.  12-503(e) Defective windshield, side, and/or rear window. 
aa.  12-601 Defective horn. 
bb.  12-602 Defective muffler; loud or no muffler. 
cc.  12-603 No seat belts. 
dd.  12-603.1 Failure to wear a properly adjusted and fastened seat/safety belt, (driver and front seat passenger). Specifically excludes violations of the Child Restraint Act. 
ee.  12-604 Television in a motor vehicle. 
ff.  12-606(a) No sign or name attached to each side of a tow-truck. 
gg.  12-606(b) Required equipment; broom, shovel, trash can, fire extinguisher. 
hh.  12-606(c) Failure to remove debris, or spread oil absorbing material on the roadway. 
ii.  12-607.1 Unlawful frame or floor height. 
jj.  12-610 Wearing a stereo headset while driving. 
kk.  13-111 No valid safety test. 
ll.  15-105 Improper projecting load; first division vehicle. 
mm.  15-106 Loose protruding member; all vehicles. 
(5)  The issuance of compliance citation shall be a courtesy in lieu of instituting a prosecution in court for the alleged offense. Any compliance citation which remains unpaid or in which the alleged violator has not appeared within a 30-day period from the date of issuance to request a court date, will be converted to a Uniform Traffic Complaint and a court date will be issued for the alleged offense, or the citation will be processed accordingly for civil action. 
(Code 1993, § 13-12.1; Ord. No. 93-0-85, 11-9-1993; Ord. No. 2009-O-72, 11-24-2009) 
Sec. 14-623. - Payment of penalties. 
(a)  Any person who violates any of the provisions of the following sections: 14-164, 14-166, 14-167, 14-170, 14-210, 14-211, 14-239, 14-296, 14-297, 14-298, 14-299, 14-300, 14-361, 14-365, 14-366, 14-367, 14-370, 14-371, 14-372, 14-405, 14-406, 14-431, 14-432, 14-561 shall be guilty of an ordinance violation, punishable by a fine as provided for in section 2-1305 of this Code. 
(b)  Any person who violates any of the provisions of the following sections of this chapter, 14-23 and 14-56, shall be guilty of an ordinance violation, punishable by a fine as provided for in section 2-1305 of this Code. 
(c)  Any person who violates article XI of this chapter shall be guilty of an ordinance violation, punishable by a fine as provided for in section 2-1305 of this Code. 
(d)  Any person who violates the provisions of section 14-180 shall be guilty of an ordinance violation, punishable by a fine as provided for in section 2-1305 of this Code. 
(Code 1993, § 13-12.2; Ord. No. 81-0-5, 1-6-1981; Ord. No. 85-0-5, 3-5-1985; Ord. No. 87-0-40, 8-4-1987; Ord. No. 91-0-74, 11-5-1991; Ord. No. 98-O-22, 4-28-1998; Ord. No. 99-O-74, 9-28-1999; Ord. No. 2002-O-100, 12-10-2002; Ord. No. 2009-O-72, 11-24-2009) 
Sec. 14-624. - Presumption in reference to illegal parking. 
    In any prosecution charging a violation of any law or regulation governing the standing or parking of a vehicle, proof that the particular vehicle described in the complaint was parked in violation of any such law or regulation, together with proof that the defendant named in the complaint was at the time of such parking the registered owner of such vehicle, shall constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that the registered owner of such vehicle was the person who parked or placed such vehicle at the point where, and for the time during which, such violation occurred. 
(Code 1993, § 13-12.3) 
Secs. 14-625-14-651. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XXI. - SCHEDULES OF DESIGNATED STREETS 

Sec. 14-652. - Schedule I; one-way streets. 
    One-way streets in the village are designated as follows: Michigan Avenue, from Lake Avenue north to Sheridan Road, northbound. 
(Code 1993, § 13-13, ¶1) 
Sec. 14-653. - Schedule II; through streets. 
    Through streets in the village are designated as follows: 
(1)  Central Avenue, Sheridan Road to Prairie Avenue. 
(2)  New Glenview Road, Wilmette Avenue to west limits. 
(3)  Old Glenview Road, Wilmette Avenue to west limits. 
(4)  Green Bay Road, south limits to north limits. 
(5)  Hibbard Road, south limits to north limits. 
(6)  Hunter Road, Wilmette Avenue to Beechwood Avenue. 
(7)  Illinois Road, Wilmette Avenue to Skokie Highway. 
(8)  Isabella Street, east limits to Sterling Lane. 
(9)  Lake Avenue, east limits to west limits. 
(10)  Locust Road, New Glenview Road to north limits. 
(11)  Ridge Road, south limits to north limits. 
(12)  Sheridan Road, south limits to north limits. 
(13)  Skokie Highway U.S. No. 41, south limits to north limits. 
(14)  Tenth Street, north limits to Wilmette Avenue. 
(15)  21st Street, Beechwood Avenue to Elmwood Avenue. 
(16)  Wilmette Avenue, Tenth Street to west limits. 
(Code 1993, § 13-13, ¶2; Ord. No. 74-0-6, 1-15-1974; Ord. No. 82-0-57, 10-5-1982) 
Secs. 14-654-14-679. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XXII. - PUBLIC DEMONSTRATION PERMIT 

Sec. 14-680. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Person means any person, firm, partnership, club, association, corporation, company, non-profit organization or other entity of any kind. 
    Public demonstration. 
(1)  The term "public demonstration" means one of the following events: 
a.  A march, demonstration, parade, procession, motorcade, foot race, marathon, walk-a-thon, bicycle race, bicycle tour, bike-a-thon or other similar organized event consisting of persons, animals or vehicles, or a combination thereof, moving upon the public streets or public rights-of-way within the village that interferes with the normal flow or regulation of pedestrian or vehicular traffic upon said streets or rights-of-way. 
b.  A meeting, demonstration, picket line, rally or gathering of more than 25 persons for a common purpose as a result of prior planning that interferes with the normal flow or regulation of pedestrian or vehicular traffic or occupies any village property in a place held open to the general public as an open public forum or public place of assembly. 
(2)  The term "public demonstration" shall not include any of the following: 
a.  A block party that has received a permit pursuant to the provisions of chapter 20. 
b.  A "temporary use" subject to approval by the Board of Trustees pursuant to appendix A, the Zoning Ordinance. 
c.  Funeral processions. 
d.  Students going to and from school classes or participating in educational activities, provided such conduct is under the immediate direction and supervision of the proper school authorities. 
e.  Official activity of officers or employees of a unit of local government, the State, or the United States of America. 
f.  Spontaneous events occasioned by news or affairs coming into public knowledge within three days of such public assembly, provided that the organizer thereof gives written notice to the Village Manager at least 24 hours prior to such parade or public assembly. 
    Public Demonstration Permit means a permit as required by this article. 
    Sidewalk means any area or way set aside or open to the general public for the purposes of pedestrian traffic, whether or not it is paved. 
    Street means any public right-of-way of the village set aside or open to the general public for the purposes of vehicular traffic, including any berm or shoulder parkway, right-of-way or median strip thereof. 
(Code 1993, § 13-14.1; Ord. No. 2000-O-1, 1-25-2000) 
Sec. 14-681. - Permit required. 
    No person shall engage in or conduct any public demonstration unless a Public Demonstration Permit therefor has been issued by the Village Manager. 
(Code 1993, § 13-14.2; Ord. No. 2000-O-1, 1-25-2000) 
Sec. 14-682. - Application. 
    A person seeking a Public Demonstration Permit shall file an application with the Village Manager on forms provided by such officer and the application shall be signed by the applicant under oath or affirmation. 
(Code 1993, § 13-14.3; Ord. No. 2000-O-1, 1-25-2000) 
Sec. 14-683. - Time for application. 
(a)  For a single, non-recurring public demonstration, an application for a Public Demonstration Permit shall be filed with the Village Manager at least ten days and not more than 180 days before the public demonstration is proposed to commence. The Village Manager may waive the minimum ten-day filing period if, after due consideration of the date, time, place and nature of the public demonstration, the anticipated number of participants, and the village services required in connection with the event, the Village Manager reasonably determines that the waiver will not present a hazard to public safety. 
(b)  For public demonstrations held on a regular or recurring basis at the same location, an application for a permit covering all such parades or public assemblies during that calendar year may be filed with the Village Manager at least ten days and not more than one year before the date and time at which the first such parade or public assembly is proposed to commence. The Village Manager may waive the minimum ten-day period after due consideration of the factors specified in subsection (a) of this section. 
(Code 1993, § 13-14.3.1; Ord. No. 2000-O-1, 1-25-2000) 
Sec. 14-684. - Contents of application. 
    An application for a Public Demonstration Permit shall set forth the following information: 
(1)  The name, address and telephone number of the person seeking the conduct such public demonstration; 
(2)  The names, addresses, and telephone numbers of the headquarters of the organization for which the public demonstration is to be conducted, if any, and the authorized and responsible heads of the organizations; 
(3)  The requested date of the public demonstration; 
(4)  The requested route to be traveled, if any, during the public demonstration, including the starting point and the termination point; 
(5)  The approximate number of persons who, and animals or vehicles which, will constitute such public demonstration and the type of animals and description of the vehicles, if applicable; 
(6)  The hours when such public demonstration will start and terminate; 
(7)  A statement as to whether the public demonstration will occupy all or a portion of the width of the streets proposed to be traversed; 
(8)  The location by street of any assembly areas for such public demonstration, and the time at which units of the public demonstration will begin to assemble at any such area; 
(9)  The intervals of space to be maintained between the units of public demonstration if a parade or similar event; 
(10)  If the public demonstration is intended to be held by, or on behalf of, any person other than the applicant, a letter from that person to the Village Manager authorizing the applicant to apply for the permit on the person's behalf; 
(11)  The type of public demonstration, including a description of activities planned during the event; 
(12)  A description of any recording equipment, sound amplification equipment, banners, signs, or other attention-getting devices to be used in connection with the public demonstration; 
(13)  The approximate number of participants in the public demonstration (spectators are not participants); 
(14)  An estimate of the number of spectators expected for the public demonstration; 
(15)  A designation of any public facilities or equipment requested to be utilized for or during the public demonstration; and 
(16)  After review of the application, such additional information that the Village Manager finds reasonably necessary to a fair determination as to whether a permit should issue. 
(Code 1993, § 13-14.3.2; Ord. No. 2000-O-1, 1-25-2000) 
Sec. 14-685. - Application fee. 
    There shall be no application fee for a Public Demonstration Permit. 
(Code 1993, § 13-14.3.3; Ord. No. 2000-O-1, 1-25-2000) 
Sec. 14-686. - Police and ambulance protection. 
(a)  The Village Manager shall, after consulting with the Police Chief, the Fire Chief, the Director of Engineering and Public Works, or such further or different personnel as the Village Manager shall deem necessary and appropriate, determine whether and to what extent additional police and ambulance protection is reasonably necessary for the public demonstration for traffic control and public safety. The Village Manager shall base this decision on the size, location, duration, time and date of the public demonstration, the expected sale or service of alcoholic beverages, the number of streets and intersections blocked, and the need to detour or preempt citizen travel and use of the streets and sidewalks. The speech content of the event shall not be a factor in determining the amount of police or ambulance protection necessary. If possible, without disruption of ordinary police or ambulance services or compromise of public safety, regularly scheduled on-duty personnel will provide police and ambulance services for the event. If additional police or ambulance protection for the public demonstration is reasonably deemed necessary by the Village Manager, the Village Manager shall so inform the applicant for the permit. The applicant then shall have the duty to secure the police or ambulance protection deemed necessary by the Village Manager at the sole expense of the applicant. 
(b)  Applicants seeking a permit for a public demonstration to be conducted for the purpose of engaging in speech protected under the First Amendment shall not be required to pay for any police or ambulance protection provided by the village. 
(Code 1993, § 13-14.4; Ord. No. 2000-O-1, 1-25-2000) 
Sec. 14-687. - Standards for issuance of Public Demonstration Permit. 
    The Village Manager shall issue a Public Demonstration Permit as provided for herein when, from a consideration of the contents of the application and such other information as may be otherwise obtained, the Village Manager reasonably finds that: 
(1)  The conduct of the public demonstration will not substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of other pedestrian or vehicular traffic contiguous to its route or location; 
(2)  The conduct of the public demonstration will not require the diversion of so great a number of village police officers to properly police the line of movement and the areas contiguous thereto as to prevent normal police protection of the village; 
(3)  The concentration of persons, animals, and vehicles at public assembly points of the public demonstration will not unduly interfere with proper fire and police protection of, or ambulance service to, areas contiguous to such public assembly areas; 
(4)  The conduct of the public demonstration is not reasonably likely to cause injury to person or property; 
(5)  The public demonstration is scheduled to move from its point of origin to its point of termination expeditiously and without unreasonable delays en route; 
(6)  Adequate sanitation and other required health facilities are or will be made available in or adjacent to any public assembly areas; 
(7)  There are sufficient parking places near the site of the public demonstration to accommodate the number of vehicles reasonably expected; 
(8)  The applicant has secured the police and ambulance protection, if any, required under this section; 
(9)  Such public demonstration is not for the primary purpose of advertising any product, goods or event that is primarily for private profit, and the parade itself is not primarily for profit. The prohibition against advertising any product, goods or event shall not apply to signs identifying organizations or sponsors furnishing or sponsoring exhibits or structures used in the public demonstration; 
(10)  No other Public Demonstration Permit application for the same time and location is already granted or has been received earlier in time than the pending application; 
(11)  No Public Demonstration Permit application for the same time but at another location is already granted or has been received earlier in time than the pending application, and the necessary police or ambulance resources required for that prior public demonstration are so great that, in combination with the subsequent pending application, the resulting deployment of police services or emergency medical services would have an immediate and adverse effect upon the welfare and safety of persons and property within the village; 
(12)  No event is scheduled elsewhere in the village where the police resources or needed ambulance resources required for that event are so great that the deployment of police services for the proposed parade or public assembly would have an immediate and adverse effect upon the welfare and safety of persons and property; 
(13)  No permit shall be granted that allows for the erection or placement of any structure, whether permanent or temporary, on a village street, sidewalk, or right-of-way unless advance approval for the erection or placement of the structure is obtained from the Village Board. 
(Code 1993, § 13-14.5; Ord. No. 2000-O-1, 1-25-2000) 
Sec. 14-688. - Non-discrimination. 
    The Village Manager shall uniformly consider each application upon its merits and in an objectively reasonable and viewpoint-neutral manner, and shall not discriminate in granting or denying Public Demonstration Permits under this article based upon political, religious, ethnic, racial, disability-related, or sexual orientation or gender-related grounds, or based on the content of any speech or expressive conduct protected by the First Amendment. 
(Code 1993, § 13-14.6; Ord. No. 2000-O-1, 1-25-2000) 
Sec. 14-689. - Notice of denial of application; alternative permit. 
(a)  The Village Manager shall act promptly upon a timely-filed application for a Public Demonstration Permit, but in no event shall grant or deny a permit less than 48 hours prior to the event. If the Village Manager disapproves the application, the Village Manager shall notify the applicant of such action, either by personal delivery or certified mail at least 48 hours prior to the scheduled start of the public demonstration as requested, and state with specificity the reasons for the denial. 
(b)  Should the Village Manager deny an application for a Public Demonstration Permit for a reason enumerated in sections 14-687(10) through (12), inclusive, the Village Manager may, in the written denial, propose for the conduct of the public demonstration at a date, time, location or route different from that named by the applicant. An applicant desiring to accept such an alternative permit shall, within five days after notice of the action of the Village Manager, file a written notice of acceptance of the alternative permit with the Village Manager. An alternate Parade or Public Assembly Permit shall otherwise conform to the requirements of, and shall have the effect of, a Public Demonstration Permit issued under this article. 
(c)  The denial by the Village Manager of an application for a Public Demonstration Permit shall be without prejudice to the applicant's submission of amendments to the original application, or the submission of a new application, so as to cure any deficiencies in the initial application. 
(Code 1993, § 13-14.7; Ord. No. 2000-O-1, 1-25-2000) 
Sec. 14-690. - Appeal procedure. 
(a)  Any applicant shall have the right to appeal the denial of a Public Demonstration Permit to the Village Board. The denied applicant shall make the appeal within five days after receipt of the denial by filing a written notice with the Village Clerk and a copy of the notice with the Village Manager. 
(b)  Said notice of appeal shall state with specificity the reasons why the Village Manager erred in interpreting or applying the standards for issuance of a Public Demonstration Permit pursuant to this article. The Village Board shall act upon the appeal at its next-scheduled regular meeting following receipt of the notice of appeal by the Village Clerk. 
(c)  In considering the appeal, the Village Board shall determine whether the Village Manager erred in applying the standards for issuance of a permit set forth in this article. The decision of the Village Board shall be made by a majority of those members present and voting. The decision of the Village Board shall be final. 
(Code 1993, § 13-14.8; Ord. No. 2000-O-1, 1-25-2000) 
Sec. 14-691. - Issuance of Public Demonstration Permit; notice to other officials. 
    Immediately upon the issuance of a parade or public assembly permit, the Village Manager shall send a copy thereof to the following: 
(1)  The Chief of Police; 
(2)  The Fire Chief; 
(3)  The Director of Engineering and Public Works; 
(4)  The Corporation Counsel; and 
(5)  The manager or responsible head of each public transportation utility, the regular routes of whose vehicles will be affected by the route of the proposed public demonstration. 
(Code 1993, § 13-14.9; Ord. No. 2000-O-1, 1-25-2000) 
Sec. 14-692. - Contents of permit. 
    Each Public Demonstration Permit shall state the following information: 
(1)  Starting and approximate ending time; 
(2)  Minimum speed of public demonstration units, if applicable; 
(3)  Maximum speed of public demonstration units, if applicable; 
(4)  Maximum interval of space to be maintained between public demonstration units, if applicable; 
(5)  The portions of the streets that may be occupied by the public demonstration units, if applicable; 
(6)  The maximum length of the public demonstration in miles or fractions thereof, if applicable; and 
(7)  Such other information as the Village Manager shall reasonably find necessary to the enforcement of this section. 
(Code 1993, § 13-14.10; Ord. No. 2000-O-1, 1-25-2000) 
Sec. 14-693. - Duties of permittee. 
(a)  A permittee hereunder shall comply with all permit directions and conditions and with all applicable laws and ordinances. 
(b)  The public demonstration chairperson or other person heading such activity shall carry the Parade or Public Assembly Permit upon his person during the conduct of the parade or public assembly. 
(Code 1993, § 13-14.11; Ord. No. 2000-O-1, 1-25-2000) 
Sec. 14-694. - Prohibitions. 
    The following prohibitions shall apply to all public demonstrations: 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to stage, present, or conduct any public demonstration without first having obtained a permit as herein provided. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly include materially false or misleading information in an application for a Public Demonstration Permit or such supporting materials submitted with the application to the Village Manager. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful for any person to participate in a public demonstration if the person knows that a permit therefor has not been granted or has been revoked; 
(4)  It shall be unlawful for any person in charge of, or responsible for the conduct of, a duly permitted public demonstration to knowingly fail to comply with the conditions of the permit; 
(5)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any public demonstration activity that would constitute a substantial hazard to the public safety or that would materially interfere with or endanger the public peace or rights of residents to the quiet and peaceful enjoyment of their property; 
(6)  It shall be unlawful for any person participating in any public demonstration to carry or possess any length of metal, lumber, wood, or similar material for the purpose of displaying a sign, poster, plaque or notice, unless such object is one-fourth inch or less in thickness and two inches or less in width, or if not generally rectangular in shape, such object shall not exceed three-fourths inch in its thickest dimension; 
(7)  It shall be unlawful for any person to carry any sign, poster, plaque, or notice, whether or not mounted on a length of material as specified in subsection (6) of this section, unless such sign, poster, plaque, or notice is constructed or made of a cloth, paper, or cardboard material; 
(8)  It shall be unlawful for any person participating in a public demonstration to utilize sound amplification equipment at decibel levels that exceed those limits imposed by appendix A, the Zoning Ordinance; and 
(9)  It shall be unlawful for any person to ride, drive or cause to be ridden or driven any animal or any animal-drawn vehicle upon any public street, unless specifically authorized by the permit. 
(Code 1993, § 13-14.12; Ord. No. 2000-O-1, 1-25-2000) 
Sec. 14-695. - Public conduct during public demonstrations. 
(a)  No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct or impede, or interfere with any public demonstration or with any person, vehicle or animal participating or used in a public demonstration. 
(b)  No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles or persons comprising a public demonstration when such vehicles or persons are in motion and are conspicuously designated as a parade or public assembly. 
(c)  The Village Manager shall have the authority, when reasonably necessary, to prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles along a street constituting a part of the route of a public demonstration. The Village Manager shall post signs to that effect, and it shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave unattended any vehicle in violation thereof. 
(Code 1993, § 13-14.13; Ord. No. 2000-O-1, 1-25-2000) 
Sec. 14-696. - Revocation of permit. 
(a)  The Village Manager shall have the authority to revoke a Public Demonstration Permit immediately upon reasonable determination of any of the following: 
(1)  That the permit application was granted based on the inclusion by the applicant of materially false and misleading information in the application or supporting materials submitted to the Village Manager, and that the Village Manager relied on said false or misleading information in granting the permit; 
(2)  Violation of the conditions or standards for issuance of the permit as set forth in this article; or 
(3)  When a public emergency arises that is of such a nature that the police resources or ambulance resources required for that emergency are so great that deployment of police services or ambulance services for the public demonstration would have an immediate and adverse effect upon the welfare and safety of persons or property. 
(b)  As soon as practicable after such revocation occurs, the Village Manager shall notify the permit applicant in writing of the reason or reasons for said revocation, said notice to be sent either by personal delivery or certified mail. A revocation of a permit shall be treated in the same manner as a denial for the purposes of appeal, and shall be subject to appeal in the same manner as provided in section 14-690. 
(Code 1993, § 13-14.14; Ord. No. 2000-O-1, 1-25-2000) 
Secs. 14-697-14-720. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XXIII. - HARBOR AND LAKE SHORE REGULATIONS 

Sec. 14-721. - Restricted area. 
    There is hereby established an area adjacent to the Lake Michigan shore line which shall be designated a restricted area and shall extend from the south village limits to the north village limits except as hereinafter noted. 
(Code 1993, § 8-1) 
Sec. 14-722. - Establishment. 
    The establishment of this restricted area is pursuant to the authority of the Boat Registration and Safety Act, Supreme Court Rule 501. The area designated "restricted area" shall extend from the south limits of the village to the south breakwater of the Wilmette Harbor; and from the 500-foot pier north of the harbor to the north village limits. It shall extend from the water's edge eastward to a point 600 feet from the water's edge. 
(Code 1993, § 8-1.1) 
Sec. 14-723. - Area designated. 
    The said restricted area may be marked and designated as such according to a uniform buoy system approved by the U.S. Coast Guard and the Department of Conservation of the State, or by the erection of signs on the shore visible to operators of motorboats offshore in the restricted area. Nothing herein shall be deemed to require the village itself to install or maintain the aforesaid devices. 
(Code 1993, § 8-1.2; Ord. No. 93-O-56, 7-27-1993) 
Sec. 14-724. - Unlawful to anchor. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to anchor or cause to be anchored any motor boat in the area designated as "restricted area" by this article. 
(Code 1993, § 8-2) 
Sec. 14-725. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Motorboat means any vessel propelled by machinery, whether or not such machinery is the principal source of propulsion. 
    Vessel means every description of watercraft, other than a seaplane on the water, used or capable of being used as a means of transportation on water. 
(Code 1993, § 8-3) 
Sec. 14-726. - Enforcement. 
    The Wilmette Police Department shall enforce this chapter, the restricted area being wholly within the limits of the police jurisdiction of the village as provided by statute. 
(Code 1993, § 8-4) 
Sec. 14-727. - Penalty. 
    Any person who shall be guilty of violating this article shall be fined not less than $25.00 nor more than $100.00 for the first offense; and not less than $50.00 nor more than $750.00 for each subsequent violation. 
(Code 1993, § 8-5; Ord. No. 78-O-26, 8-1-1978; Ord. No. 96-O-11, 4-9-1996) 
Chapter 16 - NUISANCES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 16-1. - Certain nuisances defined; abatement. 
    It is hereby declared that the following acts or conduct shall constitute a nuisance. Whenever any nuisance exists or is found on any premises within the village, the Village Manager is authorized to cause the same to be summarily abated in such manner as the Village Manager directs and at the expense of the party permitting or maintaining the nuisance. This shall be in addition to any other methods provided by law. 
(1)  Animal and vegetable matter. To cause or suffer the carcass of any animal or any animal matter or other matter to be collected or deposited, or to remain in any place in the village. 
(2)  Collections of matter. To cause or suffer grass, leaves, underbrush or other combustible matter to be collected, deposited or to remain on any premises unless properly composted as specified in the yard waste ordinance. 
(3)  Dogs and cats. To permit a dog or cat to run at-large or to keep a dog or cat which has bitten or injured a person or animal. Such animals may be impounded. 
(4)  Handbills. To scatter, distribute, or place on cars unsolicited handbills, circulars or other advertisements. 
(5)  Houses of prostitution. To maintain or keep any house of prostitution or hours of assignation where men and women resort for the purpose of prostitution. 
(6)  Offal and other offensive matter. To throw or deposit, or cause to be thrown or deposited, any offal or other offensive matter or the carcass of any animal in any watercourse, pond, spring or well, or into Lake Michigan, within one mile of any portion of the shore thereof, lying within the limits of the village. 
(7)  Offensive odors. To conduct any business or use any premises so as to create such an offensive odor as renders the air disagreeable to the neighborhood. 
(8)  Offensive or unwholesome business. To establish, maintain and carry on any offensive or unwholesome business in the village. 
(9)  Parts of removed building. To permit or suffer any foundation, or parts thereof, chimney, stack or other part of any building to remain upon the premises after the demolition of the building. 
(10)  Polluting water. To pollute or render unwholesome or injure the water of any drinking hydrant or lake. 
(11)  Rubbish and junk. To permit or suffer any lumber, bricks, concrete slabs, stones, plaster, scrap iron, rubbish, articles of junk or similar materials or articles to be collected, deposited or remain on any premises. 
(12)  Stagnant water. To permit or suffer stagnant water in artificial containers or structures, including, but not limited to, gutters and downspouts, tires, artificial ponds, pools or other containers or structures of any sort, in which mosquitoes or other insects can multiply. 
(13)  Unprotected basements and pits. To permit or suffer any basement, cellar, in-ground swimming pool or other hole or pit to remain unprotected on any premises in such a manner as to be dangerous to children or other persons going upon the premises. 
(Code 1993, § 14-1; Ord. No. 68-0-22, 5-21-1968; Ord. No. 2003-O-55, 9-9-2003) 
Secs. 16-2-16-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LITTERING 

Sec. 16-21. - Offense defined. 
(a)  Unless otherwise provided for by ordinance, it is unlawful for any person to cast, throw, drop, place, sweep, sift or deposit in any manner in or upon any street, sidewalk, alley, park or public place in the village, or in or upon the waters of Lake Michigan, or any canal, public water or receiving basin within the jurisdiction of the village, any paper, pasteboard, straw, excelsior, shavings, chips, sawdust, wood, rope, twine, wool, cotton, flax, hemp, jute, rubber, leather, ashes, cinders, soot, charcoal, coal, slag, dust, earth, sand, clay, mud, gravel, lime, shells, mortar, plaster, tar, hay, grass, leaves, weeds, grain, salt, hair, feathers, moss, shucks, bark, brick, stone, wire, nails, tacks, iron, tin, brass, copper, glass or pottery, or any kind of garbage, refuse or offal, whether animal or vegetable; or any slops, suds, swill, brine, rinsing, dishwater, urine, dirty, foul, bloody or ill-smelling liquid, or any excrement, manure, carrion, dead fish, fowl or animal or any fruit or vegetable, or any portion thereof; or any kind of dirt, rubbish, waste material, article or thing or substance whatsoever, whether liquid or solid, and whether of the same nature as the articles, things or substances herein specifically mentioned or not. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person to cast, throw, drop, place, sweep, sift or deposit, anywhere within the jurisdiction of the village, any substance, article or thing included in this section, in such manner that they, or any of them, may be carried or deposited, by the action of the sun, wind, rain or snow, in or upon any street, sidewalk, alley, park or other public place, or into or upon the waters of Lake Michigan, or any canal, public water or receiving basin within the jurisdiction of the village. 
(Code 1993, § 14-2.1) 
Sec. 16-22. - Penalty. 
    Any person who violates the provisions of section 16-21 shall be guilty of an ordinance violation, punishable by a fine as provided for in section 2-1305 of this Code. 
(Code 1993, § 14-2.2; Ord. No. 78-0-29, 8-1-1978; Ord. No. 90-0-73, 11-6-1990) 
Sec. 16-23. - Structures deemed nuisances. 
    Any building, structure or appurtenance thereto, which is not constructed or kept in a sanitary condition, or in conformity with the requirements of this Code or any other ordinances of the village, is deemed a nuisance and that nuisance may be abated in the manner provided by this Code or by law. 
(Code 1993, § 14-3) 
Secs. 16-24-16-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DISEASED AND DEAD ELM TREES DEEMED NUISANCES 

Sec. 16-50. - Condition defined. 
(a)  All species and varieties of elm trees (trees of genus Ulmus) infected with the fungus known as the Dutch Elm Disease (Certostomella Ulmi) as determined by laboratory analysis by the section of Applied Botany and Plant Pathology, Illinois Natural History Survey, or by laboratories approved by said agency, are hereby declared to be public nuisances. 
(b)  All species and varieties of elm trees that are dead or substantially dead, and all dead elmwood to which the bark is still attached, which, because of their condition, may serve as a breeding place for the European Elm Bark Beetle (Scolytus Multisriatus), and the native Elm Bark Beetle (Hylurgopinus Rufipes), are hereby declared to be public nuisances. 
(Code 1993, § 14-4.1) 
Sec. 16-51. - Unlawful to maintain. 
    It shall be unlawful for any owner of any lot or parcel of land in the village to permit or maintain on any such parcel of land, any elm tree or dead elm wood which, as provided in section 16-50 is a public nuisance, and it shall be the duty of any such owner promptly to remove from the village any such elm tree or dead elm wood. It shall be unlawful to strip the bark from, retain, or sell either the wood or bark from any such tree. 
(Code 1993, § 14-4.2; Ord. No. 86-0-41, 7-1-1986) 
Sec. 16-52. - Enforcement; inspection. 
    In order to carry out the purposes of this article and to implement the enforcement thereof, the Village Manager, or duly authorized representative, is hereby authorized and empowered to enter upon any lot or parcel of land in the village at all reasonable hours for the purpose of inspecting any elm trees or dead elm wood situated thereon and the Village Manager, or duly authorized representative, may remove such specimens from any such tree as are required for the purposes of the laboratory analysis referred to in section 16-50, or to determine whether such tree because it is dead or substantially dead, may serve as a breeding place for the European Elm Bark Beetle or the Native Elm Bark Beetle. It shall be unlawful for any person to take any action to prevent the Village Manager, or duly authorized representative, from entering on any lot or parcel of land in the village for the purpose of such inspection, or to interfere with the Village Manager, or such representative, in the performance of any duties provided for under the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1993, § 14-4.3) 
Sec. 16-53. - Removal upon notice. 
(a)  If on laboratory analysis of specimens removed from any elm tree by the Village Manager, or duly authorized representative, it is determined that such tree is a public nuisance, or if the Village Manager determines that any dead or substantially dead elm tree, or dead elm wood, is a public nuisance, as provided by section 16-50, the Village Manager shall serve or cause to be served upon the person who is owner of the lot or parcel of land on which such tree or dead elm wood is located, a written notice requiring such owner to comply with the provisions of this chapter. If the person upon whom such notice is served, fails, neglects or refuses to remove from the village such elm tree or dead elm wood within ten days after service of such notice, the Village Manager or duly authorized representative may proceed to remove from the village such tree, or dead elm wood, and assess the cost thereof against the owner of such lot or parcel of land, and the amount of such cost shall be paid by such owner to the village. 
(b)  Service of said notice shall be by personal service, if the owner of the lot or parcel of land on which an infected elm tree, as aforesaid, is located, is a resident of the village. If such owner cannot be found in the village, or is a nonresident of the village, written notice shall be served by registered mail, addressed to said owner at his last known address, and by publication at least once in a newspaper of general circulation in the village. 
(Code 1993, § 14-4.4; Ord. No. 86-0-41, 7-1-1986) 
Sec. 16-54. - Cost to owners. 
    If the village removes from any lot or parcel of land in the village any infected elm tree which is a public nuisance or any dead or substantially dead elm tree, or dead elm wood, which is a public nuisance, as provided by section 16-50, the assessment of the cost of the work done by the village against the owner of the lot or parcel of land involved shall be in addition to the penalties imposed herein for any violation or noncompliance with any provision of this article. 
(Code 1993, § 14-4.5) 
Sec. 16-55. - Removal from village property. 
    Any elm tree, or dead elm wood, on property owned by the village which is a public nuisance as provided by section 16-50 shall be promptly removed from the village under the supervision of the Village Manager, or duly authorized representative, at the expense of the village. 
(Code 1993, § 14-4.6; Ord. No. 86-0-41, 7-1-1986) 
Sec. 16-56. - Removal of dead, dying or diseased trees or limbs. 
(a)  Where the Director of Engineering and Public Works appears in this section, it shall mean the Director or an authorized designee. 
(b)  The owner of a lot or parcel of land containing any dead, dying or diseased trees, which constitute a hazard to persons or property, or any dead, dying or diseased limbs, which constitute a hazard to persons or property, shall remove promptly such trees and limbs when required to do so by the Director of Engineering and Public Works. 
(c)  Notice to remove said trees and limbs shall be served upon the owner personally or by certified mail, and the owner shall cause said trees and limbs to be removed upon receipt of such notice. If the hazard constitutes an immediate public safety concern, the Department of Engineering and Public Works may perform the necessary removal work immediately and all costs incurred therefor shall be assessed against the owner. 
(d)  If an owner fails to remove said trees and limbs within 15 days after receipt of notice to remove served pursuant to this article, the Department of Engineering and Public Works may perform the necessary removal and all costs incurred therefor shall be assessed against the owner. 
(e)  Penalty. Any person, firm, or corporation found guilty of a violation of this section shall be guilty of an ordinance violation as provided for in section 2-1305. 
(Code 1993, § 14-4.7; Ord. No. 92-0-46, 5-19-1992; Ord. No. 96-O-11, 4-9-1996) 
Secs. 16-57-16-85. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - VEGETATION DEEMED A NUISANCE 

Sec. 16-86. - Conditions defined. 
    Any weeds, such as Jimson, burdock, ragweed, thistles, cocklebur or other weeds of like kind growing in the village hereby are declared to be a nuisance, and it is unlawful for any person to permit any weeds to grow to a greater height than ten inches. Lawn grass that has grown to a height greater than ten inches also shall be deemed a nuisance. 
(Code 1993, § 14-5.1) 
Sec. 16-87. - Failure to abate. 
    In all cases where the owner, occupant or agent of any lot, tract or parcel of land shall neglect or refuse to abate the nuisance as provided for in section 16-86, he shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this section. 
(Code 1993, § 14-5.2) 
Sec. 16-88. - Abatement by village. 
    It is lawful for the village to abate the nuisance provided for in section 16-86, and the owner, occupant or agent shall be charged with expenses which may be incurred by the village in the removal or abatement thereof, which expense shall be collected by the village by suit, or otherwise, in addition to the fine or penalty. 
(Code 1993, § 14-5.3) 
Sec. 16-89. - Vegetation on adjoining parkway. 
    The duty of an owner, occupant or agent of any lot, tract or parcel of land to keep weeds and grass cut to a length not more than ten inches shall extend to any adjacent public parkway. For the purposes of this section 16-89, the term "public parkway" shall mean any public right-of-way or other property dedicated to the village lying between said lot, tract or parcel of land and an open public street. 
(Code 1993, § 14-5.4; Ord. No. 97-O-66, 9-9-1997) 
Sec. 16-90. - Unlawful nuisances; penalty. 
    In addition to being declared nuisances and notwithstanding the provisions of appendix A, the Zoning Ordinance, section 30-6.3, it shall be unlawful and punishable as provided in section 16-117, for any person, firm, or corporation to suffer or permit the excessive and unnecessary noise. 
(Code 1993, § 14-6) 
Sec. 16-91. - Excessive and unnecessary noise prohibited. 
    Making, continuing or causing to be made or continued any excessive and unnecessary loud and raucous sound or noise or any sound or noise which because of its volume level, duration or character annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, health, peace, repose or safety of reasonable persons of ordinary sensibilities within the limits of the village is prohibted. 
(Code 1993, § 14-6.1) 
Secs. 16-92-16-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - NOISE 

Sec. 16-111. - Prohibition. 
    Harboring or keeping any dog or other animal which disturbs the peace by prolonged barking or making other loud noise is prohibited. 
(Code 1993, § 14-6.2) 
Sec. 16-112. - Commercial noise. 
    The following activities are prohibited: Erecting (including excavating) demolishing, altering or repairing of any building, and removal of any tree, other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. on weekdays, and 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on Saturdays, except in case of urgent necessity as determined by the Village Engineer; provided, however, that a homeowner or occupant may engage in construction activities personally between 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on Sundays. Commercial erection, demolition, alteration, or repair of any building, or removal of any tree, is also prohibited on the following holidays: New Year's Day, Memorial Day, The Fourth of July, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day, and Christmas Day; provided, however, that a homeowner or occupant may engage in construction activities personally between 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on these holidays. 
(Code 1993, § 14-6.3; Ord. No. 92-0-17, 3-3-1992; Ord. No. 98-O-38, 5-26-1998; Ord. No. 2006-O-85, 11-14-2006) 
Sec. 16-113. - Pile drivers, hammers, etc. 
    Operating between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on weekdays and all 24 hours on Saturday and Sunday of any pile driver, steam shovel, pneumatic hammer, derrick, steam or electric hoist or other related piece of equipment, the use of which is attended by loud or unusual noise, is prohibited, except in case of urgent necessity as determined by the Village Engineer. 
(Code 1993, § 14-6.4; Ord. No. 98-O-38, 5-26-1998) 
Sec. 16-114. - Commercial activities near or within a residential district. 
(a)  Engaging in any commercial activity, including, but not limited to, manufacturing, vehicle servicing, catering and banquet hall operations, in or within 50 feet of a residential district, if such activity generates a noise which because of its volume level, duration, or character annoys, disturbs, injures, or endangers the comfort and peace and quiet of reasonable persons residing in the said residential district is prohibited. 
(b)  It is the intention of this section that any such activity which generates such noise may be pursued in a closed building (as defined below) if, as a result of such enclosure, such noise does not annoy, disturb, injure or endanger the comfort and peace and quiet of reasonable persons in the said residential district. 
(c)  The term "closed building" means that all windows and doors of the building are closed and proper ventilation is provided other than through open doors and windows. Ventilation shall to the extent possible be oriented in a direction away from adjoining residential property. 
(Code 1993, § 14-6.5; Ord. No. 91-0-48, 7-16-1991) 
Sec. 16-115. - Landscape equipment noise. 
(a)  Commercial operation of power-operated lawn or landscape maintenance equipment, including without limitation tractors, mowers, tillers, trimmers, vacuums, hedge clippers or leaf blowers, performed by commercial landscapers, lawn service contractors or other similar businesses required to obtain therefor a business license pursuant to chapter 24 hired by a property owner or occupant to perform such landscape maintenance services on the owner's or occupant's property, other than during the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. Monday through Friday, and 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. on Saturday. 
(1)  Nothing in this subsection (a) shall be deemed to prohibit a property owner, tenant or manager utilizing its own employees or an individual residential occupant operating lawn or landscape maintenance equipment, other than a lawn or leaf blower as provided in subsection (b) of this section, upon the property where said occupant resides. However, no such occupant or employee of the occupant shall operate lawn or landscape maintenance equipment prior to 9:00 a.m. or after 8:00 p.m. on Saturdays or Sundays. 
(2)  The provisions of this subsection (a) shall not apply to: 
a.  Golf courses; 
b.  Public parks; 
c.  Any property owned, leased or operated by the Wilmette Park District. 
(b)  Operating a gasoline-powered lawn or leaf-blower, which shall be deemed to include an electrically-operated leaf blower powered by a gasoline-powered portable electric generator; 
(1)  For more than 30 minutes in any three-hour period on lots of one-half acre (21,780 square feet) or less, between the dates of October 1 through and including May 14 of the following calendar year; or 
(2)  At any time between the dates of May 15 through and including September 30, provided, that the prohibitions set forth in this subsection (b)(2) shall not apply to places or uses, as the case may be: 
a.  Golf courses; 
b.  Public parks; 
c.  Any property owned, leased or operated by the Wilmette Park District; 
d.  The use of such devices for roof, gutter and downspout cleaning; 
e.  The use of such devices for cleaning and preparation of asphalt surfaces prior to seal coating, or in the paving, repair or patching of public streets and alleys. 
(c)  Each commercial landscape or lawn service business required to obtain a business license pursuant to the provisions of chapter 24 shall, at the time of receiving a business license from the village, be informed by the village in writing of the provisions of this section, provided that any failure of the village to provide such written information shall not be deemed a defense to a violation of this section or otherwise impair or affect any prosecution brought for a violation thereof. 
(d)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to: 
(1)  Relieve any person or entity from compliance with section 16-91; or 
(2)  Prohibit a property owner or occupant from suffering or permitting on the owner's or occupant's property any noise that is not audible at the property line, or any activity that does not generate noise audible at the property line. 
(Code 1993, § 14-6.6; Ord. No. 99-O-50, 6-8-1999; Ord. No. 2006-O-55, 10-24-2006; Ord. No. 2013-O-66, 10-22-2013) 
Sec. 16-116. - Motor vehicle alarms. 
    The use of a continuous, audible signal device which acts as a motor vehicle burglar alarm, when such device is: 
(1)  Not limited in continuous operation to four minutes after initial activation; or 
(2)  Automatically reactivates after initial activation and shut-off without being manually reset. 
(Code 1993, § 14-6.7; Ord. No. 96-O-69, 8-27-1996) 
Sec. 16-117. - Penalty. 
(a)  Any person, firm or corporation convicted of a violation of this article shall be guilty of an ordinance violation, punishable by a as provided for in section 2-1305. 
(b)  Any person who violates any of the provisions of section 16-115, may avoid prosecution for violating any of said section 16-115 by surrendering the citation or other notice of violation and paying to the Police Department within ten days from the date appearing on said violation notice, the sum of $75.00 for a first offense, and $150.00 for a second or subsequent offense within one year. Any person making such payment shall receive a receipt therefor from the Police Department. 
(c)  In addition to the fine provided for in this section, the violation of section 16-116, Motor Vehicle Alarm, is deemed to be a nuisance which requires immediate abatement, and the village shall be lawfully empowered to abate the nuisance by having the offending vehicle towed, and the owner of said vehicle shall be responsible to the village for its expenses incurred in abating the nuisance, including the cost of towing and storage of the offending vehicle. 
(Code 1993, § 14-6.8; Ord. No. 90-0-79, 11-20-1990; Ord. No. 96-O-11, 4-9-1996; Ord. No. 96-O-69, 8-27-1996; Ord. No. 2010-O-18, 7-27-2010) 
Secs. 16-118-16-147. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - COAL TAR 

Sec. 16-148. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Coal tar means a byproduct of the process used to refine coal. Coal tar contains high levels of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs). 
    Coal tar pavement product means a material that contains coal tar and is for use on an asphalt or concrete surface, including a driveway or parking area. 
    Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) means a group of organic chemicals that are present in coal tar and are an environmental concern because they are toxic to aquatic life. 
    Sealcoat means a black liquid that is sprayed or painted on asphalt pavement in an effort to protect and beautify the asphalt. Most sealcoat products are coal-tar or asphalt based. 
(Code 1993, § 14-7.1; Ord. No. 2017-O-10, 2-28-2017) 
Sec. 16-149. - Enforcement. 
    Violations of this article will be enforced by the village. 
(Code 1993, § 14-7.2; Ord. No. 2017-O-10, 2-28-2017) 
Sec. 16-150. - Regulation of the application and sale of sealcoat products containing coal tar. 
(a)  No person shall apply any sealcoat product within the village that is labeled as containing coal tar. 
(b)  No person shall sell, offer to sell, or display for sale any sealcoat product within the village that is labeled as containing coal tar. 
(c)  A person who owns property on which a coal tar pavement product is applied after the effective date of the amendatory ordinance from which this section is derived is presumed to have used a coal tar pavement product in violation of this section. 
(d)  Any person, who applies, sells, offers to sell or displays for sale any sealcoat product within the village that is labeled as containing coal tar is presumed to have applied, sold, offered to sell or displayed the product in violation of this section. 
(Code 1993, § 14-7.3; Ord. No. 2017-O-10, 2-28-2017) 
Sec. 16-151. - Penalty. 
(a)  Any person who violates section 16-150 by applying a coal tar sealant product at his residence shall be subjected to a fine not to exceed $250.00. 
(b)  Each day that a violation occurs or continues is a separate offense and subject to an additional fine. 
(c)  Any commercial sealcoat product applicator, residential or commercial developer, industrial or commercial owner, or any other person who violates section 16-150, shall be subject to a fine of $250.00 for the first violation within a 12-month period, $500.00 for the second violation within a 12-month period, and $750.00 for the third and each subsequent violation within a 12-month period. 
(Code 1993, § 14-7.4; Ord. No. 2017-O-10, 2-28-2017) 
Chapter 18 - PLANNING AND PLATTING 

Sec. 18-1. - Comprehensive Plan. 
    A Comprehensive Plan for the village shall be maintained by the Plan Commission as authorized in section 2-768 under the supervision of the Director of Community Development. 
(Code 1993, § 15-1; Ord. No. 68-O-18, 4-16-1968; Ord. No. 72-O-3, 1-18-1972) 
Sec. 18-2. - Subdivision fees and defined. 
    It shall be unlawful to erect any building for habitation in the village except in compliance with the following subdivision requirements. The filing fee for a request for subdivision shall be $777.00. 
(Code 1993, § 15-2; Ord. No. 2005-O-104, 11-21-2005; Ord. No. 2006-O-94, 11-28-2006; Ord. No. 2007-O-87, 11-27-2007; Ord. No. 2008-O-88, 12-9-2008; Ord. No. 2009-O-72, 11-24-2009; Ord. No. 2010-O-71, 11-23-2010; Ord. No. 2011-O-74, 11-22-2011; Ord. No. 2012-O-63, 11-27-2012; Ord. No. 2013-O-71, 11-26-2013) 
Sec. 18-3. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Subdivision means: 
(1)  A subdivision of unsubdivided land either improved or unimproved. 
(2)  A resubdivision of unimproved land. 
(3)  A subdivision or resubdivision of areas subject to redevelopment. 
(4)  Any change or rearrangement in the boundary or division lines of any lot or parcel of real estate from any public thoroughfare, also any division of any existing parcel or tract of real estate into two or more parcels or tracts. 
(Code 1993, § 15-2.1) 
Sec. 18-4. - Plat requirement. 
(a)  Any owner of land within the corporate limits of the village who wishes to subdivide the same, as defined above, or who wishes to dedicate all or a portion thereof for streets, alleys or other public use, shall first submit to the Community Development Department a plat thereof in duplicate, and a filing fee to be determined by the Village Board. 
(b)  Where a proposed subdivision borders or includes any public waters in which the State has property rights or interests, two additional prints of the plat shall be furnished and forwarded to the Illinois Department of Transportation for review and approval as to the boundary lines between private and public property rights and interests. 
(c)  The plat shall be drawn to a scale of not less than 100 feet to one inch with north sign and shall particularly describe and set forth: 
(1)  Name. The name of the proposed subdivision, as approved by the Village Engineer. 
(2)  Legal description. The legal description of the property, including the section, township and range. 
(3)  Streets. The width of roads and streets, the full width of streets bounding the proposed subdivision with their names and the width and names of intersecting streets in the property immediately adjacent thereto. 
(4)  Municipal boundaries. Municipal boundary and all corporate boundary lines within or adjacent to the proposed subdivision. 
(5)  Lots and blocks. The dimensions of lots and blocks, the square foot area of each lot and a number or letter on each lot and block. 
(6)  Dimensions. All necessary dimensions, both linear and angular; linear dimensions in feet and decimals of feet and all deflection angles, radii, arcs and interior angles of all corners along the property line of each street. 
(7)  Dedications of lands for public use. A statement of dedication properly conveying all lands dedicated for such public uses as streets, roadways, alleys, parks or any other public use. 
(8)  Certificates. A certificate of title certifying the ownership of the lands, together with all proper certificates, seals and signatures as required by law. 
(9)  Building lines. Building lines indicating the setback of buildings from street lines, which building lines shall be not less than required by the zoning ordinance and Master Street Plan ordinance of the village in force at the time the subdivision is made. 
(10)  Survey stakes. Survey stakes or survey monuments, together with property ties. 
(Code 1993, § 15-2.2; Ord. No. 83-O-37, 7-19-1983; Ord. No. 93-O-01, 1-26-1993) 
Sec. 18-5. - Requirements for subdividing, general. 
    The following requirements shall apply to every subdivision of land hereafter made in the village: 
(1)  Street widths. 
a.  There shall be dedicated for street purposes such portions of the subdivision as are necessary to supply the subdivision's portion of any streets required by the Master Street Plan or, if that plan does not apply, then there shall be dedicated for street purposes such portions of the subdivision as are necessary to supply the subdivision's portion of any streets which are necessary to adequately serve the subdivision and the needs of the area in which it is located. In no event shall any street when completely dedicated be less than 60 feet in width. 
b.  Dead-end streets shall terminate in an open space (preferably circular) having a minimum radius of 60 feet. 
(2)  Alleys. Where alleys are provided they shall be not less than 20 feet in width. 
(3)  Easements. Where no alleys are provided easements not less than six feet wide shall be provided for any or all public utilities with access to all lots. 
(4)  Zoning and consistency with surrounding neighborhood. 
a.  All lots shall conform to the requirements of the Zoning Ordinance of the village in force at the time the subdivision is made and shall be consistent with the density and the existing pattern of development in the surrounding neighborhood. For the purposes of this section, the term "neighborhood" shall means that area delineated in the Neighborhood Area Map, incorporated by reference in this section as if fully set forth herein, within which the property proposed to be subdivided is located. The term "Neighborhood Area Map" means the Neighborhood Area Map approved by the Board of Trustees as well as any amendments adopted thereto. 
b.  No proposed subdivision or resubdivision of property in a residential zoning district shall result in one or more lots having side lot lines abutting rear lot lines. Where the property that is the subject of a proposed subdivision or resubdivision in a residential zoning district has, prior to the proposed subdivision or resubdivision, a front lot line adjoining a public street, then lots in the proposed subdivision or resubdivision shall have front lot lines adjoining the same public street. The requirements of this section shall not apply to a subdivision or resubdivision of property wherein lots in the proposed new subdivision or resubdivision of property will have front yards adjoining a new dedicated public street to be constructed by the subdivider. 
c.  Each lot in a proposed subdivision or resubdivision in a residential zoning district shall be substantially rectangular in shape, unless the contours of an adjacent street or previously established lot render such shape impractical. A lot whose relationship to one or more adjacent lots is such as to form an "L" shape is considered inconsistent with the foregoing requirement and shall not be included in any residential subdivision or resubdivision. 
(Code 1993, § 15-2.3; Ord. No. 79-O-4, 3-6-1979; Ord. No. 88-O-37, 8-2-1988; Ord. No. 93-O-88, 11-23-1993; Ord. No. 2006-O-63, 8-8-2006; Ord. No. 2017-O-21, 4-25-2017) 
Sec. 18-6. - Public improvements. 
    In addition to the requirements set forth in section 18-5, the following requirements for public improvements shall also apply to every subdivision of land hereafter made in the village: 
(1)  Streets. All dedicated streets abutting upon or within subdivided properties shall be provided by the subdivider, at his own expense, with roadways having a minimum width face to face of curb sufficient to adequately serve the subdivision and the needs of the area in which it is located. In no event shall a roadway be less than 27 feet in width. The roadway shall consist of one of the following types at the option of the subdivider or developer: 
a.  A Portland cement reinforced concrete pavement not less than seven inches in thickness; or 
b.  Eight inches of thoroughly compacted gravel, waterbound macadam, soil-cement or the equivalent as a base with a wearing course of four-inch vitrified paving brick; or 
c.  Eight inches of thoroughly compacted waterbound macadam base with not less than two inches bituminous concrete wearing surface; 
d.  Six inches of thoroughly compacted bituminous asphalt material base with not less than 21/2 inches of bituminous concrete wearing surface. 
(2)  Curb. All streets abutting upon subdivided properties where the subdivider is required to pave, under this chapter, must be provided with concrete curb and gutter or conform with contiguous types. Minimum grades for curb and gutter shall be 0.25 percent. Depressed curbs at intersection crosswalks shall be added. 
(3)  Alleys. All alleys shall be improved with a Portland cement reinforced concrete pavement or equivalent thereof with a minimum thickness of six inches and a minimum width of two feet less than the width of the dedication. 
(4)  Sidewalks. Sidewalks must be provided for on both sides of each street at the property line throughout the entire subdivision. Sidewalks must be constructed of one course Portland cement concrete with broom finish, and shall be not less than five inches in thickness and not less than five feet in width. 
(5)  Water mains. 
a.  The water system of the village shall be extended for and throughout the entire subdivision in such a manner that every lot in such subdivision may be serviced by means of a house connection within its own frontage. Water mains shall be not less than six inches internal diameter, and valves shall be of a make in conformity with those being generally used in the village and shall be installed in 48-inch valve vaults constructed of six-inch concrete block or reinforced pre-cast concrete. The valves will be so placed that in the event of any single break it will not be necessary to shut down more than 800 feet of water main. Water mains shall be connected to the existing water system in such a way that the system will be circulating. 
b.  House service stubs are to be installed extending outside of the paved area at the time of the water main installation before a permanent type of roadway is constructed. 
(6)  Fire hydrants. Fire hydrants shall be installed throughout the entire subdivision so that they will be located at intervals of not exceeding 400 feet throughout the subdivision. All fire hydrants shall have a six-inch barrel and shall be provided with two two-inch hose connections and steamer connections with an auxiliary valve. Fire hydrants shall be of a type to conform with those being generally used in the village. 
(7)  Sanitary sewer. 
a.  A complete system of sanitary sewers shall be constructed for and throughout the entire subdivision in such a manner that every lot in such subdivision may be serviced by means of a house connection within its own frontage. The location of sewer access vaults shall be as determined by the Village Engineer. 
b.  Before a permanent type of roadway is constructed, house service stubs are to be installed extending outside of the paved area. 
c.  Where a public sanitary sewer capable of serving the subdivision is located within one-quarter of a mile of any part of the subdivision, the subdivider shall connect with such sanitary sewer and provide adequate sewer lines accessible to each lot. 
d.  Where a public sanitary sewer capable of serving the subdivision is not located within one-quarter of a mile of any part of the subdivision, but plans for installation of sanitary sewers in the vicinity of the subdivision and capable of serving it have been prepared by the village and approved by the Metropolitan Water Reclamation District of Greater Chicago, the subdivider shall install sewers in conformity with such plan, although a connection to an existing main may not be immediately practicable. 
(8)  Storm sewer. 
a.  In any subdivision of land hereafter made in that portion of the village lying west of Ridge Road, there shall be constructed a storm sewer system for and throughout the entire subdivision, which shall be separate and independent of the sanitary sewer system. Sewer access vaults shall be constructed at intervals determined by the Village Engineer and catch basins shall be connected to the storm sewer only at such sewer access vaults. 
b.  Before a permanent type of roadway is constructed, house service stubs are to be installed extending outside of the paved area. 
c.  The design of storm and sanitary sewer systems shall be in conformity to general practice within the village and shall be subject to the approval of the Village Engineer. 
(9)  Street lights. A street light system for and throughout the entire subdivision shall be connected to the nearest power supply with a time switch approved by the power company. Street light standards shall be of a type approved by the Village Engineer. 
(10)  Easements. 
a.  The easements required by section 18-5(3) shall be acquired and maintained and kept free from any and all encroachments on or above the easement except as provided for in this subsection. The following encroachments are permissible in an easement, upon the application and receipt of a village permit as otherwise required by this Code and as conditioned by this subsection: 
1.  Landscaping; 
2.  Fences; 
3.  Play equipment; 
4.  Small accessory structures without a foundation. 
b.  The village retains the right to enter any property where an easement is located for any public purpose relating to the utility to be or already located within the easement. The property owner bears the risk of installing any encroachment over an easement. If at any time the village requires access to the easement for either new construction or maintenance of an existing utility, the property owner shall remove the encroachment and access to the easement shall be provided to the village, if in the opinion of the Village Engineer there is no other reasonable and cost effective method of accessing the utility. All costs associated with removing any encroachment in an easement shall be the responsibility of the property owner. Any costs that are incurred by the village for accessing the easement shall be repaid to the village within 30 days after notice is provided to the property owner by the village. The village will not replace or repair any removed or damaged encroachments located in an easement. 
c.  A property owner may submit to the Director of Engineering and Public Works a request to allow for the placement of an otherwise restricted encroachment. Such a request shall include a plan, a statement of hardship, drawings and any other materials requested by the Director of Engineering and Public Works. The Director of Engineering and Public Works has sole the discretion to allow for or deny the placement of an otherwise restricted encroachment if the property owner has shown: 
1.  A hardship with no other alternative for placement of an otherwise restricted encroachment; and 
2.  That placement of an otherwise restricted encroachment will not damage or restrict access to the easement; and 
3.  That the property owner execute an express written agreement to be recorded against the property and run with the property, at the property owner's cost, indicating acceptance of the conditions of this section, which include, but are not limited to, the removal requirements of the encroachment as determined in the sole discretion of the Director of Engineering and Public Works and repayment of any costs incurred by the village to the village. 
(Code 1993, § 15-2.4; Ord. No. 2017-O-43, 8-22-2017) 
Sec. 18-7. - Plat referred to Plan Commission. 
    The Site Plan Review Committee shall review the plat and make a recommendation to the Plan Commission. The Director of Community Development shall refer the plat to the Plan Commission. The Village Engineer shall confer with the subdivider and prepare estimates of cost of all public improvements as required by this chapter. 
(Code 1993, § 15-2.5) 
Sec. 18-8. - Hearing; notices. 
    The Plan Commission shall hold a public hearing or hearings on each proposed subdivision. Notices of the public hearing shall be given as follows: 
(1)  The applicant shall notify by written notices of the hearing all persons to whom the current real estate tax bills are sent, as shown on the records of the County Assessor, for all lots any part of which lie within 250 feet of the boundaries of the subject property, not excluding streets and alleys, as well as all occupants of such lots. All such notices shall be provided to the applicant by the Director of Community Development and shall show the number assigned to the application (if any), the date, time, and place of the public hearing, and the nature of the application being considered at the hearing. All such notices shall be delivered not less than 15 days nor more than 30 days in advance of the scheduled hearing date. For the purposes of this section, the term "occupant" shall include occupants of all residential, business, and institutional properties. Such notices shall be delivered by hand or by mail. Any notice which is delivered by hand shall be given as follows: 
a.  In the case of a natural person, to the person entitled to the notice or a member of that person's household over the age of 13; 
b.  In the case of a corporation, to any officer or registered agent; and 
c.  In the case of a partnership, to any general partner. 
1.  Any notice that is delivered by mail to an owner of a property shall be sent to the person's last known address with United States Postal Service delivery confirmation or by certified or registered mail, postage pre-paid and return receipt requested. 
2.  Any notice that is mailed to an occupant may be sent by first-class mail addressed simply to "Occupant" at the appropriate address, without the actual name of the occupant being specified. 
3.  Notices delivered by mail shall be deemed to have been given when deposited in the U.S. mail. 
4.  The applicant shall file a sworn affidavit containing a complete list of names and last known addresses of the persons entitled to notice and served, and the method thereof. Such affidavit shall be filed with the Secretary of the Plan Commission not less than ten days in advance of the hearing, exclusive of the date of the hearing itself. 
(2)  Service by publication. The Secretary of the Plan Commission shall cause a notice of time, place and purpose of such hearing to be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the village not more than 30 days nor less than 15 days in advance of such hearing. 
(3)  Service by posting. The Secretary of the Plan Commission shall cause a notice to be posted on the property which is proposed for subdivision, showing the case number assigned, the date, time and place of the hearing and the change or relief sought, not more than 30 days nor less than 15 days prior to the public hearing and posted as follows: 
a.  On an unimproved lot placed not more than 15 feet from the front lot line and not less than four feet nor more than six feet from the ground level and placed in such a manner as to be visible from the public way. 
b.  On an improved lot placed near the front or main entrance door of the improvement so as to be visible from the public way. 
(4)  Additional service. Supplemental or additional notice may be distributed, published or posted as the Plan Commission may, by rule, prescribe from time to time. 
(Code 1993, § 15-2.5.1; Ord. No. 82-O-36, 9-7-1982; Ord. No. 2006-O-15, 3-14-2006; Ord. No. 2006-O-86, 11-14-2006) 
Sec. 18-9. - Hearing, plans on file. 
    The Plan Commission shall have jurisdiction to conduct hearings on proposed subdivisions when all notices required by this section have been given and when the application for a proposed subdivision, together with such plans and data as will indicate with particularity the nature of the subdivision requested as specified by the Plan Commission, have been on file for public inspection for a period of not less than 15 days in advance of the hearing. 
(Code 1993, § 15-2.5.2; Ord. No. 83-O-70, 11-15-1983) 
Sec. 18-10. - Plan Commission procedure with plat. 
(a)  The Plan Commission shall approve or disapprove the plat. However, if a plat is not satisfactory as originally presented, the Plan Commission may cause the subdivider to make such changes as may be required by the commission. Upon approval of the plat by the commission, one copy thereof shall be retained by the subdivider and the other copy retained by the commission and forwarded as hereinafter provided. 
(b)  When the commission has approved the plat it shall transmit it to the President and Board of Trustees with a report of any changes. The commission shall also transmit to the President and Board of Trustees such information concerning the plat as the commission deems necessary, together with the recommendations of the commission. 
(c)  If the Board of Trustees concurs with the recommendation of the commission it shall give tentative approval of the plat pending the receipt of the following supporting documents supplied by the subdivider: 
(1)  A grading plat and profiles approved by the Village Engineer, showing the existing center line elevations of all streets and alleys in the proposed subdivision and the center line elevations of the proposed pavement. Elevations shall be referred to village datum. Profiles shall be drawn to a horizontal scale of 50 feet to the inch, and a vertical scale of five feet to the inch. 
(2)  Statements signed by the subdivider setting forth the public improvements proposed to be made in the subdivision, per section 18-6, together with plans and specifications prepared by a registered professional engineer and agreeing to make said improvements at the applicants own expense within the time limit fixed by the Board of Trustees. 
(3)  A statement of approval signed by the Village Engineer certifying that the improvements described in the subdivider's statement meet the minimum requirements of this chapter and giving an estimate of cost of such improvements, including cost of engineering and inspection. 
(4)  A duly executed corporate surety company performance bond posted with the village by the subdivider in an amount equal to the Village Engineer's estimate of cost of improvements and certified by the Corporation Counsel as valid and enforceable by the village, securing the satisfactory completion of all public improvements in strict accordance with the description, plans and specifications submitted by the subdivider and approved by the Plan Commission. 
(5)  The stamp of the County Clerk on the plat showing that all taxes and special assessments due on the property to be subdivided have been paid. 
(6)  The signature of the Village Treasurer on the plat showing that all special assessments due on the property to be subdivided have been paid. 
(d)  The final plat, together with all of the aforesaid supporting documents to be supplied by the subdivider, shall be submitted to the Board of Trustees within one year from the date the plat was given tentative approval by the Board. 
(Code 1993, § 15-2.6; Ord. No. 69-O-15, 4-15-1969) 
Sec. 18-11. - Inspection fees; inspection of improvement. 
(a)  Prior to commencing the construction of roadways or alleys pursuant to this chapter, there shall be paid to the village an inspection fee in an amount approved by the Village Board. 
(b)  All materials and each part or detail of the work shall be subject at all times to inspection by the Village Engineer and the subdivider will be held strictly to the true intent of the specifications in regard to quality of materials, workmanship, and the diligent execution of the improvement. Such inspection may include mill, plant, or shop inspection, and any material furnished under these specifications is subject to such inspection. The Village Engineer shall be allowed access to all parts of the work, and shall be furnished with such information and assistance by the subdivider as is required to make a complete and detailed inspection. 
(c)  All work which has been rejected or condemned by the Village Engineer shall be remedied by the subdivider, at the subdivider's sole expense, in a manner acceptable to the Village Engineer. Upon failure on the part of the subdivider to comply promptly with any order of the Village Engineer made under the provisions of this chapter, the Village Engineer shall, after giving written notice to the subdivider, have the authority to cause defective work to be remedied. The subdivider shall be liable to the village for any costs incurred pursuant to this section. 
(d)  It is the intent of this chapter that first-class materials shall be used throughout the work, and that they shall be incorporated in such manner as to produce completed construction which is acceptable in every detail to the Village Engineer. 
(Code 1993, § 15-2.7) 
Sec. 18-12. - Final approval by the Board of Trustees. 
    When the Board of Trustees is satisfied with the final plat and with all improvements, conditions and documents pertaining to the subdivision platted thereon, the Board of Trustees shall by resolution approve the plat and authorize the proper officials of the village to sign the plat for and in the name of the village. The approval shall be attested by the Village Clerk and the corporate seal placed thereon. 
(Code 1993, § 15-2.8) 
Sec. 18-13. - Plat recorded. 
    The final plat shall be recorded by the village in the Recorder's Office of Cook County and two copies of the recorded document filed with the Village Clerk with the fee the responsibility of the subdivider. 
(Code 1993, § 15-2.9) 
Sec. 18-14. - Building Permits. 
    No Building Permit shall be issued to erect a structure on unsubdivided property within the village until such property has been subdivided in compliance with this chapter. No Building Permit shall be issued to erect a structure on any subdivided property within the village which is being resubdivided until the plat of resubdivision has been approved and recorded. 
(Code 1993, § 15-2.10) 
Sec. 18-15. - Variations. 
    The Plan Commission may recommend approval of variations from the requirements of this chapter in specific cases which do not affect the general plan, intent or the spirit of this chapter. All such variations shall be communicated to the Board of Trustees in writing with the reasons therefor and shall be subject to final approval by the Board of Trustees. Any proposed variation which fails to receive the approval of a majority of the Plan Commission shall not be adopted, except by the favorable vote of two-thirds of all of the elected members of the Board of Trustees; and any proposed variation which receives the approval of the Plan Commission may be denied by a majority vote of the Board of Trustees. 
(Code 1993, § 15-2.11) 
Sec. 18-16. - Annexation plats. 
    Any request for annexation shall be referred to the Plan Commission. Notice of public hearing shall be given as provided in section 18-8. Petitions for annexation shall include a plat, drawn to a scale of not less than 100 feet to one inch with a north sign and shall set forth particularly the items listed in section 18-4(c)(1) through (10) and shall also include a $777.00 fee. The Plan Commission shall have jurisdiction to conduct the hearing on the proposed annexation. The commission shall recommend approval or disapproval. If the Village Board approves the annexation, an ordinance and copy of the plat of annexation will be filed with the Cook County Recorder. 
(Code 1993, § 15-2.12; Ord. No. 93-O-01, 1-26-1993; Ord. No. 2006-O-94, 11-28-2006; Ord. No. 2007-O-87, 11-27-2007; Ord. No. 2008-O-88, 12-9-2008; Ord. No. 2009-O-72, 11-24-2009; Ord. No. 2010-O-71, 11-23-2010; Ord. No. 2011-O-74, 11-22-2011; Ord. No. 2012-O-63, 11-27-2012; Ord. No. 2013-O-71, 11-26-2013) 
Chapter 20 - PUBLIC WAYS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 20-1. - Supervision of the public ways; Right-of-Way Permit required. 
    All public ways in the village, including, but not limited to, public streets, public alleys, public sidewalks, public rights-of-way, or any other public way, are under the supervision of the Director of Engineering and Public Works. The Village Engineer shall be responsible for the supervision, maintenance and repair of such public ways and the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1993, § 16-1; Ord. No. 2006-O-76, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 20-2. - Right-of-Way Permit application; required contents. 
(a)  Unless otherwise specifically stated, whenever a permit for work is required by this chapter, application for such a permit shall be on a Right-of-Way Permit Application, the form of which shall be provided by the Village Engineer. 
(b)  In support of the Right-of-Way Permit Application, the applicant must also submit each of the following: 
(1)  A detailed description and drawing of the proposed work. 
(2)  Proof of a current Village Business License, as may be required and issued under chapter 24, for any business, contractor or subcontractor performing the proposed work. 
(3)  A certificate of liability insurance in an amount and form acceptable to the village's insurance coordinator, given the scope of the proposed work, which shall reflect that the insurance is primary coverage and names the village as an additional insured. 
(4)  A deposit of $1,000.00 so as to suitably guard and protect any excavation or obstruction maintained or created by the applicant, and to indemnify, defend and hold harmless the village for any claims for liability, damages, costs or attorney fees arising directly or indirectly from the applicant's proposed work. No amount of a deposit shall be returned to the applicant until, in the judgment of the Village Engineer, the work, as completed, conforms to all provisions of this Code, and the Director of Engineering and Public Works may apply any portion or all of the deposit to correct any violations of this Code. 
(5)  An application fee of $62.00. 
(6)  A pavement degradation fee, if applicable, as provided in article II of this chapter. 
(7)  The request identification number issued by J.U.L.I.E. for an utility locate at the location of the proposed work. The applicant shall not waive a call back. 
(8)  A list of any and all contractors and subcontractors who will be performing any portion of the applied for work. 
(9)  Any additional information which the Village Engineer shall find necessary to ensure the health, safety and welfare of the public and the preservation of public property. 
(c)  When proposed work is to be performed adjacent to, across, over or under a village-owned and operated utility, the applicant must prior to the performance of any work not otherwise authorized by the permit: 
(1)  Locate the depth of water mains by hand-digging, hydro-excavation, or by other non-destructive means approved by the Village Engineer. 
(2)  Provide notice to allow the village to witness any excavation across, over or under, or within five feet longitudinally to a water transmission main. A water transmission main shall be defined as any water main greater than 18-inch diameter. 
(3)  Trenchless directional boring or drilling construction may require pre and post construction sewer main and service televised inspection as required by the Village Engineer. 
(Code 1993, § 16-1.1; Ord. No. 96-O-51, 10-8-1996; Ord. No. 98-O-38, 5-26-1998; Ord. No. 2002-O-100, 12-10-2002; Ord. No. 2003-O-89, 11-24-2003; Ord. No. 2004-O-38, 4-27-2004; Ord. No. 2004-O-104, 11-22-2004; Ord. No. 2005-O-104, 11-21-2005; Ord. No. 2006-O-76, 11-14-2006; Ord. No. 2006-O-94, 11-28-2006; Ord. No. 2007-O-87, 11-27-2007; Ord. No. 2008-O-88, 12-9-2008; Ord. No. 2009-O-72, 11-24-2009; Ord. No. 2010-O-71, 11-23-2010; Ord. No. 2011-O-74, 11-22-2011; Ord. No. 2012-O-63, 11-27-2012; Ord. No. 2013-O-71, 11-26-2013) 
Secs. 20-3-20-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PAVEMENT DEGRADATION FEE 

Sec. 20-23. - Pavement degradation fee; purposes. 
(a)  Excavations in paved streets degrade and shorten the expected life of the surface of the street in and within at least two feet of the perimeter of the area of excavation. This degradation increases the frequency and cost to the public for necessary resurfacing, maintenance and repair. Such pavement degradation occurs regardless of how well the excavated area is restored, as the cutting of the pavement and trenching in the streets permits water seepage into the street as well as weakening pavement support around the patch, thereby accelerating the street's deterioration. 
(b)  The purposes of the pavement degradation fee are to: 
(1)  Offset the substantial cost incurred by the public due to the shortened life of the streets when they are excavated by establishing a pavement degradation fee that approximates the depreciated cost per square foot of a single roadway reconstruction and resurfacing; 
(2)  Provide an incentive to persons or entities making excavations to install, maintain, and repair underground facilities without making unnecessary or excessive excavations; 
(3)  Provide an incentive to persons or entities making excavations to minimize the number of excavations being made wherever feasible and use alternative means of construction, such as directional boring; and 
(4)  Provide an incentive to persons or entities making excavations, when feasible, to make such excavations in streets that are closer to the end of their useful life. 
(c)  The pavement degradation fee is not intended to: 
(1)  Impose financial hardship on property owners needing to excavate streets in order to make emergency repairs to buried utilities; 
(2)  Alter or impair the existing rights of persons or entities holding franchise agreements for use of the public rights-of-way for delivery of public utility, cable television or telecommunications services; or 
(3)  Deprive any person or entity of any rights or privileges concerning access to public rights-of-way under applicable federal or state law or village ordinance. 
(Code 1993, § 16-1.2.1; Ord. No. 2006-O-76, 11-14-2006) 
Sec. 20-24. - Pavement degradation fee imposed; calculation, exemptions. 
(a)  Each person or entity receiving a Right-of-Way Permit under section 20-2 that grants permission to excavate a public street in the village shall also, in addition to paying the applicable permit fee, pay to the village a pavement degradation fee prior to issuance of said permit. 
(b)  The amount of the pavement degradation fee shall be calculated as: 
Impacted Street Area x Adjusted Pavement Degradation Fee Rate. 
(c)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Adjusted Pavement Degradation Fee Rate means the rate in dollars per square foot set forth in Table 20-24, applicable to the current street condition of the street to be excavated. 
    Impacted street area means the area in square feet of the excavation to the street shown in the Right-of-Way Permit application, with four additional feet added to the length and width of the excavation. For example, if the Right-of-Way Permit application shows an excavation of six feet by ten feet, the impacted area is ten feet by 14 feet, or 140 square feet. 
    Pavement rating means the most current numerical rating, between zero and 100, assigned to the street to be excavated by the Department of Engineering and Public Works and approved by the Village Engineer. The calculation of the pavement rating approved by the Director of Engineering and Public Works shall be performed consistent with generally accepted and relevant engineering standards, promulgated by entities, including, but not limited to, American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO), American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM), and the Federal Highway Administration (FHWA). Copies of the most current Pavement Ratings for village streets shall be kept by the Department of Engineering and Public Works and made available for public inspection. 
Effective January 1, 2017, all of the below rates shall be increased every year on January 1 by the percentage increase in the Consumer Price Index for the Chicago-Gary-Kenosha Area (all urban consumers) as reported by the United States Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics in the preceding December, rounded to the nearest dollar. 
Table 20-24 Calculation of Pavement Degradation Fee 
Pavement Rating Street Condition Adjusted Pavement Degradation Fee Rate 85-100 Excellent $28.50 per square foot of impacted street area 80-84 Very Good $25.50 per square foot of impacted street area 70-79 Good $19.50 per square foot of impacted street area 60-69 Fair $9.50 per square foot of impacted street area 0-59 Poor $2.00 per square foot of impacted street area  
  
    Street condition shall be Excellent, Very Good, Good, Fair or Poor, as shown in Table 20-24, which is based on the pavement rating assigned by the Village Engineer to the street to be excavated. 
(d)  Right-of-way permit applicants or applications, as the case may be, shall have the amount of the pavement degradation fee provided for in this section reduced by 50 percent under the following circumstances: 
(1)  The Right-of-Way Permit involves the excavation of a street in order to make repairs to restore existing water, sewer, natural gas, electric or telecommunications utility services to the applicant's property that have been interrupted due to collapse, breakage, rupture, blockage, failure or other similar reason. 
(2)  The Right-of-Way Permit involves the excavation of a street with a brick or concrete surface. 
(e)  The following Right-of-Way Permit applicants or applications, as the case may be, shall be exempt from payment of the pavement degradation fee: 
(1)  Excavations to a street made by an electric, natural gas, cable television, or telecommunications utility franchisee of the village whose franchise agreement provides for access to public rights-of-way in consideration of payment of franchise fees or taxes and without payment of additional fees. 
(2)  An applicant installing, repairing or maintaining underground telecommunications facilities or infrastructure when that applicant is a "retailer" engaged in the "sale at retail" of "telecommunications" as those terms are defined in section 5-7 of the Illinois Simplified Municipal Telecommunications Tax Act, ILCS ch. 35, act 636, § 5-7, and applicable provisions of chapter 28 (Telecommunications). 
(f)  With respect to excavation of streets for the installation of telecommunications facilities not exempt under subsection (e)(2) of this section, section 253(c) of the federal Telecommunications Act of 1996 expressly recognizes the authority of local governments to impose reasonable non-discriminatory fees upon telecommunications providers using the public right-of-way, and the Pavement Degradation Fee imposed under this section constitutes such reasonable fees. 
(g)  An applicant who reasonably believes that the pavement rating for a street proposed to be excavated is erroneous, or reasonably believes that the village has improperly denied an exemption to the payment of the pavement degradation fee, may appeal the pavement rating or the denial of an exemption to the Village Engineer. Such appeal shall be in writing and shall set forth the reasons why the applicant asserts that the pavement rating is erroneous or the exemption was erroneously denied. The Village Engineer may meet with the appellant, and the Director shall respond in writing to such an appeal within ten business days of the date the written appeal is received or the date of such meeting, whichever is later. The Director's determination shall be based on the reasonable application of the engineering standards used for pavement rating and reasonable application of the exemptions set forth in this section. The decision of the Village Engineer shall be final. 
(h)  It is the responsibility of the Right-of-Way Permit holder to notify the Village Engineer no later than the close of the next business day if the area of a street actually excavated by the permit holder exceeds the dimensions stated in the Right-of-Way Permit application, such that the understatement of the impacted street area results in the permit holder having underpaid the pavement degradation fee. Such permit holder shall pay the additional amount of pavement degradation fee due to the village within two business days of providing such notice to the Village Engineer. 
(i)  If, upon inspection of the site of an excavation for which payment of a pavement degradation fee was required under this section, it is determined by the village that the area of a street actually excavated exceeds the dimensions stated in the Right-of-Way Permit application, such that the understatement of the Impacted Street Area has resulted in the permit holder having underpaid the pavement degradation fee, and the permit holder has failed to provide the notice to the Village Engineer required in subsection (h) of this section, then in addition to the payment of the additional amount of pavement degradation fee required under this section, the permit holder shall pay a $250.00 administrative fee to the village to compensate the village for its administrative expenses related to detecting and remedying the permit holder's failure to comply with said subsection (h) of this section. 
(j)  The Village Engineer shall have the authority to satisfy payment of any amounts owed for additional pavement degradation fees or administrative fees under subsections (h) and (i) of this section from the deposit paid by the permit holder under section 20-2(b)(4). 
(Code 1993, § 16-1.2.2; Ord. No. 2006-O-76, 11-14-2006; Ord. No. 2015-O-67, 11-24-2015) 
Secs. 20-25-20-51. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PAVEMENT CONSTRUCTION PERMIT 

Sec. 20-52. - Permit required. 
    It is unlawful to construct or lay any pavement on any public way, as described in section 20-1, or to repair same, without first obtaining a Right-of-Way Permit, as described in section 20-2. 
(Code 1993, § 16-2; Ord. No. 96-O-51, 10-8-1996) 
Sec. 20-53. - Bond. 
    Each applicant for the permit required by section 20-2 shall file a bond, with surety to be approved by the Corporation Counsel, conditioned to indemnify the village for any loss, cost, damage or liability resulting from the work undertaken or the manner of doing it. 
(Code 1993, § 16-3) 
Sec. 20-54. - Construction requirements. 
    All construction, maintenance and repairs of public ways shall be in compliance with section 18-6 and all street, alley and sidewalk pavements shall be made in conformity with the current Illinois Department of Transportation's Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction. All construction in the right-of-way shall be consistent with applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules and regulations, and the Department of Engineering Standards Handbook. 
(Code 1993, § 16-4) 
Sec. 20-55. - Damage to pavements. 
    It is unlawful for any person to walk upon or drive any vehicle upon, any newly-laid street, alley or sidewalk pavement while it is guarded by a warning sign or barricade, or to knowingly damage any soft or newly-laid street, alley or sidewalk pavement. It is unlawful for any person to willfully damage any street, alley or sidewalk pavement in any public place. 
(Code 1993, § 16-5) 
Sec. 20-56. - Repair of sidewalks. 
    All public sidewalk pavements shall be kept in good repair by the abutting property owner. All repair work shall be under the supervision of the Village Engineer. 
(Code 1993, § 16-6; Ord. No. 98-O-38, 5-26-1998) 
Sec. 20-57. - Sidewalk vaults prohibited. 
    It is unlawful for any person to use or maintain any vault, space or room or structure under any street or sidewalk in the village except for the construction of public utilities. 
(Code 1993, § 16-7) 
Sec. 20-58. - Private use of public ways. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to use any street, alley, sidewalk, utility pole, tree, public place or public property as space for the display of any signs, placards or any printed, painted or written matter for any purpose, or to write, print, paint or mark any signs, words or figures on any such public way, utility pole, tree, public place or public property, without first having obtained a Right-of-Way Permit as provided in article I of this chapter. 
(b)  The provisions of subsection (a) of this section shall not be construed to prohibit the placement of temporary election signs on the property of a polling place, including the parkway adjoining said polling place property, on an election day during the hours that the polls are open; provided that and only to the extent that: 
(1)  Said temporary election signs are entitled to be placed in such location pursuant to State Public Act 93-574, amending the Illinois Election Code; and 
(2)  Said temporary election signs are outside of the 100-foot "campaign free zone" defined in Public Act 93-574; and 
(3)  Said temporary election signs do not cause any damage to any such public way, utility pole, tree, public place or public property. 
(c)  Nothing in subsection (b) of this section is intended to extend any right or entitlement beyond that required by the State pursuant to Public Act 93-574. 
(Code 1993, § 16-8; Ord. No. 70-0-21, 12-15-1970; Ord. No. 96-O-51, 10-8-1996; Ord. No. 2004-O-20, 2-24-2004) 
Secs. 20-59-20-89. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OBSTRUCTIONS 

Sec. 20-90. - Encroachments upon streets. 
    It is unlawful for any person to erect or maintain any building, fence, tree, shrub, bush or any structure which encroaches upon or obstructs any public street, sidewalk, alleyway, fire hydrant, or street light, except as may be permitted by license pursuant to chapter 24. 
(Code 1993, § 16-9.1) 
Sec. 20-91. - Obstructing streets. 
    It is unlawful for any person to cause, create or maintain any obstruction of any street, alley, sidewalk or other public way, except as is specifically authorized by the provisions of this Code, the Building Code or other ordinance, or by the Village Engineer. 
(Code 1993, § 16-9.2; Ord. No. 98-O-38, 5-26-1998) 
Sec. 20-92. - Dumping snow on streets. 
    It is unlawful for any person to push, dump or deposit snow from private property onto any street or other public way or to cause or permit the removal from private property and the dumping or depositing of snow onto any street or other public way in the village. 
(Code 1993, § 16-9.2.1) 
Sec. 20-93. - Presumption of liability. 
    In any prosecution charging a violation of this article, proof that snow was deposited in public way together with proof that the defendant named in the complaint was at the time the owner or lawful tenant of the adjoining private property shall constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that said owner or lawful tenant was the person who caused or permitted the dumping of snow. 
(Code 1993, § 16-9.2.2) 
Sec. 20-94. - Penalty. 
    Any person who violates the provisions of this section shall upon conviction be fined not less than $25.00 nor more than $750.00. The fine for a second or subsequent conviction for a violation of this section shall be not less than $50.00. 
(Code 1993, § 16-9.2.3; Ord. No. 70-0-1, 1-6-1970; Ord. No. 96-O-11, 4-9-1996) 
Sec. 20-95. - Block parties, street closings. 
    The Chief of Police may issue a permit for the temporary closing of a block on a non-arterial street upon the condition that such closing does not impose a life safety threat. The closing of a block will be permitted only during daylight hours and upon securing the necessary permit from the Police Department. Said permit must be obtained at least seven days prior to the closing of the block and will be issued subject to such rules and regulations as set forth and maintained at the Police Department. 
(Code 1993, § 16-9.2.4; Ord. No. 83-0-51, 9-6-1983) 
Sec. 20-96. - Obstructions at intersections. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, place, install, erect, plant or maintain within a required unobstructed area at an intersection any berm, stone, new tree, shrubbery, sign, box, or any other object taller than 36 inches in height above the established grade of the required unobstructed area, or in the case of hanging obstructions or limbs of existing trees, lower than seven feet above the established grade of the required unobstructed area, unless that person can establish an affirmative defense as provided in section 20-99(d). 
(Code 1993, § 16-9.3) 
Sec. 20-97. - Required unobstructed area defined. 
    It is the intention of the village that the area surrounding certain street intersections within which unobstructed vision is necessary for the safety of pedestrian and motor vehicle traffic be defined by objective traffic safety and engineering standards which take into consideration the speed of traffic, stopping distances, and sight lines determined by the angles and dimensions of intersecting streets. Therefore, for the purposes of this section, and in order to provide the village staff and departments with objective and reasonable criteria by which bona fide hazards to traffic and pedestrians may be identified and abated, a required unobstructed area at an intersection shall be defined as: 
(1)  In the case of an uncontrolled or yield intersection of two local streets, a triangle formed at each corner of the intersection whose legs are measured along the lane center line of each approach, with each such leg of the triangle equal in length to 75 feet plus 20 feet for each five miles per hour of posted maximum approach speed in excess of 25 miles per hour, as depicted in figure 1 of the appendix to this chapter in section 20-226; or 
(2)  In the case of a two-way stop-controlled intersection of a major or collector street and local street, a triangle formed at each corner of the intersection whose legs are measured along the lane center line of each approach, with the leg of the triangle extending along the local street lane center line equal to five feet beyond the marked or unmarked stop line, and the leg of the triangle extending along the lane center line of the closest approaching lane of the major street equal in length to 50 feet for each five miles per hour of posted maximum approach speed, with an additional 50 feet for each for each lane of the major or collector street in excess of two in that direction, as depicted in figure 2 of the appendix to this chapter in section 20-226. 
(3)  This section does not apply to intersections which are fully signalized or controlled with stop signs from all approaches. 
(Code 1993, § 16-9.3.1) 
Sec. 20-98. - Authority to post no parking. 
    The Village Engineer shall be permitted to post "No Parking" signs along the curb of any street included within the required unobstructed area as defined in this section. 
(Code 1993, § 16-9.3.2; Ord. No. 98-O-38, 5-26-1998) 
Sec. 20-99. - Nuisance; abatement; enforcement. 
(a)  Any obstruction in a required unobstructed area shall be deemed a hazard to public safety and a nuisance, and the owner or occupant of the premises on which the nuisance exists may be prosecuted for violation of this section. 
(b)  Where, in the determination of the Village Engineer, an obstruction which violates the provisions of this section poses imminent and serious danger to the public safety which will not admit of delay in its abatement, the village may cause to be served on the owner or occupant of any premises on which an obstruction in a required unobstructed area exists a notice requiring removal of the obstruction within ten days of service of the notice. The notice may be served by certified mail to the person or entity listed as the owner or occupant on the current village water billing records which shall be deemed served at the time it is deposited in the mail, by personal service of the owner or occupant of the property, or by posting the notice in a conspicuous place on the property. 
(c)  Should an owner or occupant fail to remove the nuisance within ten days after notice is given, such failure shall constitute a separate and additional violation of this section, and the village may proceed to enter the premises and abate the nuisance by removing it. The cost to the village of abating the nuisance shall be recoverable from the record owner or occupant of the premises, and shall constitute a lien on the property, which may be perfected by recording said lien with the Recorder of Deeds. The lien may then be enforced by proceedings to foreclose as in the case of mortgage or mechanics liens. 
(d)  It shall be an affirmative defense to an action brought under this article that defendant in such a proceeding has proved by clear and convincing evidence that the object in the required unobstructed area which is the subject of the action, due to its unusually small diameter or other unique feature, does not obstruct the view of motorists, pedestrians or other users of the street, sidewalk or other public way, and does not constitute a hazard to public safety. 
(Code 1993, § 16-9.3.3; Ord. No. 97-O-12, 2-25-1997; Ord. No. 98-O-38, 5-26-1998) 
Sec. 20-100. - Overhanging trees and limbs. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to plant or maintain any tree or shrub which overhangs any sidewalk, street or other public way in the village in such a way as to impede or interfere with traffic or travel thereon and any such tree or shrub shall be trimmed by the owner of the abutting premises or of the premises on which the tree or shrub grows or stands. 
(b)  Any tree or limb of a tree which has become likely to fall on or across any public way or place shall be removed by the owner of the abutting premises or the premises on which the tree grows or stands. The Village Engineer may cause to be trimmed any such tree or shrub or remove any such tree, or branch thereof, so that the obstruction or danger to traffic or passage is removed. 
(Code 1993, § 16-9.4; Ord. No. 98-O-38, 5-26-1998) 
Sec. 20-101. - Wires or ropes on trees. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to attach any wire or rope to any tree or shrub in any public way or place without the permission of the Village Engineer. 
(b)  Any person given the right to maintain poles and wires in the public way or place in the village shall, in the absence of provision in the franchise concerning the subject, keep such wires and poles free from and away from any trees or shrubs in such places so far as may be possible and shall keep all such trees and shrubs properly trimmed, subject to the supervision of the Director of Engineering and Public Works, so that no damage shall be done either to the poles or wires or the shrubs and trees by contact with such wires or poles. 
(Code 1993, § 16-9.5; Ord. No. 98-O-38, 5-26-1998) 
Sec. 20-102. - Deposits or storage on public ways. 
    It is unlawful for any person to use any public way for storage. It is unlawful to deposit on any public way any material, glass or other substance or articles which may do injury to any person, animal or property; provided, however, the Village Engineer may give permission for temporary deposits of materials necessary for utility construction. Merchandise or other articles may be deposited on sidewalks preparatory to delivery, if the usable width of the walk is not reduced thereby to less than four feet, but no such articles shall remain on the walk for more than one-half hour. 
(Code 1993, § 16-9.6; Ord. No. 98-O-38, 5-26-1998) 
Sec. 20-103. - Obstructing drains. 
    It is unlawful for any person to obstruct any drain in any public street or alley. 
(Code 1993, § 16-9.7) 
Sec. 20-104. - Scaffolds over streets. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to place any scaffold or ladder without obtaining a permit therefor, and in such a position that it overhangs or can fall onto any public way in the village unless the scaffold or ladder is firmly and properly constructed and safeguarded. It is unlawful for any person to place or leave any tools or articles on any such scaffold or ladder in such a manner that they can fall from a height greater than four feet onto a public way. 
(b)  Application for permit shall be made to the Director of Engineering and Public Works as provided in section 20-2, and shall state the intended location of the scaffold. Applicants are required to submit a certificate of insurance in an amount acceptable to the Village Engineer and shall name the village as an additional insured. 
(Code 1993, § 16-9.8; Ord. No. 96-O-51, 10-8-1996; Ord. No. 98-O-38, 5-26-1998) 
Secs. 20-105-20-121. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - DRIVEWAYS 

Sec. 20-122. - Permit required. 
    It is unlawful for any person to construct or maintain any driveway in or across any public sidewalk or parkway in the village unless a permit for such driveway has been issued and is in full force and effect. The Village Engineer shall issue driveway permits in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1993, § 16-10.1; Ord. No. 97-O-75, 10-14-1997; Ord. No. 97-O-99, 11-11-1997; Ord. No. 98-O-38, 5-26-1998) 
Sec. 20-123. - Applications and fees. 
(a)  Applications for driveway permits shall be made to the Village Engineer as provided in section 20-2. Applications shall state the size and location of the driveway, describe the material to be used in the driveway, and provide such other information as the Village Engineer may require. It is unlawful for any person to depart from the specifications or vary from them without the permission of the Village Engineer, in consultation, where applicable, with the Site Plan Review Committee. 
(b)  The Village Engineer may require an applicant for a driveway permit that proposes the use of driveway material other than concrete or asphalt to execute a waiver of responsibility in favor of the village, in a form to be provided by the Village Engineer, providing that the village shall not be responsible for replacement of non-standard driveway materials, and that any costs associated with replacement of material other than concrete or asphalt caused by maintenance, construction or repair of public facilities, improvements or utilities in the public way shall be the sole responsibility of the property owner. 
(Code 1993, § 16-10.2; Ord. No. 96-O-51, 10-8-1996; Ord. No. 97-O-75, 10-14-1997; Ord. No. 97-O-99, 11-11-1997; Ord. No. 98-O-38, 5-26-1998) 
Sec. 20-124. - Transfer of permits. 
    A change in the ownership or the use of the property with respect to which a driveway permit was issued shall not cause the permit to be revoked. However, the foregoing rule shall not prevent the revocation of any permit pursuant to section 20-125. 
(Code 1993, § 16-10.3; Ord. No. 97-O-99, 11-11-1997) 
Sec. 20-125. - Revocation of permits. 
    The Village Engineer may at any time, on the Village Engineer s own initiative or on the basis of a complaint from any person having a reasonable interest in the permit, revoke any driveway permit then in effect. No permit shall be revoked until the Village Engineer has given the owner of the property affected ten days written notice of pendency of a revocation proceeding, with a written statement from the Village Engineer explaining the reasons for revocation. A person whose residence or place of business is within 250 feet of a driveway shall be deemed to have a reasonable interest in the permit therefor. 
(Code 1993, § 16-10.4; Ord. No. 97-O-75, 10-14-1997; Ord. No. 97-O-99, 11-11-1997; Ord. No. 98-O-38, 5-26-1998) 
Sec. 20-126. - Standards for review of applications or revocations by the Village Engineer. 
(a)  Where an application for a permit for a proposed driveway which has been reviewed and approved by the Site Plan Review Committee pursuant to the provisions of article VIII of chapter 8, a driveway permit shall be issued. Where an application for a driveway permit concerns a proposed driveway to serve a single family residential structure which is not subject to review and approval by the Site Plan Review Committee pursuant to the provisions of article VIII of chapter 8, then a driveway permit shall be issued only if the Village Engineer determines that the applicant has demonstrated that: 
(1)  There will be only one driveway serving the property and that driveway will provide access to an alley; or 
(2)  If there is no alley access available, the driveway shall have no more than one curb cut to a public street. 
(3)  In addition to those provided elsewhere in this Code, the following design standards shall apply to all residential driveways with access to a public street: 
a.  Driveways for single family residences shall not exceed a width of 18 feet at the property line. 
b.  Driveways for all non-single family residences shall not exceed a width of 24 feet at the property line. 
c.  All residential driveways shall have a minimum distance of 50 feet from the edge of the driveway to the nearest parallel curb at an intersection. 
d.  Circular driveways are permitted only when a lot has a minimum width of 75 feet. 
(b)  Where alley access exists to the driveway to serve a single family residential structure which is not subject to review and approval by the Site Plan Review Committee, a permit for a front or side yard driveway shall not be issued unless the Village Engineer grants an exception in accord with subsection (c) and (d) of this section. 
(c)  Authorized exceptions. The following shall be authorized exceptions from the requirements of sections (a) and (b) of this section pursuant to the procedure in subsection (d) of this section: 
(1)  Retaining an existing front or side yard driveway and building a second driveway with alley access. 
(2)  A front or side yard driveway accessing a street in lieu of construction of a driveway with access to an available alley. 
(3)  Two curb cuts to allow installation of a circular driveway. 
(d)  Exception procedure. Any person seeking an exception to subsections (a) and (b) of this section may apply for an exception in writing to the Village Engineer. 
(1)  The application shall be accompanied by a written statement in support which sets forth a detailed basis for the exception, demonstrating why the application meets the criteria contained in section 20-129 of this chapter. The applicant shall also submit all documentation which supports the application. The Village Engineer may request any additional documentation which he deems necessary to review the application. 
(2)  The Village Engineer shall review applications for exceptions and apply the criteria set forth in section 20-129. As part of the review the Village Engineer shall send written notice by first class mail to the occupant of all properties within 250-linear feet of the subject property on both sides of the street in the block where the proposed driveway is to be located. In cases where the subject property has frontage on two public streets, the Village Engineer shall send the notice to all properties located within 250-linear feet of the subject property in any direction. 
(3)  There shall be a public comment period open for 30 days from the date the notice was placed in the mail (comment period). During the comment period, any member of the public may submit written comments to the Village Engineer regarding the application for the exception. After the close of the comment period, the Village Engineer shall issue a written determination to the applicant granting or denying the request for exception. 
(Code 1993, § 16-10.5; Ord. No. 97-O-99, 11-11-1997; Ord. No. 98-O-38, 5-26-1998; Ord. No. 2010-O-30, 5-25-2010; Ord. No. 2011-O-23, 4-12-2011) 
Sec. 20-127. - Petitions for reconsideration. 
(a)  An applicant for a permit for a driveway proposed to serve a single family residential structure whose application has been denied by the Village Engineer because of its failure to satisfy the standards set forth in section 20-126 may, in lieu of a request for review of such decision by the Municipal Services Committee of the Board of Trustees (MSC) as provided in section 20-130, petition the Village Engineer to reconsider the denial and for relief from the strict application of the standards set forth in section 20-126. Such petition for reconsideration must be made within the same period of time as that permitted for a request for review of the Village Engineer's decision as provided in section 20-130. The petition shall be in writing, shall state the reasons justifying relief from the strict application of the standards set forth in section 20-126, and shall state with particularity why the request satisfies the standards for relief set forth in this section. 
(b)  An applicant may not both petition the Village Engineer for reconsideration under this section and seek review of the Village Engineer's decision to deny the application for driveway permit under section 20-126. An applicant who petitions the Village Engineer for reconsideration under this section shall not thereafter be permitted to seek review of the Village Engineer's original determination under section 20-130 that the application does not comply with the standards set for in section 20-126. However, an applicant who petitions the Village Engineer for reconsideration under this section, and who is denied such relief, may appeal that denial to the MSC in the manner provided in section 20-130. 
(c)  An applicant who seeks review by the MSC under section 20-130 of the Village Engineer's original determination under section 20-126 shall be deemed to have waived the privilege of petitioning the Village Engineer for reconsideration of said determination pursuant to this section, and shall not thereafter be permitted to petition the Village Engineer for relief pursuant to this section. 
(d)  When an application for review is made pursuant to subsection (a) of this section there shall be a fee of $163.00. 
(Code 1993, § 16-10.6; Ord. No. 97-O-99, 11-11-1997; Ord. No. 98-O-38, 5-26-1998; Ord. No. 2010-O-30, 5-25-2010; Ord. No. 2011-O-74, 11-22-2011; Ord. No. 2012-O-63, 11-27-2012; Ord. No. 2013-O-71, 11-26-2013) 
Sec. 20-128. - Purpose and scope of petitions for relief. 
(a)  The public interests and purposes served by the standards for issuance of driveway permits for single family residential structures in those areas served by public alleys, as set forth in section 20-126, are to: 
(1)  Promote the public safety by avoiding unnecessary conflicts between pedestrians and motor vehicles, particularly in neighborhoods where front yard driveways do not predominate; 
(2)  Preserve and conserve the public parkways, which are the property of the community and not adjoining property owners, so that they may continue to be used for open space, parkway trees, and for other uses that improve the quality of life and that serve the public interest generally; 
(3)  Promote the use of existing public alleys, so as to minimize the amount of unnecessary or duplicative paving of public parkways; and 
(4)  Preserve the existing character of neighborhoods in which front yard driveways do not predominate. 
(b)  The granting of relief from the strict application of the standards set forth in section 20-126 is intended to provide limited relief from the said requirements in those cases where strict application of said requirements will create a practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship inhibiting the reasonable use of residential property in a manner otherwise allowed under this Code. It is not intended that relief be granted merely to remove inconveniences or financial burdens that the requirements of this article may impose on property owners in general. 
(Code 1993, § 16-10.6.1; Ord. No. 97-O-99, 11-11-1997; Ord. No. 98-O-38, 5-26-1998) 
Sec. 20-129. - Standards to be applied to applications for exceptions. 
(a)  Relief from the strict application of the standards set forth in section 20-126 shall be granted by the Village Engineer when the petitioner: 
(1)  Has demonstrated that: 
a.  The particular physical conditions, shape, or surroundings of the property would impose upon the owner a practical difficulty or particular hardship, as opposed to a mere inconvenience, if the requirements of section 20-126 were strictly enforced; and 
b.  The plight of the property owner was not created by the owner and is due to unique circumstances associated with the property itself; and 
c.  The difficulty or hardship is peculiar to the property in question and is not generally shared by other properties in the same neighborhood; and 
d.  The difficulty or hardship resulting from the strict application of the standards set forth in section 20-126 would prevent the owner from making a reasonable use of that the property; however, the fact the property could be utilized more profitably with the requested relief than without the requested relief shall not be considered as grounds for granting the requested relief; and 
e.  The proposed driveway will not create an unusual danger to pedestrians or other users of the public sidewalk and/or parkway, or otherwise endanger the public health, safety and welfare; and 
f.  The proposed driveway will not require the removal, relocation or disruption of public facilities or public utilities, or require the removal of parkway trees of such a size that they cannot be replaced with compensatory plantings of substantially the same diameter or size; or 
(2)  Has demonstrated that the strict application of the standards set forth in section 20-126 would be inconsistent with the requirements of applicable state or federal laws or regulations; or 
(3)  Has demonstrated that unusual circumstances affecting the property or the owners or occupants of the property would create a hardship on the owners or occupants of such a substantial and unusual degree that the strict application of the standards set forth in section 20-126 would be arbitrary, capricious, and unreasonable, and bear no substantial relationship to the public health, safety, or general welfare sufficient to outweigh the hardship to the owners or occupants. 
(b)  The following shall not be considered as evidence supporting a determination that a petitioner has satisfied the standards for relief set forth in subsection (a) of this section: 
(1)  The property may be utilized or developed more profitably or will have a higher value with the proposed driveway. 
(2)  The proposed driveway is desired for aesthetic reasons. 
(3)  The proposed driveway is desired or needed for parking or storage. 
(4)  The driveway is desired to construct or install a circular driveway. 
(5)  The proposed driveway will enable vehicles to be parked or stored closer to the principal structure than possible with alley access, excepting cases where proximity to the principal structure is intended to facilitate access by an occupant who is a person with a disability. 
a.  The fact that evidence proffered by a petitioner is not included in the foregoing list shall not necessarily imply that said evidence is either relevant or probative to the merits of the petition. 
b.  The provisions of subsection (a) of this section shall not be interpreted as permitting relief from the strict application of the standards set forth in section 20-126 when the use of the driveway requested would result in a violation of the Zoning Ordinance and the petitioner has not obtained a variance under the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance, appendix A. 
(c)  In the event that the Village Engineer grants an authorized exception, the Village Engineer shall condition the installation of the new driveway on compliance with all applicable construction standards for the public ways set forth in this chapter, and additionally, may condition the installation of the driveway thereby approved on the performance of other conditions or improvements bearing a substantial relationship to the impact or effects of the construction proposed and the burden placed by said construction on the public way. Such conditions may include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Use of pervious material that promotes stormwater infiltration and reduces runoff. 
(2)  Compensatory planting of trees removed or damaged due to construction of the driveway. 
(3)  Restoration of the adjacent public way disturbed by construction of the driveway to its previous condition, including new top soil and sod as needed. 
(4)  Removal of other driveways across the public right-of-way which serve the subject property and complete restoration of the public way to a condition uniform with its surroundings, including new top soil and sod. 
(5)  The applicant's execution of a waiver of responsibility in favor of the village concerning the replacement of non-standard driveway materials, as provided in section 20-123. 
(Code 1993, § 16-10.6.2; Ord. No. 97-O-99, 11-11-1997; Ord. No. 98-O-38, 5-26-1998; Ord. No. 2010-O-30, 5-25-2010) 
Sec. 20-130. - Appeal of Village Engineer's determination. 
(a)  Any applicant desiring to appeal the determination of the Village Engineer to deny a petition for an authorized exception under section 20-126 may appeal that decision to the Municipal Services Committee of the Board of Trustees (MSC). Appeals shall be made by filing a written request for review with the Village Clerk not later than 30 days after the Village Engineer has made his determination and given notice thereof to the permit applicant by depositing same in certified mail, postage paid, to the applicant. 
(b)  Review by MSC. Requests for review shall be in writing and shall state the factual basis on which the appellant asserts that the decision of the Village Engineer is erroneous. The review undertaken by the MSC shall be limited to, determining whether the Village Engineer has failed to correctly apply the appropriate standards set forth in section 20-129. The MSC shall schedule a hearing at its first available meeting and send notice to the applicant and the persons entitled to notice under section 20-126 by first class mail not less than 15 days prior to the hearing. After the hearing, the MSC may affirm, modify, or reverse the decision of the Village Engineer. 
(c)  When an application for review is made pursuant to this section, there shall be a fee of $145.00. 
(Code 1993, § 16-10.7; Ord. No. 97-O-99, 11-11-1997; Ord. No. 98-O-38, 5-26-1998; Ord. No. 2010-O-30, 5-25-2010) 
Sec. 20-131. - Driveway maintenance. 
    It is the duty of any person maintaining any driveway to keep the same free of snow and ice or any obstruction and to keep it in good repair where it crosses a public sidewalk. Failure to so maintain any such driveway crossing a public sidewalk shall constitute sufficient cause for the revocation of the permit issued pursuant to this article and shall further be deemed a public nuisance which may be abated by the village in the manner provided by law. 
(Code 1993, § 16-10.8; Ord. No. 76-0-55, 12-21-1976) 
Sec. 20-132. - Articles on window ledges. 
    It is unlawful for any person to place any movable article on any window ledge, or balcony, or other place abutting on a public street, alley or other public place in the village at a height above four feet from the ground in such a manner that the article can be or is in danger of falling onto a street, sidewalk or other public place. 
(Code 1993, § 16-11) 
Sec. 20-133. - Excavations. 
    It is unlawful for any person to make any excavation in any public place or public way as described in section 20-1, or to tunnel under any such public place or public way, without first obtaining a Right-of-Way Permit as provided in section 20-2. 
(Code 1993, § 16-12; Ord. No. 96-O-51, 10-8-1996) 
Sec. 20-134. - Excavation construction requirements. 
(a)  Any person making any excavation or tunnel shall do so according to the terms and conditions of the application and permit authorizing the work to be done. 
(b)  Any person laying or repairing any pavement on a street, alley, sidewalk or other public place, or making or maintaining any excavation or opening therein shall maintain suitable barricades and lights to prevent injury to any person or property by reason of the work. The barricades shall be illuminated at night. 
(c)  It is unlawful for any person to disturb or interfere with any barricades or lights lawfully placed to protect or mark any new pavement, repairing, excavation or opening in any public street, alley or sidewalk. 
(Code 1993, § 16-12.1; Ord. No. 96-O-51, 10-8-1996) 
Sec. 20-135. - Restoration of streets after excavation. 
    Any person making any excavation or tunnel in or under any street, alley or public place in the village shall restore the street, alley or public place to its original condition promptly upon the completion of the work for which the excavation or tunnel was made. In case of unreasonable delay in so doing, the Village Engineer shall give notice to the person that unless the excavation or tunnel is restored properly within three business days, the village will do the work and charge the expense thereof to that person. If within the time mentioned the conditions of the notice are not complied with, the work shall be done by the village, an accurate account of the expense involved shall be kept and the total cost shall be charged to the person who made the excavation or tunnel. 
(Code 1993, § 16-12.2; Ord. No. 96-O-51, 10-8-1996; Ord. No. 98-O-38, 5-26-1998) 
Secs. 20-136-20-153. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - HOUSE NUMBERING 

Sec. 20-154. - Numbering plan and chart. 
(a)  All lots, buildings and structures in the village shall be numbered in accordance with the following plan: 
All lots and parcels of ground abutting on all east and west streets of the village shall be numbered from east to west beginning at the shore of Lake Michigan; and all lots and parcels of ground abutting on all north and south streets shall be numbered from the south to north, beginning at the southern terminus of any and all of those streets. All streets having a northerly or southerly course are deemed north and south streets. One number shall be assigned to every 25 feet, or fraction thereof, of all street frontage, and 100 numbers to each block. The even numbers shall be assigned to the north and east sides of streets and the odd numbers to the opposite sides of those streets. 
(b)  The Village Engineer shall keep a chart showing the proper street number of every lot in the village which shall be open to inspection by any person interested. 
(Code 1993, § 16-13.1) 
Sec. 20-155. - Numbers used on buildings. 
    It is the duty of the owner and occupant of every building in the village to place and maintain thereon, in a place visible from the street, figures at least three inches high, showing the number of the building. Where the property above-mentioned also abuts an alley, it is the duty of the owner to place and maintain, in a place visible from the alley, figures at least three inches high showing the number of the main building. House numbers on the curb are specifically prohibited. 
(Code 1993, § 16-13.2) 
Secs. 20-156-20-178. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - TREES AND SHRUBS ON PUBLIC PROPERTY 

Sec. 20-179. - Placement prohibited; permit; removal. 
    It is unlawful for any person to plant, maintain, remove or cut down any tree, bush or shrub in a public street, parkway or any public place without first obtaining a Right-of-Way Permit as provided in article I of this chapter. All trees and shrubs so planted shall be placed subject to the directions and approval of the Director of Engineering and Public Works. 
(Code 1993, § 16-14.1; Ord. No. 96-O-51, 10-8-1996) 
Sec. 20-180. - Tree protection. 
(a)  No person, firm, corporation, or utility company shall excavate any ditches, tunnels or trenches or construct any driveway, within the public right of way, without first obtaining a Right-of-Way Permit as provided in article I of this chapter. Tree protection measures may be required as a condition of obtaining the permit. 
(b)  All trees on any public right of way near any excavation, construction of any structure, or street construction, repair or improvement, shall be protected by erecting a highly visible physical barrier around each tree so as to avoid all injury to the trunk, crown, and root areas of the tree; and all building material, dirt, soil, or other debris shall be kept outside a radius as specified by the Director of Engineering and Public Works from any tree on the public right-of-way. Protective barriers shall mean snow fencing or similar material, not single strand wire or plastic flagging. 
(Code 1993, § 16-14.2; Ord. No. 92-O-46, 5-19-1992; Ord. No. 96-O-51, 10-8-1996) 
Sec. 20-181. - Violations and Penalties. 
(a)  It shall be a violation of this Code for any person or entity to damage or remove, or cause to be damaged or removed, a tree located on the parkway or other public property. 
(b)  It shall be a violation of this Code for any person or entity to commence any work or construction in or near the parkway or other public property without the prior installation and maintenance of tree protection measures. 
(c)  Any person or entity who violates the provision of this section shall be fined as provided for in section 2-1305 of this Code. 
Sec. 20-182. - Lawn sprinklers on the public right-of-way. 
    It is unlawful for any person to install or maintain a lawn sprinkling or other irrigation system, whether wholly or partially underground, in the public right-of-way without having first applied for and received a Right-of-Way Permit, as provided in article I of this chapter. All water lines, sprinkler heads, and other appurtenances must be separated by no less than one foot from the public sidewalk, curb or any other public infrastructure. Any water lines crossing underneath the public sidewalk must be no less than one foot beneath the bottom of the public sidewalk. 
(Code 1993, § 16-15; Ord. No. 96-O-51, 10-8-1996) 
Secs. 20-183-20-202. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - CONSTRUCTION AND USE STANDARDS FOR UTILITY FACILITIES IN RIGHTS-OF-WAY 

Sec. 20-203. - Purpose, intent and scope. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this article, including each of its further subsections, is to establish policies and procedures for constructing facilities on rights-of-way within the village's jurisdiction, which will provide public benefit consistent with the preservation of the integrity, safe usage, and visual qualities of the village rights-of-way and the village as a whole. 
(b)  Intent. In enacting this article, the village intends to exercise its authority over the rights-of-way in the village and, in particular, the use of the public ways and property by utilities, by establishing uniform standards to address issues presented by utility facilities, including without limitation: 
(1)  Preventing interference with the use of streets, sidewalks, alleys, parkways and other public ways and places; 
(2)  Preventing the creation of visual and physical obstructions and other conditions that are hazardous to vehicular and pedestrian traffic; 
(3)  Preventing interference with the facilities and operations of the village's utilities and of other utilities lawfully located in rights-of-way or public property; 
(4)  Protecting against environmental damage, including damage to trees, from the installation of utility facilities; 
(5)  Protecting against increased stormwater run-off due to structures and materials that increase impermeable surfaces; 
(6)  Preserving the character of the neighborhoods in which facilities are installed; 
(7)  Preserving open space, particularly the tree-lined parkways that characterize the village's residential neighborhoods; 
(8)  Preventing visual blight from the proliferation of facilities in the rights-of-way; and 
(9)  Ensuring the continued safe use and enjoyment of private properties adjacent to utility facilities locations. 
(c)  Facilities subject to this article. This article applies to all facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the rights-of-way within the jurisdiction of the village. A facility lawfully established prior to the effective date of this article may continue to be maintained, repaired and operated by the utility as presently constructed and located, except as may be otherwise provided in any applicable franchise, license or similar agreement. 
(d)  Franchises, licenses, or similar agreements. The village, in its discretion and as limited by law, may require utilities to enter into a franchise, license or similar agreement for the privilege of locating their facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the village rights-of-way. Utilities that are not required by law to enter into such an agreement may request that the village enter into such an agreement. In such an agreement, the village may provide for terms and conditions inconsistent with this article. 
(e)  Effect of franchises, licenses, or similar agreements. 
(1)  Utilities other than telecommunications providers. In the event that a utility other than a telecommunications provider has a franchise, license or similar agreement with the village, such franchise, license or similar agreement shall govern and control during the term of such agreement and any lawful renewal or extension thereof. 
(2)  Telecommunications providers. In the event of any conflict with, or inconsistency between, the provisions of this article and the provisions of any franchise, license or similar agreement between the village and any telecommunications provider, the provisions of such franchise, license or similar agreement shall govern and control during the term of such agreement and any lawful renewal or extension thereof. 
(f)  Conflicts with other sections. This article supersedes all sections or parts of chapter 20 adopted prior hereto that are in conflict herewith, to the extent of such conflict. 
(g)  Conflicts with state and federal laws. In the event that applicable federal or state law or regulations conflict with the requirements of this article, the utility shall comply with the requirements of this article to the maximum extent possible without violating federal or state law or regulations. 
(h)  Sound engineering judgment. The village shall use sound engineering judgment when administering this article and may vary the standards, conditions, and requirements expressed in this article when the village so determines. Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the ability of the village to regulate its rights-of-way for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare. 
(Code 1993, § 16-16.1; Ord. No. 2007-O-73, 10-23-2007) 
Sec. 20-204. - Definitions. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    AASHTO means American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials. 
    ANSI means American National Standards Institute. 
    Applicant means a person applying for a permit under this section. 
    ASTM means American Society for Testing and Materials. 
    Backfill means the methods or materials for replacing excavated material in a trench or pit. 
    Bore or boring means to excavate an underground cylindrical cavity for the insertion of a pipe or electrical conductor. 
    Cable operator means that term as defined in 47 USC 522(5). 
    Cable service means that term as defined in 47 USC 522(6). 
    Cable system means that term as defined in 47 USC 522(7). 
    Carrier pipe means the pipe enclosing the liquid, gas or slurry to be transported. 
    Casing means a structural protective enclosure for transmittal devices such as means carrier pipes, electrical conductors, and fiber optic devices. 
    Clear zone means the total roadside border area, starting at the edge of the pavement, available for safe use by errant vehicles. This area may consist of a shoulder, a recoverable slope, a non-recoverable slope, and a clear run-out area. The desired width is dependent upon the traffic volumes and speeds, and on the roadside geometry. Distances are specified in the AASHTO Roadside Design Guide. 
    Coating means protective wrapping or mastic cover applied to buried pipe for protection against external corrosion. 
    Code means the Wilmette Village Code, as amended. 
    Conductor means wire carrying electrical current. 
    Conduit means a casing or encasement for wires or cables. 
    Construction or construct means the installation, repair, maintenance, placement, alteration, enlargement, demolition, modification or abandonment in place of facilities. 
    Cover means the depth of earth or backfill over buried utility pipe or conductor. 
    Crossing facility means a facility that crosses one or more right-of-way lines of a right-of-way. 
    Director means the Village Engineer, or said Engineer's designee. 
    Disrupt the right-of-way means any work that obstructs the right-of-way or causes a material adverse effect on the use of the right-of-way for its intended use. Such work may include, without limitation, the following means: excavating or other cutting; placement (whether temporary or permanent) of materials, equipment, devices, or structures; damage to vegetation; and compaction or loosening of the soil; and shall not include the parking of vehicles or equipment in a manner that does not materially obstruct the flow of traffic on a highway. 
    Emergency means any immediate maintenance to the facility required for the safety of the public using or in the vicinity of the right-of-way or immediate maintenance required for the health and safety of the general public served by the utility. 
    Encasement means the provision of a protective casing. 
    Engineer means the Village Engineer, or said Engineer's designee. 
    Equipment means materials, tools, implements, supplies, and/or other items used to facilitate construction of facilities. 
    Excavation means the making of a hole or cavity by removing material, or laying bare by digging. 
    Extra heavy pipe means pipe meeting ASTM standards for this pipe designation. 
    Facility means all structures, devices, objects, and materials (including, but not limited to, track and rails, wires, ducts, fiber optic cable, antennas, vaults, boxes, equipment enclosures, cabinets, pedestals, poles, conduits, grates, covers, pipes, cables, and appurtenances thereto) located on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within rights-of-way under this section. For the purposes of this article, the term "facility" shall not include any facility owned or operated by the village. 
    Freestanding facility means a facility that is not a crossing facility or a parallel facility, such as an antenna, transformer, pump, or meter station. 
    Frontage road means roadway, usually parallel, providing access to land adjacent to the highway where it is precluded by control of access to a highway. 
    Hazardous materials means any substance or material which, due to its quantity, form, concentration, location, or other characteristics, is determined by the Village Engineer to pose an unreasonable and imminent risk to the life, health or safety of persons or property or to the ecological balance of the environment, including, but not limited to, explosives, radioactive materials, petroleum or petroleum products or gases, poisons, etiology (biological) agents, flammables, corrosives or any substance determined to be hazardous or toxic under any federal or state law, statute or regulation. 
    Highway code means the Illinois Highway Code, ILCS ch. 605, act 5, § 1-101 et seq., as amended from time to time. 
    Highway means a specific type of right-of-way used for vehicular traffic including rural or urban roads or streets. The term "highway" includes all highway land and improvements, including roadways, ditches and embankments, bridges, drainage structures, signs, guardrails, protective structures and appurtenances necessary or convenient for vehicle traffic. 
    Holder means a person or entity that has received authorization to offer or provide cable or video service from the ICC pursuant to the Illinois Cable and Video Competition Law, ILCS ch. 220, act 5, § 21-401. 
    IDOT means Illinois Department of Transportation. 
    ICC means Illinois Commerce Commission. 
    Jacking means pushing a pipe horizontally under a roadway by mechanical means with or without boring. 
    Jetting means pushing a pipe through the earth using water under pressure to create a cavity ahead of the pipe. 
    Joint use means the use of pole lines, trenches or other facilities by two or more utilities. 
    J.U.L.I.E. means the Joint Utility Locating Information for Excavators utility notification program. 
    Major intersection means the intersection of two or more major arterial highways. 
    Occupancy means the presence of facilities on, over or under a right-of-way. 
    Parallel facility means a facility that is generally parallel or longitudinal to the center line of a right-of-way. 
    Parkway means any portion of the right-of-way not improved by street or sidewalk. 
    Pavement cut means the removal of an area of pavement for access to facility or for the construction of a facility. 
    Permittee means that entity to which a permit has been issued pursuant to sections 20-206 and 20-207. 
    Petroleum products pipelines means pipelines carrying crude or refined liquid petroleum products, including, but not limited to, gasoline, distillates, propane, butane, or coal-slurry. 
    Practicable means that which is performable, feasible or possible, rather than that which is simply convenient. 
    Pressure means the internal force acting radially against the walls of a carrier pipe expressed in pounds per square inch gauge (PSIG). 
    Prompt means that which is done within a period of time specified by the village. If no time period is specified, the period shall be 30 days. 
    Public entity means a legal entity that constitutes or is part of the government, whether at local, state or federal level. 
    Restoration means the repair of a right-of-way, highway, roadway, or other area disrupted by the construction of a facility. 
    Right-of-way or rights-of-way mean any street, alley, other land or waterway, dedicated or commonly used for pedestrian or vehicular traffic or other similar purposes, including utility easements, in which the village has the right and authority to authorize, regulate or permit the location of facilities other than those of the village. The terms "right-of-way" or "rights-of-way" shall not include any real or personal village property that is not specifically described in the previous two sentences and shall not include village buildings, fixtures and other structures or improvements, regardless of whether they are situated in the right-of-way. 
    Roadway means that part of the highway that includes the pavement and shoulders. 
    Sale of telecommunications at retail means the transmitting, supplying, or furnishing of telecommunications and all services rendered in connection therewith for a consideration, other than between a parent corporation and its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, when the gross charge made by one such corporation to another such corporation is not greater than the gross charge paid to the retailer for their use or consumption and not for sale. 
    Security fund means that amount of security required pursuant to section 20-210. 
    Shoulder means a width of roadway, adjacent to the pavement, providing lateral support to the pavement edge and providing an area for emergency vehicular stops and storage of snow removed from the pavement. 
    Sound engineering judgment means a decisions consistent with generally accepted engineering principles, practices and experience. 
    Telecommunications means and includes, but is not limited to, messages or information transmitted through use of local, toll and wide area telephone service, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter service, computer exchange service, private line services, mobile radio services, cellular mobile telecommunications services, stationary two-way radio, paging service and any other form of mobile or portable one-way or two-way communications, and any other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar means, between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite, or similar facilities. The term "private line" means a dedicated non-traffic sensitive service for a single customer that entitles the customer to exclusive or priority use of a communications channel, or a group of such channels, from one or more specified locations to one or more other specified locations. The term "telecommunications" shall not include value added services in which computer processing applications are used to act on the form, content, code and protocol of the information for the purposes other than transmission. The term "telecommunications" shall not include purchase of telecommunications by a telecommunications service provider for use as a component part of the service provided by such provider to the ultimate retail consumer who originates or terminates the end-to-end communications. The term "telecommunications" shall not include the provision of cable services through a cable system as defined in the Cable Communications Act of 1984 (47 USC 521 et seq.), as now or hereafter amended, or cable or other programming services subject to an open video system fee payable to the village through an open video system as defined in the Rules of the Federal Communications Commission (47 CFR 76.1500 et seq.), as now or hereafter amended. 
    Telecommunications provider means any person that installs, owns, operates or controls facilities in the right-of-way used or designed to be used to transmit telecommunications in any form. 
    Telecommunications retailer means and includes every person engaged in making sales of telecommunications at retail as defined herein. 
    Trench means a relatively narrow open excavation for the installation of an underground facility. 
    Utility means the individual or entity owning or operating any facility as defined in this section. 
    Vent means a pipe to allow the dissipation into the atmosphere of gases or vapors from an underground casing. 
    Video service means that term as defined in section 21-201(v) of the Illinois Cable and Video Competition Law of 2007, ILCS 220, act 5, § 21-201(v). 
    Village means the Village of Wilmette, Illinois. 
    Village Board means the corporate authorities of the village, composed of the Village President and Trustees, collectively. 
    Water lines means pipelines carrying raw or potable water. 
    Wet boring means boring using water under pressure at the cutting auger to soften the earth and to provide a sluice for the excavated material. 
(b)  Any term not defined in this section shall have the meaning ascribed to it in 92 Ill. Adm. Code § 530.30, unless the context clearly requires otherwise. 
(Code 1993, § 16-16.2; Ord. No. 2007-O-73, 10-23-2007) 
Sec. 20-205. - Annual registration required. 
    Every utility that occupies right-of-way within the village shall register on January 1 of each year with the Village Engineer, providing the utility's name, address and regular business telephone and telecopy numbers, the name of one or more contact persons who can act on behalf of the utility in connection with emergencies involving the utility's facilities in the right-of-way and a 24-hour telephone number for each such person, and evidence of insurance as required in section 20-210, in the form of a certificate of insurance. 
(Code 1993, § 16-16.3; Ord. No. 2007-O-73, 10-23-2007) 
Sec. 20-206. - Permit required; applications and fees. 
(a)  Permit required. No person shall construct (as defined in this article) any facility on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within any village right-of-way which: 
(1)  Changes the location of the facility; 
(2)  Adds a new facility; 
(3)  Disrupts the right-of-way (as defined in this article); or 
(4)  Materially increases the amount of area or space occupied by the facility on, over, above, along, under across or within the right-of-way; without first filing an application with the Village Engineer and obtaining a permit from the village therefor, except as otherwise provided in this article. No permit shall be required for installation and maintenance of service connections to customers' premises where there will be no disruption of the right-of-way. 
(b)  Permit application. All applications for permits pursuant to this article shall be filed on a form provided by the village and shall be filed in such number of duplicate copies as the village may designate. The applicant may designate those portions of its application materials that it reasonably believes contain proprietary or confidential information as proprietary or confidential by clearly marking each page of such materials accordingly. 
(c)  Minimum general application requirements. The application shall be made by the utility or its duly authorized representative and shall contain, at a minimum, the following: 
(1)  The utility's name and address and telephone and telecopy numbers; 
(2)  The applicant's name and address, if different than the utility, its telephone, telecopy numbers, e-mail address, and its interest in the work; 
(3)  The names, addresses and telephone and telecopy numbers and e-mail addresses of all professional consultants, if any, advising the applicant with respect to the application; 
(4)  A general description of the proposed work and the purposes and intent of the facility and the uses to which the facility will be put. The scope and detail of such description shall be appropriate to the nature and character of the work to be performed, with special emphasis on those matters likely to be affected or impacted by the work proposed; 
(5)  Evidence that the utility has placed on file with the village: 
a.  A written traffic control plan demonstrating the protective measures and devices that will be employed consistent with the Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, to prevent injury or damage to persons or property and to minimize disruptions to efficient pedestrian and vehicular traffic; and 
b.  An emergency contingency plan which shall specify the nature of potential emergencies, including, without limitation, construction and hazardous materials emergencies, and the intended response by the applicant. The intended response shall include notification to the village and shall promote protection of the safety and convenience of the public. Compliance with ICC regulations for emergency contingency plans constitutes compliance with this section unless the village finds that additional information or assurances are needed; 
(6)  Drawings, plans and specifications showing the work proposed, including the certification of an engineer that such drawings, plans, and specifications comply with applicable codes, rules, and regulations; 
(7)  Evidence of insurance as required in section 20-210; 
(8)  Evidence of posting of the Security Fund as required in section 20-212; 
(9)  Any request for a variance from one or more provisions of this article (see section 20-223); and 
(10)  Such additional information as may be reasonably required by the village. 
(d)  Supplemental application requirements for specific types of utilities. In addition to the requirements of subsection (c) of this section, the permit application shall include the following items, as applicable to the specific utility that is the subject of the permit application: 
(1)  In the case of the installation of a new electric power, communications, telecommunications, cable television service, video service or natural gas distribution system, evidence that any Certificate of Public Convenience and Necessity or other regulatory authorization that the applicant is required by law to obtain, or that the applicant has elected to obtain, has been issued by the ICC or other jurisdictional authority; 
(2)  In the case of natural gas systems, state the proposed pipe size, design, construction class, and operating pressures; 
(3)  In the case of water lines, indicate that all requirements of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, Division of Public Water Supplies, have been satisfied; 
(4)  In the case of sewer line installations, indicate that the land and water pollution requirements of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, Division of Water Pollution Control and the Metropolitan Water Reclamation District of Greater Chicago, have been satisfied; or 
(5)  In the case of petroleum products pipelines, state the type or types of petroleum products, pipe size, maximum working pressure, and the design standard to be followed. 
(e)  Applicant's duty to update information. Throughout the entire permit application review period and the construction period authorized by the permit, any amendments to information contained in a permit application shall be submitted by the utility in writing to the village within 30 days after the change necessitating the amendment. 
(f)  Application fees. Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license, or similar agreement, or otherwise exempted under the provisions of chapter 28 concerning telecommunications providers paying the Simplified Municipal Telecommunications Tax or the payment of a Service Provider Fee by a holder, all applications for permits pursuant to this article shall be accompanied by a fee in the amount of $250.00. No application fee is required to be paid by any electricity utility that is paying the municipal electricity infrastructure maintenance fee pursuant to the Electricity Infrastructure Maintenance Fee Act. 
(Code 1993, § 16-16.4; Ord. No. 2007-O-73, 10-23-2007) 
Sec. 20-207. - Action on permit applications. 
(a)  Village review of permit applications. Completed permit applications, containing all required documentation, shall be examined by the Village Engineer within a reasonable time after filing. If the application does not conform to the requirements of applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules, and regulations, the Village Engineer shall reject such application in writing, stating the reasons therefor. If the Village Engineer is satisfied that the proposed work conforms to the requirements of this article and applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules, and regulations, the Village Engineer shall issue a permit therefor as soon as practicable. In all instances, it shall be the duty of the applicant to demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the Village Engineer, that the construction proposed under the application shall be in full compliance with the requirements of this section. 
(b)  Additional village review of applications of telecommunications retailers. 
(1)  Pursuant to section 4 of the Telephone Company Act, ILCS 220, act 65, § 4, a telecommunications retailer shall notify the village that it intends to commence work governed by this article for facilities for the provision of telecommunications services. Such notice shall consist of plans, specifications, and other documentation sufficient to demonstrate the purpose and intent of the facilities, and shall be provided by the telecommunications retailer to the village not less than ten days prior to the commencement of work requiring no excavation and not less than 30 days prior to the commencement of work requiring excavation. The Village Engineer shall specify the portion of the right-of-way upon which the facility may be placed, used and constructed. 
(2)  In the event that the Village Engineer fails to provide such specification of location to the telecommunications retailer within either: 
a.  Ten days after service of notice to the village by the telecommunications retailer in the case of work not involving excavation for new construction; or 
b.  25 days after service of notice by the telecommunications retailer in the case of work involving excavation for new construction, the telecommunications retailer may commence work without obtaining a permit under this article. 
(3)  Upon the provision of such specification by the village, where a permit is required for work pursuant to section 20-206, the telecommunications retailer shall submit to the village an application for a permit and any and all plans, specifications and documentation available regarding the facility to be constructed. Such application shall be subject to the requirements of subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  Additional village review of applications of holders of state authorization under the Cable and Video Competition Law of 2007. Applications by a utility that is a holder of a state-issued authorization under the Cable and Video Competition Law of 2007 shall be deemed granted 45 days after submission to the village, unless otherwise acted upon by the village, provided the holder has complied with applicable village codes, ordinances, and regulations. 
(Code 1993, § 16-16.5; Ord. No. 2007-O-73, 10-23-2007) 
Sec. 20-208. - Effect of permit. 
(a)  Authority granted; no property right or other interest created. A permit from the village authorizes a permittee to undertake only certain activities in accordance with this article on village rights-of-way, and does not create a property right or grant authority to the permittee to impinge upon the rights of others who may have an interest in the rights-of-way. 
(b)  Duration. No permit issued under this article shall be valid for a period longer than six months unless construction is actually begun within that period and is thereafter diligently pursued to completion. 
(c)  Pre-construction meeting required. When the Village Engineer determines that the scope of the work subject to the permit so warrants, no construction shall begin pursuant to such a permit issued under this article prior to attendance by the permittee and all major contractors and subcontractors who will perform any work under the permit at a pre-construction meeting. The pre-construction meeting shall be held at a date, time and place designated by the Village Engineer with such village representatives in attendance as the Village Engineer deems necessary. The meeting shall be for the purpose of reviewing the work under the permit, and reviewing special considerations necessary in the areas where work will occur, including, without limitation, presence or absence of other utility facilities in the area and their locations, procedures to avoid disruption of other utilities, use of rights-of-way by the public during construction, and access and egress by adjacent property owners. 
(d)  Compliance with all laws required. The issuance of a permit by the village does not excuse the permittee from complying with other requirements of the village and applicable statutes, laws, ordinances, rules, and regulations. 
(Code 1993, § 16-16.6; Ord. No. 2007-O-73, 10-23-2007) 
Sec. 20-209. - Revised permit drawings. 
    In the event that the actual locations of any facilities deviate in any material respect from the locations identified in the plans, drawings and specifications submitted with the permit application, the permittee shall immediately notify the Village Engineer of such deviation and, additionally, shall submit a revised set of drawings or plans to the village within 90 days after the completion of the permitted work. The revised drawings or plans shall specifically identify where the locations of the actual facilities deviate from the locations approved in the permit. If any deviation from the permit also deviates from the requirements of this article, it shall be treated as a request for variance in accordance with section 20-223. If the village denies the request for a variance, then the permittee shall either remove the facility from the right-of-way or modify the facility so that it conforms to the permit and submit revised drawings or plans therefor. 
(Code 1993, § 16-16.7; Ord. No. 2007-O-73, 10-23-2007) 
Sec. 20-210. - Insurance. 
(a)  Required coverage and limits. Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license, or similar agreement, each utility occupying right-of-way or constructing any facility in the right-of-way shall secure and maintain the following liability insurance policies insuring the utility as named insured and naming the village, and its elected and appointed officers, officials, agents, and employees as additional insureds on the policies listed in subsections (a)(1) and (2) of this section: 
(1)  Commercial general liability insurance, including premises-operations, explosion, collapse, and underground hazard (commonly referred to as "X," "C," and "U" coverages) and products-completed operations coverage with limits not less than: 
a.  $5,000,000.00 for bodily injury or death to each person; 
b.  $5,000,000.00 for property damage resulting from any one accident; and 
c.  $5,000,000.00 for all other types of liability; 
(2)  Automobile liability for owned, non-owned and hired vehicles with a combined single limit of $1,000,000.00 for personal injury and property damage for each accident; 
(3)  Worker's compensation with statutory limits; and 
(4)  Employer's liability insurance with limits of not less than $1,000,000.00 per employee and per accident. If the utility is not providing such insurance to protect the contractors and subcontractors performing the work, then such contractors and subcontractors shall comply with this subsection (a)(4). 
(b)  Excess or umbrella policies. The coverages required by this section may be in any combination of primary, excess, and umbrella policies. Any excess or umbrella policy must provide excess coverage over underlying insurance on a following-form basis such that when any loss covered by the primary policy exceeds the limits under the primary policy, the excess or umbrella policy becomes effective to cover such loss. 
(c)  Copies required. The utility shall provide copies of any of the policies required by this section to the village within ten days following receipt of a written request therefor from the village. 
(d)  Maintenance and renewal of required coverages. 
(1)  The insurance policies required by this section shall contain the following endorsement: 
"It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be canceled nor the intention not to renew be stated until 30 days after receipt by the Village of Wilmette, by registered mail or certified mail, return receipt requested, of a written notice addressed to the Village Engineer, Village of Wilmette, 1200 Wilmette Ave., Wilmette, IL 60091, of such intent to cancel or not to renew." 
(2)  Within ten days after receipt by the village of said notice, and in no event later than ten days prior to said cancellation, the utility shall obtain and furnish to the village evidence of replacement insurance policies meeting the requirements of this section. 
(e)  Self-insurance. A utility may self-insure all or a portion of the insurance coverage and limit requirements required by subsection (a) of this section. A utility that self-insures is not required, to the extent of such self-insurance, to comply with the requirement for the naming of additional insureds under subsection (a) of this section, or the requirements of subsections (b), (c) and (d) of this section. A utility that elects to self-insure shall provide to the village evidence sufficient to demonstrate its financial ability to self-insure the insurance coverage and limit requirements required under subsection (a) of this section, such as evidence that the utility is a private self insurer under the Workers Compensation Act. 
(f)  Effect of insurance and self-insurance on utility's liability. The legal liability of the utility to the village and any person for any of the matters that are the subject of the insurance policies or self-insurance required by this section shall not be limited by such insurance policies or self-insurance or by the recovery of any amounts thereunder. 
(g)  Insurance companies. All insurance provided pursuant to this section shall be effected under valid and enforceable policies, issued by insurers legally able to conduct business with the licensee in the State. 
(Code 1993, § 16-16.8; Ord. No. 2007-O-73, 10-23-2007) 
Sec. 20-211. - Indemnification. 
    By occupying or constructing facilities in the right-of-way, a utility shall be deemed to agree to defend, indemnify and hold the village and its elected and appointed officials and officers, employees, agents and representatives harmless from and against any and all injuries, claims, demands, judgments, damages, losses and expenses, including reasonable attorney's fees and costs of suit or defense, arising out of, resulting from or alleged to arise out of or result from the negligent, careless or wrongful acts, omissions, failures to act or misconduct of the utility or its affiliates, officers, employees, agents, contractors or subcontractors in the construction of facilities or occupancy of the rights-of-way, and in providing or offering service over the facilities, whether such acts or omissions are authorized, allowed or prohibited by this article or by a franchise, license, or similar agreement; provided, however, that the utility's indemnity obligations hereunder shall not apply to any injuries, claims, demands, judgments, damages, losses or expenses arising out of or resulting from the negligence, misconduct or breach of this article by the village, its officials, officers, employees, agents or representatives. 
(Code 1993, § 16-16.9; Ord. No. 2007-O-73, 10-23-2007) 
Sec. 20-212. - Security. 
(a)  Purpose and applicability. The permittee shall establish a security fund in a form and in an amount as set forth in this section. The Security Fund shall be continuously maintained in accordance with this article at the permittee's sole cost and expense until the completion of the work authorized under the permit. The Security Fund shall serve as security for: 
(1)  The faithful performance by the permittee of all the requirements of this article; 
(2)  Any expenditure, damage, or loss incurred by the village occasioned by the permittee's failure to comply with any codes, rules, regulations, orders, permits and other directives of the village issued pursuant to this article; 
(3)  The payment by permittee of all liens and all damages, claims, costs, or expenses that the village may pay or incur by reason of any action or non-performance by permittee in violation of this article including, without limitation, any damage to public property or restoration work the permittee is required by this article to perform that the village must perform itself or have completed as a consequence solely of the permittee's failure to perform or complete, and all other payments due the village from the permittee pursuant to this article or any other applicable law; 
(4)  The Village Engineer, in the exercise of his reasonable discretion, based on the scope of the work permitted and the nature of the disruption to the right-of-way, may waive the requirement for a security fund, or may allow a permittee receiving multiple permits to post a single security covering all permitted work. 
(b)  Form. The permittee shall provide the Security Fund to the village in the form, at the permittee's election, of cash, a surety bond in a form acceptable to the village, or an unconditional letter of credit in a form acceptable to the village. Any surety bond or letter of credit provided pursuant to this section shall, at a minimum: 
(1)  Provide that it will not be canceled without prior notice to the village and the permittee; 
(2)  Not require the consent of the permittee prior to the collection by the village of any amounts covered by it; and 
(3)  Provide a location convenient to the village and within the State at which it can be drawn. 
(c)  Amount. The dollar amount of the Security Fund shall be sufficient to provide for the reasonably estimated cost to restore the right-of-way to at least as good a condition as that existing prior to the construction under the permit, as determined by the Village Engineer, and may also include reasonable, directly related costs that the village estimates are likely to be incurred if the permittee fails to perform such restoration. Where the construction of facilities proposed under the permit will be performed in phases in multiple locations in the village, with each phase consisting of construction of facilities in one location or a related group of locations, and where construction in another phase will not be undertaken prior to substantial completion of restoration in the previous phase or phases, the Village Engineer may, in the exercise of sound discretion, allow the permittee to post a single amount of security which shall be applicable to each phase of the construction under the permit. The amount of the Security Fund for phased construction shall be equal to the greatest amount that would have been required under the provisions of this subsection (c) for any single phase. 
(d)  Withdrawals. The village, upon 14 days' advance written notice clearly stating the reason for, and its intention to exercise withdrawal rights under this subsection, may withdraw an amount from the Security Fund, provided that the permittee has not reimbursed the village for such amount within the 14-day notice period. Withdrawals may be made if the permittee: 
(1)  Fails to make any payment required to be made by the permittee hereunder; 
(2)  Fails to pay any liens relating to the facilities that are due and unpaid; 
(3)  Fails to reimburse the village for any damages, claims, costs or expenses which the village has been compelled to pay or incur by reason of any action or non-performance by the permittee; or 
(4)  Fails to comply with any provision of this article that the village determines can be remedied by an expenditure of an amount in the Security Fund. 
(e)  Replenishment. Within 14 days after receipt of written notice from the village that any amount has been withdrawn from the Security Fund, the permittee shall restore the Security Fund to the amount specified in subsection (c) of this section. 
(f)  Interest. The permittee may request that any and all interest accrued on the amount in the Security Fund be returned to the permittee by the village, upon written request for said withdrawal to the village, provided that any such withdrawal does not reduce the Security Fund below the minimum balance required in subsection (c) of this section. 
(g)  Closing and return of Security Fund. Upon completion of the work authorized under the permit, the permittee shall be entitled to the return of the Security Fund, or such portion thereof as remains on deposit, within a reasonable time after account is taken for all offsets necessary to compensate the village for failure by the permittee to comply with any provisions of this article or other applicable law. In the event of any revocation of the permit, the Security Fund, and any and all accrued interest therein, shall become the property of the village to the extent necessary to cover any reasonable costs, loss or damage incurred by the village as a result of said revocation, provided that any amounts in excess of said costs, loss or damage shall be refunded to the permittee. 
(h)  Rights not limited. The rights reserved to the village with respect to the Security Fund are in addition to all other rights of the village, whether reserved by this article or otherwise authorized by law, and no action, proceeding or exercise of right with respect to said Security Fund shall affect any other right the village may have. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the village shall not be entitled to a double monetary recovery with respect to any of its rights which may be infringed or otherwise violated. 
(Code 1993, § 16-16.10; Ord. No. 2007-O-73, 10-23-2007) 
Sec. 20-213. - Permit suspension and revocation. 
(a)  Village right to revoke permit. The village may revoke or suspend a permit issued pursuant to this article for one or more of the following reasons: 
(1)  Fraudulent, false, misrepresenting, or materially incomplete statements in the permit application; 
(2)  Non-compliance with this chapter or other applicable provisions of this Code; 
(3)  Permittee's physical presence or presence of permittee's facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the rights-of-way presents a direct or imminent threat to the public health, safety, or welfare; or 
(4)  Permittee's failure to construct the facilities substantially in accordance with the permit and approved plans. 
(b)  Notice of revocation or suspension. The village shall send written notice of its intent to revoke or suspend a permit issued pursuant to this section stating the reason or reasons for the revocation or suspension and the alternatives available to the permittee under this section. 
(c)  Permittee alternatives upon receipt of notice of revocation or suspension. Upon receipt of a written notice of revocation or suspension from the village, the permittee shall have the following options: 
(1)  Immediately provide the village with evidence that no cause exists for the revocation or suspension; 
(2)  Immediately correct, to the satisfaction of the village, the deficiencies stated in the written notice, providing written proof of such correction to the village within five working days after receipt of the written notice of revocation; or 
(3)  Immediately remove the facilities located on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the rights-of-way and restore the rights-of-way to the satisfaction of the village providing written proof of such removal to the village within ten days after receipt of the written notice of revocation. The village may, in its discretion, for good cause shown, extend the time periods provided in this section. 
(d)  Stop work order. In addition to the issuance of a notice of revocation or suspension, the village may issue a stop work order immediately upon discovery of any of the reasons for revocation set forth within subsection (a) of this section. 
(e)  Failure or refusal of the permittee to comply. If the permittee fails to comply with the provisions of subsection (c) of this section, the village or its designee may, at the option of the village: 
(1)  Correct the deficiencies; 
(2)  Upon not less than 20 days' notice to the permittee, remove the subject facilities or equipment; or 
(3)  After not less than 30 days' notice to the permittee of failure to cure the non-compliance, deem them abandoned and property of the village. 
(f)  Liability for costs. The permittee shall be liable in all events to the village for all costs of removal. 
(Code 1993, § 16-16.11; Ord. No. 2007-O-73, 10-23-2007) 
Sec. 20-214. - Change of ownership or owner's identity or legal status. 
(a)  Notification of change. A utility shall notify the village no less than 30 days prior to the transfer of ownership of any facility in the right-of-way or change in identity of the utility. The new owner of the utility or the facility shall have all the obligations and privileges enjoyed by the former owner under the permit, if any, and applicable laws, ordinances, rules and regulations, including this article, with respect to the work and facilities in the right-of-way. 
(b)  Amended permit. A new owner shall request that any current permit be amended to show current ownership. If the new owner fails to have a new or amended permit issued in its name, the new owner shall be presumed to have accepted, and agreed to be bound by, the terms and conditions of the permit if the new owner uses the facility or allows it to remain on the village right-of-way. 
(c)  Insurance and bonding. All required insurance coverage or bonding must be changed to reflect the name of the new owner upon transfer. 
(Code 1993, § 16-16.12; Ord. No. 2007-O-73, 10-23-2007) 
Sec. 20-215. - General construction standards. 
(a)  Standards and principles. All construction in the right-of-way shall be consistent with applicable ordinances, codes, laws rules and regulations, and commonly recognized and accepted traffic control and construction principles, sound engineering judgment and, where applicable, the principles and standards set forth in the following publications, as amended from time to time: 
(1)  Village of Wilmette. Department of Engineering Standards Handbook. 
(2)  IDOT. 
a.  Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction; 
b.  Supplemental Specifications and Recurring Special Provisions; 
c.  Bureau of Design and Environment Manual; 
d.  Highway Standards Manual; 
e.  Illinois Highway Standards for Traffic Control Items; 
f.  Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices and any supplements. 
(b)  Interpretation of municipal standards and principles. If a discrepancy exists between or among differing principles and standards required by this section, the Village Engineer shall determine, in the exercise of sound engineering judgment, which principles apply and such decision shall be final. If requested, the Village Engineer shall state which standard or principle will apply to the construction, maintenance, or operation of a facility in the future. 
(c)  Tree protection. Unless otherwise specifically provided in this article, the utility shall comply with the tree protection standards set for in section 8-444 with respect to any tree whose critical root zone is located in an area where work authorized under its permit is occurring. 
(Code 1993, § 16-16.13; Ord. No. 2007-O-73, 10-23-2007) 
Sec. 20-216. - Traffic control. 
(a)  Minimum requirements. The village's minimum requirements for traffic protection are contained in IDOT's Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices and this Code. 
(b)  Warning signs, protective devices, and flaggers. The utility is responsible for providing and installing warning signs, protective devices and flaggers, when necessary, meeting applicable federal, state, and local requirements for protection of the public and the utility's workers when performing any work on the rights-of-way. 
(c)  Interference with traffic. All work shall be phased so that there is minimum interference with pedestrian and vehicular traffic. 
(d)  Notice when access is blocked. At least 48 hours prior to beginning work that will partially or completely block access to any residence, business or institution, the utility shall notify the resident, business or institution of the approximate beginning time and duration of such work; provided, however, that in cases involving emergency repairs pursuant to section 20-220, the utility shall provide such notice as is practicable under the circumstances. 
(e)  Compliance. The utility shall take immediate action to correct any deficiencies in traffic protection requirements that are brought to the utility's attention by the village. 
(Code 1993, § 16-16.14; Ord. No. 2007-O-73, 10-23-2007) 
Sec. 20-217. - Location of facilities. 
(a)  General requirements. In addition to location requirements applicable to specific types of utility facilities, all utility facilities, regardless of type, shall be subject to the general location requirements of this section. 
(1)  No interference with village facilities. No utility facilities shall be placed in any location if the Village Engineer determines that the proposed location will require the relocation or displacement of any of the village's utility facilities or will otherwise interfere with the operation or maintenance of any of the village's utility facilities. 
(2)  Minimum interference and impact. The proposed location shall cause only the minimum possible interference with the use of the right-of-way and shall cause only the minimum possible impact upon, and interference with the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin said right-of-way. 
(3)  No interference with travel. No utility facility shall be placed in any location that interferes with the usual travel on such right-of-way. 
(4)  No limitations on visibility. No utility facility shall be placed in any location so as to limit visibility of or by users of the right-of-way. 
(5)  Size of utility facilities. The proposed installation shall use the smallest suitable vaults, boxes, equipment enclosures, power pedestals, and/or cabinets then in use by the facility owner, regardless of location, for the particular application. 
(b)  Parallel facilities located within highways. 
(1)  Overhead parallel facilities. An overhead parallel facility may be located within the right-of-way lines of a highway only if: 
a.  Lines are located as near as practicable to the right-of-way line and as nearly parallel to the right-of-way line as reasonable pole alignment will permit; 
b.  Where pavement is curbed, poles are as remote as practicable from the curb with a minimum distance of two feet (0.6 m) behind the face of the curb, where available; 
c.  Where pavement is uncurbed, poles are as remote from pavement edge as practicable with minimum distance of four feet (1.2 m) outside the outer shoulder line of the roadway and are not within the clear zone; 
d.  No pole is located in the ditch line of a highway; and 
e.  Any ground-mounted appurtenance is located within one foot (0.3 m) of the right-of-way line or as near as possible to the right-of-way line. 
(2)  Underground parallel facilities. An underground parallel facility may be located within the right-of-way lines of a highway only if: 
a.  The facility is located as near the right-of-way line as practicable and not more than eight feet (2.4 m) from and parallel to the right-of-way line; 
b.  A new facility may be located under the paved portion of a highway only if other locations are impracticable or inconsistent with sound engineering judgment (e.g., a new cable may be installed in existing conduit without disrupting the pavement); and 
c.  In the case of an underground power or communications line, the facility shall be located as near the right-of-way line as practicable and not more than five feet (1.5 m) from the right-of-way line and any above-grounded appurtenance shall be located within one foot (0.3 m) of the right-of-way line or as near as practicable. 
(c)  Facilities crossing highways. 
(1)  No future disruption. The construction and design of crossing facilities installed between the ditch lines or curb lines of village highways may require the incorporation of materials and protections (such as encasement or additional cover) to avoid settlement or future repairs to the roadbed resulting from the installation of such crossing facilities. 
(2)  Cattle passes, culverts, or drainage facilities. Crossing facilities shall not be located in cattle passes, culverts, or drainage facilities. 
(3)  90-degree crossing required. Crossing facilities shall cross at or as near to a 90-degree angle to the center line as practicable. 
(4)  Overhead power or communication facility. An overhead power or communication facility may cross a highway only if: 
a.  It has a minimum vertical line clearance as required by ICC's rules entitled, Construction of Electric Power and Communication Lines (83 Ill. Adm. Code 305); 
b.  Poles are located within one foot (0.3 m) of the right-of-way line of the highway and outside of the clear zone; and 
c.  Overhead crossings at major intersections are avoided. 
(5)  Underground power or communication facility. An underground power or communication facility may cross a highway only if: 
a.  The design materials and construction methods will provide maximum maintenance-free service life; and 
b.  Capacity for the utility's foreseeable future expansion needs is provided in the initial installation. 
(6)  Markers. The village may require the utility to provide a marker at each right-of-way line where an underground facility other than a power or communication facility crosses a highway. Each marker shall identify the type of facility, the utility, and an emergency phone number. Markers may also be eliminated as provided in current federal regulations. (49 CFR 192.707 (1989)). 
(d)  Facilities to be located within particular rights-of-way. The village may require that facilities be located within particular rights-of-way that are not highways, rather than within particular highways. 
(e)  Freestanding facilities. 
(1)  The village may restrict the location and size of any freestanding facility located within a right-of-way. 
(2)  The village may require any freestanding facility located within a right-of-way to be screened from view using such vegetation or materials as may be approved by the Village Engineer. 
(f)  Facilities installed above ground. Above ground facilities may be installed only if: 
(1)  No other existing facilities in the area are located underground; 
(2)  New underground installation is not technically feasible; and 
(3)  The proposed installation will be made at a location, and will employ suitable design and materials, to provide the greatest protection of aesthetic qualities of the area being traversed without adversely affecting safety. Suitable designs include, but are not limited to, self-supporting armless, single-pole construction with vertical configuration of conductors and cable. Existing utility poles and light standards shall be used wherever practicable; the installation of additional utility poles is strongly discouraged. 
(g)  Facility attachments to bridges or roadway structures. 
(1)  Facilities may be installed as attachments to bridges or roadway structures only where the utility has demonstrated that all other means of accommodating the facility are not practicable. Other means shall include, but are not limited to, underground, underwater, independent poles, cable supports and tower supports, all of which are completely separated from the bridge or roadway structure. Facilities transmitting commodities that are volatile, flammable, corrosive, or energized, especially those under significant pressure or potential, present high degrees of risk and such installations are not permitted. 
(2)  A utility shall include in its request to accommodate a facility installation on a bridge or roadway structure supporting data demonstrating the impracticability of alternate routing. Approval or disapproval of an application for facility attachment to a bridge or roadway structure will be based upon the following considerations: 
a.  The type, volume, pressure or voltage of the commodity to be transmitted and an evaluation of the resulting risk to persons and property in the event of damage to or failure of the facility; 
b.  The type, length, value, and relative importance of the highway structure in the transportation system; 
c.  The alternative routings available to the utility and their comparative practicability; 
d.  The proposed method of attachment; 
e.  The ability of the structure to bear the increased load of the proposed facility; 
f.  The degree of interference with bridge maintenance and painting; 
g.  The effect on the visual quality of the structure; and 
h.  The public benefit expected from the utility service as compared to the risk involved. 
(h)  Appearance standards. 
(1)  The village may prohibit the installation of facilities in particular locations in order to preserve visual quality. 
(2)  A facility may be constructed only if its construction does not require extensive removal or alteration of trees or terrain features visible to the right-of-way user or to adjacent residents and property owners, and if it does not impair the aesthetic quality of the lands being traversed. 
(Code 1993, § 16-16.15; Ord. No. 2007-O-73, 10-23-2007) 
Sec. 20-218. - Construction methods and materials. 
(a)  Standards and requirements for particular types of construction methods. 
(1)  Boring or jacking. 
a.  Pits and shoring. 
1.  Boring or jacking under rights-of-way shall be accomplished from pits located at a minimum distance specified by the Village Engineer from the edge of the pavement. 
2.  Pits for boring or jacking shall be excavated on the same day as the commencing of boring or jacking operations, and shall be backfilled on the same day as completion of the boring or jacking operations. Boring and jacking operations must be carried out expeditiously to minimize the amount of time that pits are open and to avoid having pits open overnight or at times when no boring or jacking work is being performed. 
3.  While pits are open, they shall be clearly marked and protected by barricades. In addition to such markings and barricades, if a pit must remain open overnight or when no boring or jacking is being performed, the pit must also be covered with steel plates. 
4.  Shoring shall be designed, erected, supported, braced, and maintained so that it will safely support all vertical and lateral loads that may be imposed upon it during the boring or jacking operation. 
b.  Wet boring or jetting. Wet boring or jetting shall not be permitted under the roadway. 
c.  Borings with diameters greater than six inches. Borings over six inches (0.15 m) in diameter shall be accomplished with an auger and following pipe, and the diameter of the auger shall not exceed the outside diameter of the following pipe by more than one inch (25 mm). 
d.  Borings with diameters six inches or less. Borings of six inches or less in diameter may be accomplished by either jacking, guided with auger, or auger and following pipe method. 
e.  Tree preservation. Any facility located within the drip line of any tree designated by the village to be preserved or protected shall be bored under or around the root system. 
(2)  Trenching. Trenching for facility installation, repair, or maintenance on rights-of-way shall be done in accord with the applicable portions of section 603 of IDOT's Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction. 
a.  Length. The length of open trench shall be kept to the practicable minimum consistent with requirements for pipe-line testing. Only one-half of any intersection may have an open trench at any time unless special permission is obtained from the Village Engineer. 
b.  Open trench and excavated material. Open trench and windrowed excavated material shall be protected as required by chapter 6 of the Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. Where practicable, the excavated material shall be deposited between the roadway and the trench as added protection. Excavated material shall not be allowed to remain on the paved portion of the roadway. Where right-of-way width does not allow for windrowing excavated material off the paved portion of the roadway, excavated material shall be hauled to an off-road location. 
c.  Drip line of trees. The utility shall not trench within the drip line of any tree designated by the village to be preserved. 
(3)  Backfilling. 
a.  Any pit, trench, or excavation created during the installation of facilities shall be backfilled for its full width, depth, and length using methods and materials in accordance with IDOT's Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction. When excavated material is hauled away or is unsuitable for backfill, suitable granular backfill shall be used. 
b.  For a period of three years from the date construction of a facility is completed, the utility shall be responsible to remove and restore any backfilled area that has settled due to construction of the facility. If so ordered by the Village Engineer, the utility, at its expense, shall remove any pavement and backfill material to the top of the installed facility, place and properly compact new backfill material, and restore new pavement, sidewalk, curbs, and driveways to the proper grades, as determined by the Village Engineer. 
(4)  Pavement cuts. Pavement cuts for facility installation or repair shall be permitted on a highway only if that portion of the highway is closed to traffic. If a variance to the limitation set forth in this subsection (4) is permitted under section 20-223, the following requirements shall apply: 
a.  Any excavation under pavements shall be backfilled and compacted as soon as practicable with granular material of CA-11 gradation or such other material as may be required by the Village Engineer. 
b.  Restoration of pavement, using materials and methods as may be specified by the Village Engineer, shall be accomplished as soon as practicable, and temporary repair with bituminous mixture shall be provided immediately. Any subsequent failure of either the temporary repair or the restoration shall be rebuilt upon notification by the village. 
c.  All saw cuts shall be full depth. 
d.  For all rights-of-way which have been reconstructed with a concrete surface/base in the last seven years, or resurfaced in the last three years, permits shall not be issued unless such work is determined to be an emergency repair or other work considered necessary and unforeseen before the time of the reconstruction or unless a pavement cut is necessary for a J.U.L.I.E. locate. 
(5)  Encasement. 
a.  Casing pipe shall be designed to withstand the load of the highway and any other superimposed loads. The casing shall be continuous either by one-piece fabrication or by welding or jointed installation approved by the village. 
b.  The venting, if any, of any encasement shall extend within one foot (0.3 m) of the right-of-way line. No above-ground vent pipes shall be located in the area established as clear zone for that particular section of the highway. 
c.  In the case of water main or service crossing, encasement shall be furnished between bore pits unless continuous pipe or village approved jointed pipe is used under the roadway. Casing may be omitted only if pipe is installed prior to highway construction and carrier pipe is continuous or mechanical joints are of a type approved by the village. Bell and spigot type pipe shall be encased regardless of installation method. 
d.  In the case of gas pipelines of 60 psig or less, encasement may be eliminated. 
e.  In the case of gas pipelines or petroleum products pipelines with installations of more than 60 psig, encasement may be eliminated only if: 
1.  Extra heavy pipe is used that precludes future maintenance or repair; and 
2.  Cathodic protection of the pipe is provided. 
f.  If encasement is eliminated for a gas or petroleum products pipeline, the facility shall be located so as to provide that construction does not disrupt the right-of-way. 
(6)  Minimum cover of underground facilities. Cover shall be provided and maintained at least in the amount specified in the following table for minimum cover for the type of facility: 
Type of Facility Minimum Cover Electric lines 30 inches (0.8 m) Communication, cable or video service lines 18 to 24 inches (0.6 m as determined by village) Gas or petroleum products 30 inches (0.8 m) Water line Sufficient cover to provide freeze protection Sanitary sewer, storm sewer, or drainage line Sufficient cover to provide freeze protection  
(b)  Standards and requirements for particular types of facilities. 
(1)  Electric power or communication lines. 
a.  Code compliance. Electric power or communications facilities within village rights-of-way shall be constructed, operated, and maintained in conformity with the provisions of 83 Ill. Adm. Code part 305 (formerly General Order 160 of the Illinois Commerce Commission) entitled Rules for Construction of Electric Power and Communications Lines, and the National Electrical Safety Code. 
b.  Overhead facilities. Overhead power or communication facilities shall use single pole construction and, where practicable, joint use of poles shall be used. Utilities shall make every reasonable effort to design the installation so guys and braces will not be needed. Variances may be allowed if there is no feasible alternative and if guy wires are equipped with guy guards for maximum visibility. 
c.  Underground facilities. 
1.  Cable may be installed by trenching or plowing, provided that special consideration is given to boring in order to minimize damage when crossing improved entrances and side roads. 
2.  If a crossing is installed by boring or jacking, encasement shall be provided between jacking or bore pits. Encasement may be eliminated only if: 
(i)  The crossing is installed by the use of moles, whip augers, or other approved method which compress the earth to make the opening for cable installation; 
(ii)  The installation is by the open trench method which is only permitted prior to roadway construction. 
3.  Cable shall be grounded in accordance with the National Electrical Safety Code. 
d.  Burial of drops. All temporary service drops placed between November 1 of the prior year and March 15 of the current year, also known as snowdrops, shall be buried by May 31 of the current year, weather permitting, unless otherwise permitted by the village. Weather permitting, utilities shall bury all temporary drops, excluding snowdrops, within ten business days after placement. 
(2)  Underground facilities other than electric power or communication lines. Underground facilities other than electric power or communication lines may be installed by: 
a.  The use of moles, whip augers, or other approved methods which compress the earth to move the opening for the pipe; 
b.  Jacking or boring with vented encasement provided between the ditch lines or toes of slopes of the highway; 
c.  Open trench with vented encasement between ultimate ditch lines or toes of slopes, but only if prior to roadway construction; or 
d.  Tunneling with vented encasement, but only if installation is not possible by other means. 
(3)  Gas transmission, distribution and service. Gas pipelines within rights-of-way shall be constructed, maintained, and operated in a village approved manner and in conformance with the Federal Code of the Office of Pipeline Safety Operations, Department of Transportation, part 192, Transportation of Natural and Other Gas by Pipeline: Minimum Federal Safety Standards (49 CFR 192), IDOT's Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, and all other applicable laws, rules, and regulations. 
(4)  Petroleum products pipelines. Petroleum products pipelines within rights-of-way shall conform to the applicable sections of ANSI Standard Code for Pressure Piping. (Liquid Petroleum Transportation Piping Systems ANSI-B 31.4). 
(5)  Waterlines, sanitary sewer lines, stormwater sewer lines or drainage lines. Water lines, sanitary sewer lines, storm sewer lines, and drainage lines within rights-of-way shall meet or exceed the recommendations of the current Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois. 
(6)  Ground mounted appurtenances. Ground mounted appurtenances to overhead or underground facilities, when permitted within a right-of-way, shall be provided with a vegetation-free area extending one foot (305 mm) in width beyond the appurtenance in all directions. The vegetation-free area may be provided by an extension of the mounting pad, or by heavy duty plastic or similar material approved by the Village Engineer. With the approval of the Village Engineer, shrubbery surrounding the appurtenance may be used in place of vegetation-free area. The housing for ground-mounted appurtenances shall be painted a neutral color to blend with the surroundings. 
(c)  Materials. 
(1)  General standards. The materials used in constructing facilities within rights-of-way shall be those meeting the accepted standards of the appropriate industry, the applicable portions of IDOT's Standards Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, the requirements of the Illinois Commerce Commission, or the standards established by other official regulatory agencies for the appropriate industry. 
(2)  Material storage on right-of-way. Any anticipated storage of materials the right-of-way shall be indicated in the permit application, and shall be subject to prior approval by the Village Engineer. When such storage is permitted, all pipe, conduit, wire, poles, cross arms, or other materials shall be distributed along the right-of-way prior to and during installation in a manner to minimize hazards to the public or an obstacle to right-of-way maintenance or damage to the right-of-way and other property. If material is to be stored on right-of-way, prior approval must be obtained from the village. 
(3)  Hazardous materials. The plans submitted by the utility to the village shall identify any hazardous materials that may be involved in the construction of the new facilities or removal of any existing facilities. 
(d)  Operational restrictions. 
(1)  Construction operations on rights-of-way may, at the discretion of the village, be required to be discontinued when such operations would create hazards to traffic or the public health, safety, and welfare. Such operations may also be required to be discontinued or restricted when conditions are such that construction would result in extensive damage to the right-of-way or other property. 
(2)  These restrictions may be waived by the Village Engineer when emergency work is required to restore vital utility services. 
(3)  Unless otherwise permitted by the village, the hours of construction are those set forth in section 16-112, commercial noise. 
(e)  Location of existing facilities. Any utility proposing to construct facilities in the village shall contact J.U.L.I.E. and ascertain the presence and location of existing above-ground and underground facilities within the rights-of-way to be occupied by its proposed facilities. The village will make its permit records available to a utility for the purpose of identifying possible facilities. When notified of an excavation or when requested by the village or by J.U.L.I.E., a utility shall locate and physically mark its underground facilities within 48 hours, excluding weekends and holidays, in accordance with the Illinois Underground Facilities Damage Prevention Act (ILCS 220, act 50, § 1 et seq.) 
(Code 1993, § 16-16.16; Ord. No. 2007-O-73, 10-23-2007) 
Sec. 20-219. - Vegetation control. 
(a)  Electric utilities, compliance with state law and regulations. An electric utility shall conduct all tree-trimming and vegetation control activities in the right-of-way in accordance with applicable Illinois laws and regulations, and additionally, with such local franchise or other agreement with the village as permitted by law. 
(b)  Other utilities, tree trimming permit required. Tree trimming that is done by any other utility with facilities in the right-of-way and that is not performed pursuant to applicable Illinois laws and regulations specifically governing same, shall not be considered a normal maintenance operation, but shall require the application for, and the issuance of, a permit, in addition to any other permit required under this chapter. 
(1)  Application for tree trimming permit. Applications for tree trimming permits shall include assurance that the work will be accomplished by competent workers with supervision who are experienced in accepted tree pruning practices. Tree trimming permits shall designate an expiration date in the interest of assuring that the work will be expeditiously accomplished. 
(2)  Damage to trees. Poor pruning practices resulting in damaged or misshapen trees will not be tolerated and shall be grounds for cancellation of the tree trimming permit and for assessment of damages. The village will require compensation for trees extensively damaged and for trees removed without authorization. The formula developed by the International Society of Arboriculture will be used as a basis for determining the compensation for damaged trees or unauthorized removal of trees. The village may require the removal and replacement of trees if trimming or radical pruning would leave them in an unacceptable condition. 
(c)  Specimen trees or trees of special significance. The village may require that special measures be taken to preserve specimen trees or trees of special significance. The required measures may consist of higher poles, side arm extensions, covered wire or other means. 
(d)  Use of chemicals. 
(1)  Unless authorized under a state law or regulation that supersedes the requirements of this section, the spraying or application of brush-killing or defoliating chemicals, herbicides, insecticides or chemical fertilizers on the public right-of-way by a utility is prohibited. 
(2)  Specific application of chemical insecticide or fertilizer to right-of-way trees may be approved by the Village Engineer when, in consultation with the Director of Engineering and Public Works, it is determined to be reasonably necessary to preserve or protect the health of a tree, or treat disease or infestation of a tree. 
(Code 1993, § 16-16.17; Ord. No. 2007-O-73, 10-23-2007) 
Sec. 20-220. - Removal, relocation, or modifications of utility facilities. 
(a)  Notice. Within 30 days following written notice from the village, or such longer time as the Village Engineer may reasonably allow, a utility shall, at its own expense, protect, support, temporarily or permanently disconnect, remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any utility facilities within the rights-of-way whenever the corporate authorities have determined that such removal, relocation, change or alteration, is reasonably necessary for the construction, repair, maintenance, or installation of any village improvement in or upon, or the operations of the village in or upon, the rights-of-way. 
(b)  Removal of unauthorized facilities. Within 30 days following written notice from the village, any utility that owns, controls, or maintains any unauthorized facility or related appurtenances within the rights-of-way shall, at its own expense, remove all or any part of such facilities or appurtenances from the rights-of-way. A facility is unauthorized and subject to removal in the following circumstances: 
(1)  Upon expiration or termination of the permittee's license or franchise, unless otherwise permitted by applicable law; 
(2)  If the facility was constructed or installed without the prior grant of a license or franchise, if required; 
(3)  If the facility was constructed or installed without prior issuance of a required permit in violation of this article; or 
(4)  If the facility was constructed or installed at a location not permitted by the permittee's permit, license or franchise. 
(c)  Emergency removal or relocation of facilities. The village retains the right and privilege to cut or move any facilities located within the rights-of-way of the village, as the village may determine to be necessary, appropriate or useful in response to any public health or safety emergency. If circumstances permit, the municipality shall attempt to notify the utility, if known, prior to cutting or removing a facility and shall notify the utility, if known, after cutting or removing a facility. 
(d)  Abandonment of facilities. Upon abandonment of a facility within the rights-of-way of the village, the utility shall notify the village within 90 days. Following receipt of such notice the village may direct the utility to remove all or any portion of the facility if the Village Engineer determines that such removal will be in the best interest of the public health, safety and welfare. In the event that the village does not direct the utility that abandoned the facility to remove it, by giving notice of abandonment to the village, the abandoning utility shall be deemed to consent to the alteration or removal of all or any portion of the facility by another utility or person. 
(Code 1993, § 16-16.18; Ord. No. 2007-O-73, 10-23-2007) 
Sec. 20-221. - Clean-up and restoration. 
    The utility shall remove all excess material and restore all turf and terrain and other property within ten days after any portion of the rights-of-way are disturbed, damaged or destroyed due to construction or maintenance by the utility, all to the satisfaction of the village. This includes restoration of entrances and side roads. Restoration of roadway surfaces shall be made using materials and methods approved by the Village Engineer. Such cleanup and repair may be required to consist of backfilling, regrading, reseeding, resodding, or any other requirement to restore the right-of-way to a condition substantially equivalent to that which existed prior to the commencement of the project. The time period provided in this section may be extended by the Village Engineer for good cause shown. 
(Code 1993, § 16-16.19; Ord. No. 2007-O-73, 10-23-2007) 
Sec. 20-222. - Maintenance and emergency maintenance. 
(a)  General. Facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within rights-of-way are to be maintained by or for the utility in a manner satisfactory to the village and at the utility's expense. 
(b)  Emergency maintenance procedures. Emergencies may justify non-compliance with normal procedures for securing a permit: 
(1)  If an emergency creates a hazard on the traveled portion of the right-of-way, the utility shall take immediate steps to provide all necessary protection for traffic on the highway or the public on the right-of-way, including the use of signs, lights, barricades or flaggers. If a hazard does not exist on the traveled way, but the nature of the emergency is such as to require the parking on the shoulder of equipment required in repair operations, adequate signs and lights shall be provided. Parking on the shoulder in such an emergency will only be permitted when no other means of access to the facility is available. 
(2)  In an emergency, the utility shall, as soon as possible, notify the Village Engineer or the Village Engineer's duly authorized agent of the emergency, informing him as to what steps have been taken for protection of the traveling public and what will be required to make the necessary repairs. If the nature of the emergency is such as to interfere with the free movement of traffic, the Village Police Department shall be notified immediately. 
(3)  In an emergency, the utility shall use all means at hand to complete repairs as rapidly as practicable and with the least inconvenience to the traveling public. 
(c)  Emergency repairs. The utility must file in writing with the village a description of the repairs undertaken in the right-of-way within 48 hours after an emergency repair. 
(Code 1993, § 16-16.20; Ord. No. 2007-O-73, 10-23-2007) 
Sec. 20-223. - Variances. 
(a)  Request for variance. A utility requesting a variance from one or more of the provisions of this article must do so in writing to the Village Engineer as a part of the permit application. The request shall identify each provision of this article from which a variance is requested and the reasons why a variance should be granted. 
(b)  Authority to grant variances. The Village Engineer shall decide whether a variance is authorized for each provision of this article identified in the variance request on an individual basis. 
(c)  Conditions for granting of variance. The Village Engineer may authorize a variance only if the utility requesting the variance has demonstrated that: 
(1)  One or more conditions not under the control of the utility (such as terrain features or an irregular right-of-way line) create a special hardship that would make enforcement of the provision unreasonable, given the public purposes to be achieved by the provision; and 
(2)  All other designs, methods, materials, locations or facilities that would conform with the provision from which a variance is requested are impracticable in relation to the requested approach. 
(d)  Additional conditions for granting of a variance. As a condition for authorizing a variance, the Village Engineer may require the utility requesting the variance to meet reasonable standards and conditions that may or may not be expressly contained within this article but which carry out the purposes of this article. 
(e)  Right to appeal. Any utility aggrieved by any order, requirement, decision or determination, including denial of a variance, made by the Village Engineer under the provisions of this chapter shall have the right to appeal to the Village Board, or such other board or commission as it may designate. The application for appeal shall be submitted in writing to the Village Clerk within 30 days after the date of such order, requirement, decision or determination. The Village Board shall commence its consideration of the appeal at the Village Board's next regularly scheduled meeting occurring at least seven days after the filing of the appeal. The Village Board shall timely decide the appeal. 
(Code 1993, § 16-16.21; Ord. No. 2007-O-73, 10-23-2007) 
Sec. 20-224. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with any of the provisions of this article shall be subject to fine up to $750.00 for each offense. A separate violation will be deemed to occur each day that a violation exists that has not been remedied or corrected by the violator. 
(b)  There may be times when the village will incur delay or other costs, including third party claims, because the utility will not or cannot perform its duties under its permit and this article. Unless the utility shows that another allocation of the cost of undertaking the requested action is appropriate, the utility shall bear the village's costs of damages and its costs of installing, maintaining, modifying, relocating, or removing the facility that is the subject of the permit. No other administrative agency or commission may review or overrule a permit-related cost apportionment of the village. It shall also constitute an offense for a utility to fail to pay costs so apportioned to it. 
(Code 1993, § 16-16.22; Ord. No. 2007-O-73, 10-23-2007) 
Sec. 20-225. - Other remedies. 
    Nothing in this article shall be construed as limiting any additional or further remedies that the village may have for enforcement of this article, or any other provision of this chapter or Code, including, but not limited to, seeking injunctive relief in order to compel compliance. 
(Code 1993, § 16-16.23; Ord. No. 2007-O-73, 10-23-2007) 
Sec. 20-226. - Appendix. 
TYPICAL SIGHT TRIANGLE 


(Code 1993, app.) 
Secs. 20-227-20-245. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - CONSTRUCTION AND USE FOR SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES 

Sec. 20-246. - Purpose and scope. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this article is to establish regulations, standards and procedures for the siting and collocation of small wireless facilities on rights-of-way within the village's jurisdiction, in a manner that is consistent with the Act. 
(b)  Conflicts with other ordinances. This article supersedes all ordinances or parts of ordinances adopted prior hereto that are in conflict herewith, to the extent of such conflict. 
(c)  Conflicts with State and federal laws. In the event that applicable federal or state laws or regulations conflict with the requirements of this article, the wireless provider shall comply with the requirements of this article to the maximum extent possible without violating federal or state laws or regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-48, § 2(16-7.1), 7-24-2018) 
Sec. 20-247. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Antenna means communications equipment that transmits or receives electromagnetic radio frequency signals used in the provision of wireless services. 
    Applicable codes means uniform building, fire, electrical, plumbing, or mechanical codes adopted by a recognized national code organization or local amendments to those codes, including the National Electric Safety Code. 
    Applicant means any person who submits an application and is a wireless provider. 
    Application means a request submitted by an applicant to an authority for a permit to collocate small wireless facilities, and a request that includes the installation of a new utility pole for such collocation, as well as any applicable fee for the review of such application. 
    Collocate or collocation means to install, mount, maintain, modify, operate, or replace wireless facilities on or adjacent to a wireless support structure or utility pole. 
    Communications service means cable service, as defined in 47 USC 522(6), as amended; information service, as defined in 47 USC 153(24), as amended; telecommunications service, as defined in 47 USC 153(53), as amended; mobile service, as defined in 47 USC 153(53), as amended; or wireless service other than mobile service. 
    Communications service provider means a cable operator, as defined in 47 USC 522(5), as amended; a provider of information service, as defined in 47 USC 153(24), as amended; a telecommunications carrier, as defined in 47 USC 153(51), as amended; or a wireless provider. 
    FCC means the Federal Communications Commission of the United States. 
    Fee means a one-time charge. 
    Historic district or historic landmark means a building, property, or site, or group of buildings, properties, or sites that are either: 
(1)  Listed in the National Register of Historic Places or formally determined eligible for listing by the Keeper of the National Register, the individual who has been delegated the authority by the federal agency to list properties and determine their eligibility for the National Register, in accordance with Section VI.D.1.a.i through Section VI.D.1.a.v of the Nationwide Programmatic Agreement codified at 47 CFR Part 1, Appendix C; or 
(2)  Designated as a locally landmarked building, property, site, or historic district by an ordinance adopted by the village pursuant to a preservation program that meets the requirements of the Certified Local Government Program of the Illinois State Historic Preservation Office or where such certification of the preservation program by the Illinois State Historic Preservation Office is pending. 
    Law means a federal or state statute, common law, code, rule, regulation, order, or local ordinance or resolution. 
    Micro wireless facility means a small wireless facility that is not larger in dimension than 24 inches in length, 15 inches in width, and 12 inches in height and that has an exterior antenna, if any, no longer than 11 inches. 
    Municipal utility pole means a utility pole owned or operated by the village in public rights-of-way. 
    Permit means a written authorization required by the village to perform an action or initiate, continue, or complete a project. 
    Person means an individual, corporation, limited liability company, partnership, association, trust, or other entity or organization. 
    Public safety agency means the functional division of the federal government, the State, a unit of local government, or a special purpose district located in whole or in part within this State, that provides or has authority to provide firefighting, police, ambulance, medical, or other emergency services to respond to and manage emergency incidents. 
    Rate means a recurring charge. 
    Right-of-way means the area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway, street, public sidewalk, alley, or utility easement dedicated for compatible use. Right-of-way does not include village-owned aerial lines. 
    Small wireless facility means a wireless facility that meets both of the following qualifications: 
(1)  Each antenna is located inside an enclosure of no more than six cubic feet in volume or, in the case of an antenna that has exposed elements, the antenna and all of its exposed elements could fit within an imaginary enclosure of no more than six cubic feet; and 
(2)  All other wireless equipment attached directly to a utility pole associated with the facility is cumulatively no more than 25 cubic feet in volume. 
The following types of associated ancillary equipment are not included in the calculation of equipment volume: electric meter, concealment elements, telecommunications demarcation box, ground-based enclosures, grounding equipment, power transfer switch, cut-off switch, and vertical cable runs for the connection of power and other services. 
    Utility pole means a pole or similar structure that is used in whole or in part by a communications service provider or for electric distribution, lighting, traffic control, or a similar function. 
    Wireless facility. 
(1)  The term "wireless facility" means equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless communications between user equipment and a communications network, including: 
a.  Equipment associated with wireless communications; and 
b.  Radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup power supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration. 
The term "wireless facility" includes small wireless facilities. 
(2)  The term "wireless facility" does not include: 
a.  The structure or improvements on, under, or within which the equipment is collocated; or 
b.  Wireline backhaul facilities, coaxial or fiber optic cable that is between wireless support structures or utility poles or coaxial, or fiber optic cable that is otherwise not immediately adjacent to or directly associated with an antenna. 
    Wireless infrastructure provider means any person authorized to provide telecommunications service in the State that builds or installs wireless communication transmission equipment, wireless facilities, wireless support structures, or utility poles and that is not a wireless services provider but is acting as an agent or a contractor for a wireless services provider for the application submitted to the village. 
    Wireless provider means a wireless infrastructure provider or a wireless services provider. 
    Wireless services means any services provided to the general public, including a particular class of customers, and made available on a nondiscriminatory basis using licensed or unlicensed spectrum, whether at a fixed location or mobile, provided using wireless facilities. 
    Wireless services provider means a person who provides wireless services. 
    Wireless support structure means a freestanding structure, such as a monopole; tower, either guyed or self-supporting; billboard; or other existing or proposed structure designed to support or capable of supporting wireless facilities. The term "wireless support structure" does not include a utility pole. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-48, § 2(16-7.2), 7-24-2018) 
Sec. 20-248. - Small wireless facilities. 
(a)  Permitted use. Small wireless facilities shall be classified as permitted uses and subject to administrative review, except as provided in subsection (c)(9) of this section regarding height exceptions or variances, but not subject to zoning review or approval if they are collocated: 
(1)  In rights-of-way in any zoning district; or 
(2)  Outside rights-of-way in property zoned exclusively for commercial or industrial use. 
(b)  Permit required. An applicant shall obtain one or more permits from the village to collocate a small wireless facility. An application shall be received and processed, and permits issued shall be subject to the following conditions and requirements: 
(1)  Application requirements. A wireless provider shall provide the following information to the village, together with the Village's Small Cell Facilities Permit Application, as a condition of any permit application to collocate small wireless facilities on a utility pole or wireless support structure: 
a.  Site specific structural integrity and, for a municipal utility pole, make-ready analysis prepared by a structural engineer, as that term is defined in Section 4 of the Structural Engineering Practice Act of 1989; 
b.  The location where each proposed small wireless facility or utility pole would be installed and photographs of the location and its immediate surroundings depicting the utility poles or structures on which each proposed small wireless facility would be mounted or location where utility poles or structures would be installed. This should include a depiction of the completed facility; 
c.  Specifications and drawings prepared by a structural engineer, as that term is defined in Section 4 of the Structural Engineering Practice Act of 1989, for each proposed small wireless facility covered by the application as it is proposed to be installed; 
d.  The equipment type and model numbers for the antennas and all other wireless equipment associated with the small wireless facility; 
e.  A proposed schedule for the installation and completion of each small wireless facility covered by the application, if approved; 
f.  Emergency contact information of the application and installation contractor which shall include at a minimum a cellular phone number, email address and mailing address; and 
g.  Certification that the collocation complies with the collocation requirements and conditions contained herein, to the best of the applicant's knowledge. 
(2)  Application process. The village shall process applications as follows: 
a.  The first completed application shall have priority over applications received by different applicants for collocation on the same utility pole or wireless support structure. 
b.  An application to collocate a small wireless facility on an existing utility pole or wireless support structure, or replacement of an existing utility pole or wireless support structure shall be processed on a nondiscriminatory basis and shall be deemed approved if the village fails to approve or deny the application within 90 days after the submission of a completed application. However, if an applicant intends to proceed with the permitted activity on a deemed approved basis, the applicant shall notify the village in writing of its intention to invoke the deemed approved remedy no sooner than 75 days after the submission of a completed application. The permit shall be deemed approved on the latter of the 90th day after submission of the complete application or the 10th day after the receipt of the deemed approved notice by the village. The receipt of the deemed approved notice shall not preclude the village's denial of the permit request within the time limits as provided under this article. 
c.  An application to collocate a small wireless facility that includes the installation of a new utility pole shall be processed on a nondiscriminatory basis and deemed approved if the village fails to approve or deny the application within 120 days after the submission of a completed application. However, if an applicant intends to proceed with the permitted activity on a deemed approved basis, the applicant shall notify the village in writing of its intention to invoke the deemed approved remedy no sooner than 105 days after the submission of a completed application. The permit shall be deemed approved on the latter of the 120th day after submission of the complete application or the tenth day after the receipt of the deemed approved notice by the village. The receipt of the deemed approved notice shall not preclude the village's denial of the permit request within the time limits as provided under this article. 
d.  The village shall deny an application that does not meet the requirements of this article. 
1.  If the village determines that applicable codes, ordinances or regulations that concern public safety, or the Collocation Requirements and Conditions contained herein require that the utility pole or wireless support structure be replaced before the requested collocation, approval shall be conditioned on the replacement of the utility pole or wireless support structure at the cost of the provider. 
2.  The village shall document the basis for a denial, including the specific code provisions or application conditions on which the denial is based, and send the documentation to the applicant on or before the day the village denies an application. 
3.  The applicant may cure the deficiencies identified by the village and resubmit the revised application once within 30 days after notice of denial is sent to the applicant without paying an additional application fee. The village shall approve or deny the revised application within 30 days after the applicant resubmits the application or it is deemed approved. Failure to resubmit the revised application within 30 days of denial shall require the applicant to submit a new application with applicable fees, and recommencement of the village's review period. 
4.  The applicant must notify the village in writing of its intention to proceed with the permitted activity on a deemed approved basis, which may be submitted with the revised application. 
5.  Any review of a revised application shall be limited to the deficiencies cited in the denial. However, this revised application does not apply if the cure requires the review of a new location, new or different structure to be collocated upon, new antennas, or other wireless equipment associated with the small wireless facility. 
e.  Pole attachment agreement. Within 30 days after an approved permit to collocate a small wireless facility on a municipal utility pole, the Village and the application shall enter in a Master Pole Attachment Agreement, provided by the village for the initial collocation on a municipal utility pole by the applicant. For subsequently approved permits to collocate on a small wireless facility on a municipal utility pole, the village and the applicant shall enter in a License Supplement of the Master Pole Attachment Agreement. The Village Manager, or his designee, is hereby authorized to enter into such an agreement and license on behalf of the village. 
(3)  Completeness of application. Within 30 days after receiving an application, the village shall determine whether the application is complete and notify the applicant. If an application is incomplete, the village must specifically identify the missing information. An application shall be deemed complete if the village fails to provide notification to the applicant within 30 days after all documents, information and fees specifically enumerated in the village's permit application form are submitted by the applicant to the village. Processing deadlines are tolled from the time the village sends the notice of incompleteness to the time the application provided the missing information. 
(4)  Tolling. The time period for applications may be further tolled by: 
a.  An express written agreement by both the applicant and the village; or 
b.  A local, State or federal disaster declaration or similar emergency that causes the delay. 
(5)  Consolidated applications. 
a.  An applicant seeking to collocate small wireless facilities within the jurisdiction of the village shall be allowed, at the applicant's discretion, to file a consolidated application and receive a single permit for the collocation of up to 25 small wireless facilities if the collocations each involve substantially the same type of small wireless facility and substantially the same type of structure. 
b.  If an application includes multiple small wireless facilities, the village may remove small wireless facility collocations from the application and treat separately small wireless facility collocations for which incomplete information has been provided or that do not qualify for consolidated treatment or that are denied. The village may issue separate permits for each collocation that is approved in a consolidated application. 
(6)  Duration of permits. 
a.  The duration of a permit shall be for a period of not less than five years, and the permit shall be renewed for equivalent durations unless the village makes a finding that the small wireless facilities or the new or modified utility pole do not comply with the applicable village codes or any provision, condition or requirement contained in this article. 
b.  If the Act is repealed as provided in Section 90 therein, renewals of permits shall be subject to the applicable Village Code provisions or regulations in effect at the time of renewal. 
(7)  Means of submitting applications. Applicants shall submit applications, supporting information, and notices to the village by personal delivery to the Village's Engineering and Public Works Department, by regular mail postmarked on the date due or by another other commonly used means, including electronic mail or by another method as otherwise required by the village. 
(c)  Collocation requirements and conditions. 
(1)  Public safety space reservation. The village may reserve space on municipal utility poles for future public safety uses, for the village's electric utility uses, or both, but a reservation of space may not preclude the collocation of a small wireless facility unless the village reasonably determines that the municipal utility pole cannot accommodate both uses. 
(2)  Installation and maintenance. The wireless provider shall install, maintain, repair and modify its small wireless facilities in a safe condition and good repair and in compliance with the requirements and conditions of this article. The wireless provider shall ensure that its employees, agents or contracts that perform work in connection with its small wireless facilities are adequately trained and skilled in accordance with all applicable industry and governmental standards and regulations. 
(3)  No interference with public safety communication frequencies. The wireless provider's operation of the small wireless facilities shall not interfere with the frequencies used by a public safety agency for public safety communications. 
a.  A wireless provider shall install small wireless facilities of the type and frequency that will not cause unacceptable interference with a public safety agency's communications equipment. 
b.  Unacceptable interference will be determined by and measured in accordance with industry standards and the FCC's regulations addressing unacceptable interference to public safety spectrum or any other spectrum licensed by a public safety agency. 
c.  If a small wireless facility causes such interference, and the wireless provider has been given written notice of the interference by the public safety agency, the wireless provider, at its own expense, shall remedy the interference in a manner consistent with the abatement and resolution procedures for interference with public safety spectrum established by the FCC including 47 CFR 22.970 through 47 CFR 22.973 and 47 CFR 90.672 through 47 CFR 90.675. 
d.  The village may terminate a permit for a small wireless facility based on such interference if the wireless provider is not in compliance with the Code of Federal Regulations cited in subsection (c)3c of this section above. Failure to remedy the interference as required herein shall constitute a public nuisance. 
(4)  The wireless provider shall not collocate small wireless facilities on village utility poles that are part of an electric distribution or transmission system within the communication worker safety zone of the pole or the electric supply zone of the pole. However, the antenna and support equipment of the small wireless facility may be located in the communications space on the village utility pole and on the top of the pole, if not otherwise unavailable, if the wireless provider complies with applicable codes for work involving the top of the pole. For purposes of this subsection, the terms "communications space", "communication worker safety zone", and "electric supply zone" have the meanings given to those terms in the National Electric Safety Code as published by the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers. 
(5)  The wireless provider shall comply with all applicable codes and local code provisions or regulations that concern public safety. 
(6)  The wireless provider shall comply with written design standards that are generally applicable for decorative utility poles, or reasonable stealth, concealment and aesthetic requirements that are set forth by the Village Engineer, in the Village's Comprehensive Plan and the Village Center Master Plan, or other written design plan that applies to other occupiers of the rights-of-way, including on a historic landmark or in a historic district. The wireless provider shall also comply with any additional site-specific standards or deviations provided by the Village Engineer from the written standards to the proposed site. The wireless provider shall provide its proposed design plans to the Village Engineer prior to the approval of a permit. 
(7)  Alternate placements. Except as provided in this collocation requirements and conditions subsection (c), a wireless provider shall not be required to collocate small wireless facilities on any specific utility pole, or category of utility poles, or be required to collocate multiple antenna systems on a single utility pole. However, with respect to an application for the collocation of a small wireless facility associated with a new utility pole, the village may propose that the small wireless facility be collocated on an existing utility pole or existing wireless support structure within 100 feet of the proposed collocation, which the applicant shall accept if it has the right to use the alternate structure on reasonable terms and conditions, and the alternate location and structure does not impose technical limits or additional material costs as determined by the applicant. If the applicant refuses a collocation proposed by the village, the applicant shall provide written certification describing the property rights, technical limits or material cost reasons the alternate location does not satisfy the criteria in this subsection. 
(8)  Height limitations. The maximum height of a small wireless facility shall be no more than ten feet above the utility pole or wireless support structure on which the small wireless facility is collocated. A small wireless facility shall be not be placed lower than ten feet from the ground on a utility pole or wireless support structure. New or replacement utility poles or wireless support structures on which small wireless facilities are collocated may not exceed the higher of: 
a.  Ten feet in height above the tallest existing utility pole, other than a utility pole supporting only wireless facilities, that is in place on the date the application is submitted to the village, that is located within 300 feet of the new or replacement utility pole or wireless support structure and that is in the same right-of-way within the jurisdictional boundary of the village, provided the village may designate which intersecting right-of-way within 300 feet of the proposed utility pole or wireless support structures shall control the height limitation for such facility; or 
b.  45 feet above ground level. 
(9)  Height exceptions or variances on rights-of-way. If an applicant proposes a height for a new or replacement pole, proposes to place a small wireless facility lower than ten feet from the ground on an utility pole or wireless support structure, or proposes an alternate design plan than what has been approved by the Village Engineer, located within the village's right-of-way, in excess of the above height limitations on which the small wireless facility is proposed for collocation, the applicant shall apply for a variance in the following manner: 
a.  Request for variance. A applicant requesting a variance from the height limitations of this section must do so in writing to the Village Engineer as a part of the permit application. The request shall identify the variance sought and the reasons why a variance should be granted. 
b.  Authority to grant variances. The Village Engineer shall decide whether a variance is authorized based upon variance request on an individual basis. 
c.  Conditions for granting of variance. The Village Engineer may authorize a variance only if the applicant requesting the variance has demonstrated that: 
1.  One or more conditions not under the control of the applicant (such as surrounding structure heights, location and height of existing poles, or an irregular right-of-way) create a special hardship that would make a small cell facility located upon a permitted new or replacement pole substantially ineffective; and 
2.  All other designs, methods, materials, locations or facilities that would conform with the provision from which a variance is requested are impracticable in relation to the requested approach; and 
d.  Additional conditions for granting of a variance. As a condition for authorizing a variance, the Village Engineer may require the applicant requesting the variance to meet reasonable standards and conditions that may or may not be expressly contained within this section. 
e.  Right to appeal. Any utility aggrieved by any order, requirement, decision or determination, including denial of a variance, made by the Village Engineer under the provisions of this chapter shall have the right to an initial appeal to the Director of Engineering and Public Works. The application for an initial appeal shall be submitted in writing to the Director of Engineering and Public Works within 30 days after the date of such order, requirement, decision or determination. The Director of Engineering and Public Works shall commence its consideration of the initial appeal within ten (ten business days) and shall timely decide the appeal. 
f.  Right to appeal. Any utility aggrieved by any order, requirement, decision or determination, including denial of a variance, made by the Director of Engineering and Public Works under the provisions of this chapter shall have the right to appeal to the Municipal Services Committee of the Village Board. The application for appeal shall be submitted in writing to the Village Clerk within 30 days after the date of such order, requirement, decision or determination. The Municipal Services Committee of the Village Board shall commence its consideration of the appeal at the Municipal Services Committee of the Village Board's next regularly scheduled meeting occurring at least seven days after the filing of the appeal. If no meeting is scheduled, the Municipal Services Committee of the Village Board shall schedule a meeting within 30 days from the date of the receipt of the request for an appeal. The Municipal Services Committee of the Village Board shall timely decide the appeal. 
(10)  Height exceptions or variances on property outside of rights-of-way. If an applicant proposes a height for a new or replacement pole or proposes to place a small wireless facility lower than ten feet from the ground on an utility pole or wireless support structure, located on property that is not within a right-of-way located in the village, in excess of the above height limitations on which the small wireless facility is proposed for collocation, the applicant shall apply for a variation in conformance with procedures, terms and conditions set forth in Village's Zoning Ordinance. 
(11)  Contractual design requirements. The wireless provider shall comply with requirements that are imposed by a contract between the village and a private property owner that concern design or construction standards applicable to utility poles and ground-mounted equipment located in the right-of-way. 
(12)  Ground-mounted equipment spacing. Ground-mounted equipment may not be preferred. The applicant is requested to provide alternative location for necessary equipment. Prior to a permit being issued, the applicant shall meet with the Village Engineer to discuss potential alternatives to ground-mounted equipment. To the extent that the applicant cannot find an alternative, the wireless provider shall comply with applicable spacing requirements in applicable codes and ordinances concerning the location of ground-mounted equipment located in the right-of-way or the requirements provided by the Village Engineer. 
(13)  Undergrounding regulations. The wireless provider shall comply with all local code provisions or regulations concerning undergrounding requirements that prohibit the installation of new or the modification of existing utility poles in a right-of-way without prior approval. 
(14)  Collocation completion deadline. Collocation for which a permit is granted shall be completed within 180 days after issuance of the permit, unless the village and the wireless provider agree to extend this period or a delay is caused by make-ready work for a municipal utility pole or by the lack of commercial power or backhaul availability at the site, provided the wireless provider has made a timely request within 60 days after the issuance of the permit for commercial power or backhaul services, and the additional time to complete installation does not exceed 360 days after issuance of the permit. Otherwise, the permit shall be void unless the village grants an extension in writing to the applicant. 
(d)  Application fees. Application fees are imposed as follows: 
(1)  The applicant shall pay an application fee of $650.00 for an application to collocate a single small wireless facility on an existing utility pole or wireless support structure and $350.00 for each small wireless facility addressed in a consolidated application to collocate more than one small wireless facility on existing utility poles or wireless support structures. 
(2)  The applicant shall pay an application fee of $1,000.00 for each small wireless facility addressed in an application that includes the installation of a new utility pole for such collocation. 
(3)  Notwithstanding any contrary provision of state law or local ordinance, applications pursuant to this section shall be accompanied by the required application fee. Application fees shall be non-refundable. 
(4)  The village shall not require an application, approval, or permit, or require any fees or other charges, from a communications service provider authorized to occupy the rights-of-way, for: 
a.  Routine maintenance; 
b.  The replacement of wireless facilities with wireless facilities that are substantially similar, the same size, or smaller if the wireless provider notifies the village at least ten days prior to the planned replacement and includes equipment specifications for the replacement of equipment consistent with subsection (b)(1)d of this section; or 
c.  The installation, placement, maintenance, operation, or replacement of micro wireless facilities suspended on cables that are strung between existing utility poles in compliance with applicable safety codes. 
(5)  Wireless providers shall secure a permit from the Village to work within rights-of-way for activities that affect traffic patterns or require lane closures. 
(e)  Exceptions to applicability. Nothing in this article authorizes a person to collocate small wireless facilities on: 
(1)  Property owned by a private party or property owned or controlled by the village or another unit of local government that is not located within rights-of-way, or a privately owned utility pole or wireless support structure without the consent of the property owner; 
(2)  Property owned, leased, or controlled by a park district, forest preserve district, or conservation district for public park, recreation, or conservation purposes without the consent of the affected district, excluding the placement of facilities on rights-of-way located in an affected district that are under the jurisdiction and control of a different unit of local government as provided by the Illinois Highway Code; or 
(3)  Property owned by a rail carrier registered under section 18c-7201 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, Metra Commuter Rail or any other public commuter rail service, or an electric utility as defined in section 16-102 of the Public Utilities Act, without the consent of the rail carrier, public commuter rail service, or electric utility. The provisions of this article do not apply to an electric or gas public utility or such utility's wireless facilities if the facilities are being used, developed, and maintained consistent with the provisions of subsection (i) of section 16-108.5 of the Public Utilities Act. For the purposes of this subsection, the term "public utility" has the meaning given to that term in section 3-105 of the Public Utilities Act. Nothing in this article shall be construed to relieve any person from any requirement to obtain a franchise or a State-issued authorization to offer cable service or video service or to obtain any required permission to install, place, maintain, or operate communications facilities, other than small wireless facilities subject to this article. 
(f)  Pre-existing agreements. Existing agreements between the village and wireless providers that relate to the collocation of small wireless facilities in the right-of-way, including the collocation of small wireless facilities on authority utility poles, that are in effect on June 1, 2018, remain in effect for all small wireless facilities collocated on the village's utility poles pursuant to applications submitted to the village before June 1, 2018, subject to applicable termination provisions contained therein. Agreement entered into after June 1, 2018, shall comply with this article. A wireless provider that has an existing agreement with the village on the effective date of the Act may accept the rates, fees and terms that the village makes available under this article for the collocation of small wireless facilities or the installation of new utility poles for the collocation of small wireless facilities that are the subject of an application submitted two or more years after the effective date of the Act by notifying the village that it opts to accept such rates, fees and terms. The existing agreement remains in effect, subject to applicable termination provisions, for the small wireless facilities the wireless provider has collocated on the village's utility poles pursuant to applications submitted to the village before the wireless provider provides such notice and exercises its option under this section. 
(g)  Annual recurring rate. A wireless provider shall pay to the village an annual recurring rate to collocate a small wireless facility on a village utility pole located in a right-of-way that equals: 
(1)  $200.00 per year; or 
(2)  The actual, direct, and reasonable costs related to the wireless provider's use of space on the village utility pole. 
If the village has not billed the wireless provider actual and direct cots, the fee shall be $200.00 payable on the first day after the first annual anniversary of the issuance of the permit or notice of intent to collocate, and on each annual anniversary date thereafter. 
(h)  Abandonment. A small wireless facility that is not operated for a continuous period of 12 months shall be considered abandoned. The owner of the facility shall remove the small wireless facility within 90 days after receipt of written notice from the village notifying the wireless provider of the abandonment. The notice shall be sent by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, by the village to the owner at the last known address of the wireless provider. If the small wireless facility is not removed within 90 days of such notice, the village may remove or cause the removal of such facility pursuant to the terms of its pole attachment agreement for municipal utility poles or through whatever actions are provided for abatement of nuisances or by other law for removal and cost recovery. A wireless provider shall provide written notice to the village if it sells or transfers small wireless facilities within the jurisdiction of the village. Such notice shall include the name and contact information of the new wireless provider. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-48, § 2(16-7.3), 7-24-2018) 
Sec. 20-249. - Dispute resolution. 
    The Circuit Court of Cook County shall have exclusive jurisdiction to resolve all disputes arising under the Small Wireless Facilities Deployment Act. Pending resolution of a dispute concerning rates for collocation of small wireless facilities on municipal utility poles within the right-of-way, the village shall allow the collocating person to collocate on its poles at annual rates of no more than $200.00 per year per municipal utility pole, with rates to be determined upon final resolution of the dispute. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-48, § 2(16-7.4), 7-24-2018) 
Sec. 20-250. - Indemnification. 
    A wireless provider shall indemnify and hold the village harmless against any and all liability or loss from personal injury or property damage resulting from or arising out of, in whole or in part, the use or occupancy of the village improvements or right-of-way associated with such improvements by the wireless provider or its employees, agents, or contractors arising out of the rights and privileges granted under this article and the Act. A wireless provider has no obligation to indemnify or hold harmless against any liabilities and losses as may be due to or caused by the sole negligence of the village or its employees or agents. A wireless provider shall further waive any claims that they may have against the village with respect to consequential, incidental, or special damages, however caused, based on the theory of liability. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-48, § 2(16-7.5), 7-24-2018) 
Sec. 20-251. - Insurance. 
(a)  The wireless provider shall carry, at the wireless provider's own cost and expense, the following insurance: 
(1)  Property insurance for its property's replacement cost against all risks; 
(2)  Workers' compensation insurance, as required by law; or 
(3)  Commercial general liability insurance with respect to its activities on the village improvements or rights-of-way to afford minimum protection limits consistent with its requirements of other users of authority improvements or rights-of-way, including coverage for bodily injury and property damage. 
(b)  The wireless provider shall include the village as an additional insured on the commercial general liability policy and provide certification and documentation of inclusion of the village in a commercial general liability policy prior to the collocation of any wireless facility. 
(c)  A wireless provider may self-insure all or a portion of the insurance coverage and limit requirement required by the village. A wireless provider that self-insures is not required, to the extent of the self-insurance, to comply with the requirement for the name of additional insureds under this section. A wireless provider that elects to self-insure shall provide to the village evidence sufficient to demonstrate its financial ability to self-insure the insurance coverage limits required by the village. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-48, § 2(16-7.6), 7-24-2018) 
Sec. 20-252. - Severability. 
    If any provision of this article or application thereof to any person or circumstances is ruled unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of this article that can be given effect without the invalid application or provision, and each invalid provision or invalid application of this article is severable. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-48, § 2(16-7.7), 7-24-2018) 
Chapter 22 - REFUSE, RECYCLING AND YARD WASTE DISPOSAL 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 22-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Garbage means organic kitchen waste, paper, and food wrappings. 
    Potentially Infectious Medical Waste (PIMW) means waste generated in connection with the diagnosis, treatment (i.e., provision of medical services) or immunization of human beings or animals; research pertaining to the provision of medical services; or the provision or testing of biologicals, including, but not limited to, cultures and stocks, human pathological wastes, human or animal blood and blood products, used sharps, unused sharps, animal waste, or isolation waste, or any other PIMW as defined in applicable regulations of the Illinois Pollution Control Board and the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, Title 35, Illinois Administrative Code, and said regulatory definitions are incorporated herein by reference. PIMW does not include waste, except used or unused sharps, generated as household waste. 
    Refuse means rubbish and garbage. 
    Rubbish means metal, wood and plastic containers; ordinary household objects, rags, clothing, and rubble. 
    Sharps means waste composed of either unused sharps and/or used sharps as defined in this section, with or without residual fluids. 
    Unused sharps means waste including but not be limited to, the following unused, discarded sharps: hypodermic, intravenous, or other needles; hypodermic or intravenous syringes; or scalpel blades. 
    Used sharps means waste, including, but not limited to, discarded sharps used in animal or human patient care, medical research, or clinical or pharmaceutical laboratories; hypodermic, intravenous, or other medical needles; hypodermic or intravenous syringes; pasteur pipettes; scalpel blades; or blood vials. This waste shall also include, but not be limited to, other types of broken or unbroken glass (including slides and cover slips) in contact with infectious agents. 
    Yard waste means yard trimmings, grass clippings, flower stems, leaves and other landscape waste as defined by the State. 
(Code 1993, § 7-1; Ord. No. 90-O-38, 6-5-1990; Ord. No. 96-O-8, 2-13-1996) 
Secs. 22-2-22-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - REFUSE STORAGE CONTAINERS 

Sec. 22-21. - Size. 
(a)  Unless otherwise specified by the Village Manager or his agent, it is the duty of every owner or his agent, or the occupant of any premises, store, house, building, flat, apartment or tenement in the village to furnish watertight containers with close-fitting covers having a capacity of not less than ten, or more than 32 gallons, and provided with suitable handles, to be used for the storage and collection of refuse. The weight of the container and its contents must not exceed 65 pounds. 
(b)  Multifamily residences, institutions, and commercial establishments may utilize commercial-type refuse containers with suitable lids if they are approved by the Director of Engineering and Public Works. 
(Code 1993, § 7-2.1; Ord. No. 89-O-31, 7-5-1989) 
Sec. 22-22. - Number required; maintenance. 
    It is the duty of every owner or his agent or the occupant of any premises, store, house, building, flat, apartment or tenement in the village to: 
(1)  Furnish sufficient storage containers to permit the storage of all refuse other than grass and hedge clippings, leaves and bulky objects therein in a manner which will insure each container is tightly covered. 
(2)  Maintain in good order and repair, each container, including covers and handles. Containers which have been determined to be unsuitable or deteriorated to the point where they can no longer be used may be removed by the village if left in the collection area for more than 72 hours after a notice has been placed on the container. If garbage or refuse is not in the required containers or is placed so it can be blown or scattered in the wind, a written notice of violation will be delivered to the premises. If, after a second notice, the violation continues, a citation charging a violation of the provisions of this section may be issued by the Village Manager or his agent. Upon conviction, the minimum fine for a first offense shall be $25.00, and for a second or subsequent offense $50.00. 
(3)  Keep underground containers free of water, snow or ice. Underground containers are prohibited in new construction. 
(Code 1993, § 7-2.2; Ord. No. 89-O-31, 7-1-1989) 
Sec. 22-23. - Location of containers. 
(a)  It is the duty of every owner, or his agent, or the occupant of any premises or building on property abutting a public alley, to provide a concentrated storage area at the alley for refuse containers, and to store all such containers in that area only for collection by the village. 
(b)  It is the duty of every owner, or his agent, or the occupant of any premises or building not on property abutting a public alley, to provide a concentrated storage area for refuse containers on his property. This storage area shall be inconspicuous from the street. No refuse of any kind or refuse containers shall be placed in any required front yard or a required side yard adjoining a street as defined by the zoning ordinance or anywhere between the actual setback of the principal building and street, except when placed in such location for collection. For such premises, refuse containers, recycling containers, and bulk items not included in refuse containers may be placed at the curb, but not earlier than 4:00 p.m. the day before collection, and said containers shall be removed from the curb no later than 6:00 p.m. on the day following collection. 
(c)  It is the responsibility of the owner or his agent or the occupant of any premises or building to store all refuse inside approved containers or inside a building prior to placement at curb or alley for collection and to maintain a clear and free access to the storage area for the refuse containers. Such access shall be free and clear of any building obstruction, bushes, or excessive snow. 
(Code 1993, § 7-2.3; Ord. No. 89-O-31, 9-15-1989; Ord. No. 2010-O-03, 1-12-2010) 
Sec. 22-24. - Depositing in streets and alleys. 
    No refuse shall be deposited in any street, alley, public way or vacant lot except in the containers specified in section 22-21. No refuse shall be so placed that it can be blown about or scattered in the wind. The Director of Engineering and Public Works or the director's designee may, at his discretion, permit the temporary storage of leaves in streets without the use of storage containers. 
(Code 1993, § 7-2.4; Ord. No. 68-O-51, 1-7-1969; Ord. No. 93-O-5, 2-23-1993) 
Sec. 22-25. - Bulky objects. 
    Bulky objects whose collection is included in the contract for refuse removal, such as wooden and paper crates or boxes and whose dimensions are in excess of 46 inches in length, 24 inches in width and 24 inches in depth shall be broken into pieces no larger than the foregoing dimensions. 
(Code 1993, § 7-2.5) 
Sec. 22-26. - Draining and wrapping of garbage. 
    All garbage, including animal excrement or offal, shall be drained and wrapped in paper or other suitable material before it is placed in refuse storage containers for removal by the village. 
(Code 1993, § 7-2.6) 
Secs. 22-27-22-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING COLLECTION 

Sec. 22-56. - Residential solid waste and recycling collection. 
(a)  The village shall provide solid waste and recycling collection for all single-family dwellings and multifamily dwellings. Said collection service may be provided by the village directly, by a contractor engaged by the village, or by an entity pursuant to a franchise approved by the village. 
(b)  Owners and occupants of said properties receiving solid waste and recycling collection service shall be liable for payment of the Solid Waste Collection Fee, as provided in article XI of chapter 6. 
(Code 1993, § 7-3.1; Ord. No. 2008-O-60, 9-9-2008) 
Sec. 22-57. - Commercial, institutional and multifamily solid waste and recycling collection. 
    Owners, lessees, and occupants, as the case may be, of commercial, industrial, institutional and multifamily properties in the village shall have their solid waste and recyclables collected by the village's solid waste franchise holder as provided in this section, unless they are specifically exempted from such requirement under section 22-61. 
(Code 1993, § 7-3.2; Ord. No. 2008-O-60, 9-9-2008) 
Sec. 22-58. - Authority to grant franchise. 
(a)  In pursuance of the public health, safety and welfare, and to better enable the village to regulate and control the services provided to the users of solid waste services, the village may provide for a franchise for the collection and disposal of solid waste for commercial, industrial, institutional and multifamily users by procurement of one or more contracts with qualified contractors. 
(b)  Such franchise may be granted by resolution adopted by the Village Board. 
(Code 1993, § 7-3.2.1; Ord. No. 2008-O-60, 9-9-2008) 
Sec. 22-59. - Franchise and license required. 
(a)  Commencing December 1, 2008, it shall be unlawful for any person or entity to engage in the business of collection, transportation or disposing of solid waste, from any commercial, industrial, institutional and multifamily building or property within the village without first having obtained a franchise from the village and made payment of the applicable business license fee as provided in chapter 24, unless said person or entity is providing such service to a building or property that has received an exemption pursuant to section 22-61. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to engage in the business of collection, transportation or disposal of solid waste, from any commercial, industrial, institutional or multifamily building within the village that has been exempted pursuant to section 22-61 without first having secured a business license as required under chapter 24. 
(Code 1993, § 7-3.2.2; Ord. No. 2008-O-60, 9-9-2008) 
Sec. 22-60. - Service under contracts. 
    All commercial, industrial, institutional and multifamily buildings shall be serviced by the solid waste franchise holder selected by the village. No person or entity owning or occupying a commercial, industrial, institutional or multifamily building shall enter into a contract for solid waste collection with a person or entity other than the village's franchise holder unless said building or property is exempted pursuant to section 22-61. 
(Code 1993, § 7-3.2.3; Ord. No. 2008-O-60, 9-9-2008) 
Sec. 22-61. - Exemption from franchised service. 
(a)  Any building or property occupied by the following users are exempt from the requirement of this article to receive solid waste service only from the village's solid waste franchise holder: 
(1)  The United States of America, or any agency or entity thereof, including, but not limited to, the United States Postal Service and the United States Coast Guard. 
(2)  The State, or any agency or entity thereof. 
(3)  A political subdivision of the State. 
(b)  In addition to the foregoing, any person or entity occupying any commercial, industrial, institutional or multifamily building may request, in writing and supported by copies of such documents described below, to the Village Manager, that they be exempted from the franchised solid waste service. The request shall specify the circumstances that necessitate such exemption status, which may include the following: 
(1)  The person or entity in question is subject to a corporate contract whose provisions are outside the person's or entity's control. 
(2)  The person or entity in question is subject to a written and binding contract with a scavenger licensed by the village entered into prior to effective date of this section, but only until the earlier of December 31, 2008, or the remaining term, without renewal, of such contract. 
(3)  The person or entity in question receives a specialized solid waste or recycling service that cannot be provided by the village's franchise holder. 
(c)  Any person or entity that has been granted an exemption from the exclusive franchise pursuant to this section shall utilize only a scavenger that is licensed by the village. 
(d)  Any person or entity denied an exemption under this section may appeal said denial in writing to the Village Board within ten days of the date of the Village Manager's written denial. 
(Code 1993, § 7-3.2.4; Ord. No. 2008-O-60, 9-9-2008) 
Sec. 22-62. - Removal of rubbish. 
    It is the duty of an owner or his agent, or an occupant of any building to see that rubbish is removed from the property at least once each week or more often if necessary to prevent a nuisance. The removal shall be accomplished in such a manner as not to create a nuisance. 
(Code 1993, § 7-4; Ord. No. 79-O-1, 1-16-1979) 
Secs. 22-63-22-82. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SCAVENGERS 

Sec. 22-83. - License required. 
    It is unlawful for any person to engage in the business of scavenger, or the disposal of animal, human, vegetable refuse or offal, except a licensed sewer or catch basin cleaner, without obtaining a license therefor as required by this Code. 
(Code 1993, § 7-5.1) 
Sec. 22-84. - Definition. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Scavenger means any person who regularly or occasionally within the village engages in the hauling of rubbish, refuse, garbage and waste materials, other than trees, tree branches, dirt, sand, gravel, crushed rock, coal, construction waste, roofing waste or similar materials, for a consideration. 
(Code 1993, § 7-5.2) 
Sec. 22-85. - Vehicles. 
    No scavenger truck shall be operated within the village unless it is equipped with a totally enclosed, compactor-type refuse collection body, watertight and maintained in a clean condition and in good repair. 
(Code 1993, § 7-5.3) 
Sec. 22-86. - Prohibited storage and disposition. 
    It is unlawful for any scavenger to store or dispose of any refuse in any place within the village or within one mile therefrom except with the permission of the Director of Engineering and Public Works or the Director's designee. 
(Code 1993, § 7-5.4; Ord. No. 93-O-5, 2-23-1993) 
Sec. 22-87. - Containers for collection of refuse by scavengers. 
    Containers provided for the collection of refuse by scavengers shall be of a type and capacity approved by the Village Manager or his agent. 
(Code 1993, § 7-5.5) 
Sec. 22-88. - Bond. 
    Before obtaining the license required by this section the applicant shall execute a bond to the village in the penal sum of $1,000.00 with surety to be approved by the Board, conditioned that the licensee will comply with the provisions of this Code and all other ordinances of the village and will also comply with and obey the directions and regulations of the Village Manager or his agent made in pursuance of law. 
(Code 1993, § 7-5.6) 
Sec. 22-89. - Removal of recycled materials. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person not under contract with the village to remove any recycling container, or to remove any recyclable item, including, but not limited to, newspapers; aluminum or bimetal cans; glass bottles or plastic milk containers placed in or adjacent to village recycling containers. 
(Code 1993, § 7-5.7; Ord. No. 89-O-19, 4-18-1989) 
Sec. 22-90. - Hours of operation. 
    No scavenger truck shall pick up prior to 7:00 a.m. or after 7:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday. No pickup is permitted on Sunday. 
(Code 1993, § 7-5.8) 
Secs. 22-91-22-108. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - COLLECTION OF LEAVES 

Sec. 22-109. - Collection from street pavement. 
    The village will remove for disposal all leaves from public and private trees and shrubs during the periods designated by the Village Manager when such leaves are deposited on the street pavement and immediately adjacent to the curb. 
(Code 1993, § 7-6.1; Ord. No. 90-O-38, 6-5-1990) 
Sec. 22-110. - Deposit of leaves in street. 
    Leaves shall be placed on the street pavement during the specified collection period in a loose condition, not in containers, and free from foreign matter such as tree branches, hedge clippings, rubble and bulky objects. 
(Code 1993, § 7-6.2; Ord. No. 68-O-51, 1-7-1969; Ord. No. 90-O-38, 6-5-1990) 
Secs. 22-111-22-133. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - YARD WASTE 

Sec. 22-134. - Village yard waste collection service. 
    The village, at its option, may provide yard waste removal service for buildings which contain residences only, subject to such regulations as may be promulgated by the Village Manager. 
(Code 1993, § 7-7.1) 
Sec. 22-135. - Resident requirements. 
    The owner or occupant of any unit receiving residential yard waste service shall: 
(1)  Place all grass clippings, prunings of small diameter, and green stemmed shrub and plant stalks in biodegradable bags. Each bag must be marked with a village-approved yard waste sticker. Bundles of brush less than four feet in length, containing branches not over three inches in diameter, that are tied with cloth or cotton twine, have a yard waste sticker attached to the twine or an individual branch, and can be easily handled by one person will also be collected. All other disposal containers, such as plastic bags, are prohibited for use in yard waste collection service. 
(2)  Place these bags with the yard waste adjacent to the alley, or at the curb if the house does not abut an alley, on the specified collection day. 
(3)  Residents have the option of renting an approved 95-gallon toter to be used for the storage and collection of yard waste. The toter must be marked with three yard waste stickers. 
(4)  The cost of the yard waste sticker is $2.25 per sticker. 
(Code 1993, § 7-7.2; Ord. No. 2002-O-100, 12-10-2002) 
Sec. 22-136. - Disposal. 
    All yard waste intended for disposal shall be kept separate from regular refuse and recyclable materials. 
(Code 1993, § 7-7.3) 
Sec. 22-137. - Compost piles. 
(a)  Compostable materials such as grass trimmings, wood waste, leaves, weeds, and other garden refuse may be placed in a compost pile, provided that it is enclosed in a fence, box or other barrier or container equal in height to the compost pile and in a manner to prevent materials from being wind blown. Said fence or box shall not exceed 100 square feet in area and shall not exceed five feet in height. The container shall be set back from the lot line equal to the setback for accessory buildings and shall not be located in the front or side yard, or on a drainage or utility easement. The depositing of garbage, pet waste, meat scraps or other materials that may attract animals or vermin to the compost pile or which may produce an obnoxious odor shall be prohibited. 
(b)  Any compost pile shall be maintained in accordance with Illinois Department of Energy and Natural Resources guide entitled, A Homeowner's Guide to Recycling Yard Wastes, (reference numbers ILENR/RR-89/03 and XO4628-650M-3-90) as hereafter may be amended from time to time, which is incorporated herein by reference. In the event of a conflict between said guide and the provisions of this Code, the Code shall supersede the guide and shall govern the maintenance of compost piles to the extent of the conflict. 
(Code 1993, § 7-7.4) 
Sec. 22-138. - Compliance. 
    Failure to maintain said compost pile as specified under section 22-137, shall constitute a nuisance as specified under chapter 16. 
(Code 1993, § 7-7.5) 
Sec. 22-139. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating any provision of this article shall be fined not less than $50.00 nor more than $750.00 for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. 
(Code 1993, § 7-7.6; Ord. No. 90-O-38, 6-5-1990; Ord. No. 96-O-11, 4-9-1996) 
Secs. 22-140-22-161. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - POTENTIALLY INFECTIOUS MEDICAL WASTE (PIMW) 

Sec. 22-162. - Unlawful disposal waste. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to introduce any Potentially Infectious Medical Waste ("PIMW") into any refuse collected by the village, or a contractor engaged by the village which provides refuse collection services pursuant to article III of this chapter. 
(Code 1993, § 7-8.1; Ord. No. 96-O-8, 2-13-1996) 
Sec. 22-163. - Sharps. 
    Any person or entity receiving refuse collection service provided pursuant to article III of this chapter, whether by the village or a contractor engaged by the village, shall be required to dispose of sharps in the manner provided in this section. 
(1)  Sharps shall be placed in a container which is: 
a.  Rigid; 
b.  Leak-resistant; 
c.  Puncture-resistant; 
d.  Impervious to moisture; 
e.  Of a strength sufficient to prevent tearing or bursting under normal conditions of use or handling; 
f.  Sealed to prevent leakage during transport; 
g.  Identified by the Universal Biohazard Symbol, as depicted in the applicable regulations of the Illinois Pollution Control Board, title 35, Illinois Administrative Code; and 
h.  Otherwise complies with applicable regulations of the Illinois Pollution Control Board and the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, title 35, Illinois Administrative Code, and said regulations are incorporated herein by reference. 
(2)  Sharps containers must be disposed of with a health care provider, hospital or other person or entity permitted by applicable law to receive PIMW, or may be disposed of at another location designated by the Community Development Department. 
(Code 1993, § 7-8.2; Ord. No. 96-O-8, 2-13-1996) 
Chapter 24 - REGULATION OF CERTAIN COMMERCIAL AND QUASI-COMMERCIAL ACTIVITIES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 24-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Business means any person, sole proprietorship, partnership, corporation or other legal entity which engages in a commercial activity for remuneration within the village. The term "business" shall include, but shall not be limited to, a retail establishment, a resale store, a restaurant, a food handler, a service establishment, a manufacturing establishment, a bank office or retail location, a real estate sales office or retail location, an insurance agency office or retail location, a consulting firm, a law firm office or retail location, a medical or dental office or retail location, a veterinary office, an accounting firm, a travel agent, a general contractor, an electrical contractor, a plumbing contractor office or retail location, an excavation contractor, a publisher, a securities brokerage firm office or retail location, a photography studio, a printer, a theater, a place of amusement, a gasoline service station, a vehicle repair facility, an outdoor advertiser, a tobacco dealer, a tanning salon, a landscaper, a pesticide sprayer, a lawn fertilizer or weed sprayer, a laundromat, a laundry, or a dry cleaner. The term "landscaper" shall be deemed to include a business engaged in tree removal or tree trimming. The term "business" shall not include any of the following: 
(1)  A home occupation as defined in section 30-2.4 of appendix A, the Zoning Ordinance. 
(2)  An entity which is exempt from income taxation under section 501 of the Internal Revenue Code, except any such entity which acts as a retail food handler at any time during a calendar year shall be required to obtain a Food Handler License for each location where it engages in that activity. 
(3)  An entity which does not maintain a place of business in a building within the village, provided that this subsection (3) shall not apply to an entity engaged within the village in landscaping services, pesticide spraying services, lawn fertilizing or weed spraying services, pickup and delivery of laundry or dry cleaning at dwelling units, milk delivery at dwelling units, outdoor advertising, garbage or refuse pickup, a retail food handler, or an activity requiring a building, plumbing, electrical, demolition, tree removal or excavation permit. 
(4)  A general contractor, an electrical contractor, a plumbing contractor, an excavation contractor, or other entity engaged in building and construction activities which does not perform any work for remuneration in the village. 
(5)  A governmental unit, except any such unit which acts as a retail food handler at any time during a calendar year shall be required to obtain a Food Handler License for each location where it engages in that activity. 
(6)  A public utility or cable television company which is subject to regulation by the Federal Communications Commission or the Illinois Commerce Commission and which operates in the village pursuant to a franchise agreement with the village. 
(7)  The actual practice of a trade or business which is licensed and/or regulated exclusively by the State or the United States government, including, but not limited to, a bank, real estate brokers or sales agents, an insurance agency or a law firm. This exception for such licensed and/or regulated business shall not apply to the maintenance of a physical office, retail or industrial location in the village by such a business for the purposes of enforcing the zoning, building and public health and safety codes of the village. 
    Contractor means a general contractor, an electrical contractor, a plumbing contractor, an excavation contractor, or other entity engaged in building and construction activities requiring a building, plumbing, electrical, demolition, tree removal or excavation permit. 
    Downtown Wilmette means the area bounded by Linden Avenue on the South, 11th Street on the East, Lake Avenue on the North and the public alley parallel to and West of Green Bay Road on the West. 
    Dry cleaner means any business which removes dirt, grease, paint, spots, stains or any other form of foreign matter from wearing apparel or household furnishings, by any means other than washing with soap or detergent and water, including any business which makes available for public use any automatic dry cleaning machine using perchlorethylene or any other chemical solvent or substance. 
    Firearm means any device, by whatever name known, which is designed or may be readily converted to expel a projectile or projectiles by the action of an explosive or propellant, or by an expansion or escape of gas generated by the process of combustion or ignition, or the component parts of the foregoing, or any combination of component parts either designed or intended for use in converting any device into a firearm as described herein. The definition of the term "firearm" excludes, however: 
(1)  Any "air rifle," as defined in section 12-555; 
(2)  Any safety device used exclusively for signaling or safety and required or recommended by the U.S. Coast Guard; 
(3)  Any device used exclusively for the firing of stud cartridges, explosive rivets or similar construction or industrial ammunition; and 
(4)  Model rockets designed to propel a model vehicle in a vertical direction. 
    Firearms dealer means any person who, at any location in the village: 
(1)  Sells or rents firearms or their component parts. 
(2)  Engages in the business of manufacturing firearms or their component parts for remuneration. 
(3)  Engages in the business of repairing firearms or making or fitting special barrels, trigger mechanisms, stocks or grips for firearms for remuneration. 
    Food handler means a business which sells, prepares or stores food or beverages intended for human consumption, or places having kitchen, banquet or similar facilities that are rented out or otherwise made available to outside persons or entities for banquet or other special event use, where food intended for human consumption that has been prepared off-site is served for human consumption. The forgoing includes, but is not limited to, a business engaged in the automatic vending or mobile catering of food or beverages, a bakery, a grocery store, an ice cream store, a milk dealer, a refrigerated locker, a restaurant, and a banquet hall, rental hall or similar facility held out for rental or use by outside persons or entities. 
    Gasoline service station means a business engaged in the sale of gasoline, diesel fuel, compressed natural gas, or other flammable liquid or gas intended to be used as motor fuel. 
    Gross floor area means the sum total of all the area in square feet occupied by a business, which includes all indoor floor area of each location and activity of said business as described in section 24-3(d). 
    Laundromat means any business which contains one or more coin operated devices or machines available to the public for the cleaning of clothes or fabrics by use of soap or detergent and water. 
    Licensed massage therapist means an individual who holds a current and valid massage therapist license issued by the State pursuant to the provisions of the Illinois Massage Licensing Act (225 ILCS 57/1 et seq.), now or hereafter amended. 
    Massage or massage therapy shall have the same definition as that provided in the Illinois Massage Licensing Act (225 ILCS 57/1 et seq.), now or hereafter amended. 
    Massage apprentice or massage student means a person studying massage under the direction and supervision of a certified massage therapist as part of a program for the apprentice or student to gain individual certification as a massage therapist. 
    Massage establishment means any establishment having a fixed place of business where any person, firm, partnership, association, or corporation engages in, or carries on, or permits to be engaged in or carried on any massage or massage therapy. A "massage establishment" shall not include any of the following: 
(1)  A dwelling where the business providing service is otherwise in compliance with the applicable provisions of appendix A, the Zoning Ordinance, governing home occupations; or 
(2)  Out-call massage services; or 
(3)  A primary or secondary school, whether public or private, licensed by the State; or 
(4)  An establishment or institution owned and operated by a unit of local government; or 
(5)  A hospital, nursing home, or sanitarium, licensed by the State. 
    Newsrack means any self-service or coin-operated box, container, storage unit or other dispenser installed, used, or maintained for the sale or distribution of newspapers or other news periodicals. 
    Out-call massage service means any business, the function of which is to engage in or carry on massages at a location designated by the customer or client, rather than at a massage establishment or as part of a home occupation as defined in appendix A, the Zoning Ordinance. 
    Outdoor advertiser means a business which: 
(1)  Places, posts or paints any advertisements, notices or displays in or on any place, other than its own place of business, for the purpose of outdoor advertising so that the resultant display is visible from any street; or 
(2)  Which distributes any commercial circulars, handbills, advertising materials, or samples in or around public places or door-to-door. 
    Parkway means the area between the sidewalk and the curb of any street, and where there is no sidewalk, the area between the edge of the roadway and property line adjacent thereto. The term "parkway" shall also include any area within a roadway which is not open to vehicular travel. 
    Person means any individual or entity. 
    Place of amusement means a business which provides any of the following forms of amusement to its patrons within the village means bowling, billiards, pool or other sports or recreational activities in which patrons participate; music for dancing; motion pictures; or theatrical performances. 
    Roadway means that portion of a street improved, designed, or ordinarily used for vehicular travel. 
    Sexual or genital area means the genitals, pubic area, anus, or perineum of any person. 
    Sidewalk means a walkway provided by the village for pedestrian traffic. 
    Smokeless tobacco means any finely cut, ground, powdered or leaf tobacco that is intended to be placed in the oral cavity. 
    Street means the entire area dedicated to public use for public street purposes and shall include, but not be limited to, roadways, parkways, alleys and sidewalks. 
    Tobacco dealer means any business engaged in the sale of tobacco products at retail within the village. 
    Tobacco paper means either: 
(1)  Cigarette paper, being paper or any other material except tobacco, prepared for use as a cigarette wrapper; or 
(2)  Cigarette tubes, being cigarette paper made into a hollow cylinder for use in making cigarettes; or 
(3)  Vaporizers which are intended to simulate smoking tobacco, electronic cigarettes (a/k/a e-cigs or e-cigarettes), or any electronic nicotine delivery system typically, but not necessarily battery powered, which produce an aerosol which delivers nicotine to the user by means of inhalation. 
    Tobacco product means any substance containing tobacco leaf, including, but not limited to, any cigar, cigarette, leaf tobacco, pipe tobacco, smokeless tobacco, or tobacco in any of its forms. The term "tobacco products" also includes vaporizers which are intended to simulate smoking tobacco, electronic cigarettes (a/k/a e-cigs or e-cigarettes), or any electronic nicotine delivery system typically, but not necessarily battery powered, which produce an aerosol which delivers nicotine to the user by means of inhalation. 
    Tobacco vending machine means any device, whether mechanical, electrical or electronic, which dispenses any tobacco product upon the insertion of any form of payment, whether money, coins, tokens, debit card, or any other form of payment. 
    Valet customer means any person granting temporary custody of a motor vehicle to a valet parking operator for the purpose of valet parking. 
    Valet loading zone means a location which has been approved by the village and designated as an area for pick up and discharge for valet parking. 
    Valet parking operator means a corporation, partnership, business association, or other organizational entity who, through its agents and employees, provides valet parking services in the Central Business District. 
    Valet parking services means a service provided to customers by which an attendant on behalf of a business takes temporary custody of the customer's vehicle and moves, parks, stores or retrieves the vehicle for the customer's convenience. 
    Village means the Village of Wilmette, a municipal corporation which is a home-rule general purpose governmental unit of the State. 
(Code 1993, § 5-1.1; Ord. No. 94-0-5, 3-13-1994; Ord. No. 97-O-27, 10-14-1997; Ord. No. 2002-O-79, 2-25-2003; Ord. No. 2004-O-97, 11-9-2004; Ord. No. 2005-O-5, 2-22-2005; Ord. No. 2005-O-16, 4-26-2005; Ord. No. 2005-O-118, 12-3-2005; Ord. No. 2013-O-45, 11-26-2013; Ord. No. 2014-O-49, § 1, 9-9-2014; Ord. No. 2016-O-31, 6-28-2016) 
Sec. 24-2. - Issuance, renewal and revocation of licenses. 
(a)  Conflicts with other provisions. To the extent that the general provisions of this section conflict with other specific provisions of this Code or other village ordinances, the general provisions of this section shall not apply to the activity covered by such other specific provisions, and such other provisions shall be given full force and effect. 
(b)  Application. An application for a license required by this Code or any other ordinance of the village shall be made in writing under oath to the village on a form prescribed by the Finance Director. Each application shall contain the following information and such other information as may be required to determine whether the license should be granted: 
(1)  The name and residential address of the applicant, who shall be the principal owner in the case of a non-corporate entity or the president in the case of a corporate entity. 
(2)  The addresses of the permanent places of business within the village covered by the application, or, if there are no permanent places within the village, the address of the permanent place or location most closely involved with the business or activity covered by the application. 
(3)  A description of the business or activity for which the license is requested. 
(4)  The period of time for which the license is requested. 
(5)  Any information required by the Finance Director to determine the appropriate fee for the license, including the gross floor area of the business. 
(c)  Forms. Forms for all licenses, and all applications therefor, may be prepared and kept on file by the Finance Director. 
(d)  Investigations and inspections. An applicant for a license or the holder of a license shall permit the village to conduct appropriate investigations and inspections to determine the applicant's eligibility for the license and the holder's compliance with the requirements of the license. Such inspections may include inspections of any building or premises where the licensed business or activity is conducted or proposed to be conducted. Such investigations or inspections may be conducted by the official specified in this Code or other village ordinances, or by that official's designated representative. Whenever the analysis of any commodity or material used in a business or activity covered by a license, including, but not limited to, food or beverages, is reasonably necessary to secure compliance with this Code or other village ordinances, or to detect violation thereof, the holder of the license shall upon request promptly provide sufficient samples of the material or commodity to an authorized representative of the village to allow analysis thereof. 
(e)  Issuance of license. The Finance Director shall issue the license pursuant to the application if the application is in proper form, the license fee is paid in advance, and any investigation or inspection shows that the conduct of the business or activity would not violate this Code or other village ordinances. The Finance Director may also issue a conditional license when an investigation or inspection discloses a condition which must be corrected, when the applicant has provided satisfactory assurance that the condition will be corrected within a reasonable time, and the conduct of the business or activity pending the correction of the condition will not endanger the public health, safety or welfare. The Finance Director may, in the exercise of the Finance Director's discretion, permit the Director of Community Development to perform any of the foregoing functions in relation to the issuance of business licenses to contractors. 
(f)  Term of license. All licenses shall be effective for a calendar year. 
(g)  Notice of expiration. The Finance Director shall give the holder of a license a notice of expiration at least 30 days prior to the end of the calendar year. However, a failure to give notice, or the failure of the holder to receive it, does not excuse the holder from obtaining a new license and shall not be a defense to a citation for operating without a license. 
(h)  Duty to notify Finance Director of changes. The applicant or holder of a license shall have a duty to notify the Finance Director of any changes in the information contained in an application which is pending or which was the basis for the issuance of a license. 
(i)  Transfer. No license shall be assigned or transferred, nor shall any license authorize any person other than the applicant to conduct business under such license. 
(j)  Suspension and revocation. In addition to any other penalty which may be authorized by this Code or other village ordinances, the Village Manager may suspend or revoke any license issued pursuant to this chapter if the holder refuses to allow a required inspection or jeopardizes public health, safety or welfare by violating this Code, other village ordinances, or state or federal laws or regulations which apply to the licensed business or activity. The procedure for suspension or revocation of any license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be as follows: 
(1)  Notice of hearing on suspension or revocation of license. Except as provided in subsection (j)(2) of this section, prior to the revocation or suspension of a license, the licensee be afforded a public hearing before the Village Manager, and shall be served with a written notice stating the nature of the violations alleged and the date, time and place of a public hearing at which the Village Manager will receive evidence concerning the alleged violation. Notice of the hearing shall be hand-delivered to the licensee's place of business and shall be sent by certified mail, postage prepaid, to the address of the applicant for the license as stated on the license application, and service shall be deemed complete at the time the notice is deposited in the mail. The hearing date shall be set no sooner than five days after the date of service without the agreement of the licensee. 
(2)  Summary suspension pending expedited hearing. Where the Corporation Counsel or the Chief of Police, or their respective designees, present to the Village Manager sufficient evidence demonstrating probable cause to believe that the licensee has violated the provisions of this Code or of the laws of the United States or the State, and that said violation will immediately threaten the public health, safety or welfare, the Village Manager may, upon the issuance of a written order stating the reason for such conclusion and without prior notice or hearing, order the licensed premises closed and the license summarily suspended pending a public hearing and determination on suspension or revocation. Said hearing shall be commenced not more than seven days following entry of such an order, unless the licensee shall agree to a longer period of time. Upon entry of an order of summary suspension, the licensee shall be served with a copy of the order and notice of violation and hearing in the manner provided in subsection (j)(1) of this section. 
(3)  Hearing on suspension or revocation. All public hearings conducted by the Village Manager incident to the revocation or suspension of any license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be hearings of record. Any order of suspension or revocation shall be based on written findings of fact, and such findings shall be supported by substantial evidence in the light of the whole record. An order of suspension or revocation shall be served on the licensee in the manner provided in subsection (j)(1) of this section. The failure of the licensee to appear at the hearing shall be deemed a waiver of the licensee's right to present evidence in denial of the complaint of violation or in mitigation of such punishment as may be imposed, and the Village Manager may proceed to make a determination on the complaint in the licensee's absence. The decision of the Village Manager shall be final, unless timely appealed in the manner provided in subsection (j)(4) of this section. 
(4)  Appeal to the Village Board of Trustees. A licensee may appeal the action of the Village Manager suspending or revoking a license to the Village President and Board of Trustees. Said appeal shall be perfected by written notice given to the President within 30 days from the date when notice of suspension or revocation was issued. Said notice shall describe the order appealed from and state the reasons why the order should be overturned or modified. The review of the Village Manager's order shall be on the record made before the Village Manager, and no new evidence shall be accepted by the Village Board. The Village Board may hear and determine the appeal during the course of a regular or special meeting, and may permit the parties to make written or oral arguments on the record, as it shall determine. The decision of the Village Board shall be final. 
(k)  Posting. The license or a copy thereof shall be conspicuously posted at all times at the addresses set forth on the application pursuant to subsection (b)(2) of this section. 
(Code 1993, § 5-1.2; Ord. No. 94-0-5, 3-13-1994; Ord. No. 97-O-9, 2-25-1997; Ord. No. 2002-O-100, 12-10-2002) 
Sec. 24-3. - General Business License. 
(a)  License required. No business shall operate within the village without a valid General Business License issued by the village. A business which operates within the village shall be required to obtain, in addition to a General Business License, such other licenses or permits as apply to the business, as set forth in this Code or other village ordinances. 
(b)  Annual fee. The annual fee for a Business License shall be the following amount, which shall be in addition to the fee for any other license required by this Code or other village ordinances: 
(1)  The annual fee for a contractor shall be $80.00. 
(2)  The annual fee for a business which has a gross floor area of zero to 3,000 square feet shall be $80.00. 
(3)  The annual fee for a business which has a gross floor area of in excess of 3,000 to 10,000 square feet shall be $160.00. 
(4)  The annual fee for a business which has a gross floor area in excess of 10,000 square feet shall be $235.00. 
(c)  Late penalty. Except as to those contractors covered by subsection (b)(1) of this section, the annual fee for a business operating within the village shall be paid to the village no later than January 31 of any given year. Any business that fails to pay the annual fee on or before January 31 shall be required to pay the applicable annual fee set forth in subsections (b)(2) through (b)(4) of this section, plus shall pay a late penalty in the amount of 100 percent of the annual fee due. 
(d)  Several locations or activities. A business which has more than one location or which performs more than one business activity within the village shall be treated as a single business for the purposes of this chapter if the several locations and activities are conducted under one business name and are held out to the public as a single, integrated business operation. 
(Code 1993, § 5-2.1; Ord. No. 94-O-5, 3-13-1994; Ord. No. 2003-O-89, 11-24-2003; Ord. No. 2005-O-104, 11-21-2005; Ord. No. 2007-O-87, 11-27-2007; Ord. No. 2009-O-72, 11-24-2009; Ord. No. 2015-O-67, 11-24-2015) 
Sec. 24-4. - 24-Hour Business License. 
(a)  License required. Except for a business engaged in public transportation or livery service, no business shall be open to the public, accept deliveries from a vehicle with above-D Illinois commercial vehicle license plates or equivalent out-of-state truck license plates, or engage in any outdoor operations or activities related to the business within the village between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 5:30 a.m. without a valid 24-Hour Business License issued by the village. Responding to an emergency request for service between 1:00 a.m. and 5:30 a.m. because of an imminent danger to person or property shall not be considered to be operating within the village during those hours so as to require a license under this section. 
(b)  Annual fee. The annual fee for a 24-Hour Business License shall be $50.00. 
(c)  Application, contents, approval. An application for a 24-Hour Business License must be approved by the Village Manager, Chief of Police and Director of Community Development annually on the basis of the standards set forth in subsection (f) of this section. Applications for renewal of a 24-Hour Business License shall be submitted no later than 90 days prior to expiration of the current license. A determination shall be made within 30 days after the submission of a complete application for original issuance or renewal, as the case may be, and license fee, upon which the Village Manager, Chief of Police and Director of Community Development shall cause the issuance of the 24-Hour Business License if it is approved, or shall give the applicant written notice of denial and the reasons therefor. An application for a 24-Hour Business License, in addition to the information required for a general business license, shall also include the following information and materials: 
(1)  A description of the business activities anticipated to occur on the licensed premises, the hours over which they are expected to occur, and the number of employees anticipated to be on the premises during the hours covered by the 24-Hour Business License. 
(2)  A copy of the ordinance adopted by the Board of Trustees granting a special use permit to the applicant to allow the operation of a 24-hour business at the particular location for which the 24-Hour Business License is being sought. 
(3)  The name, address and telephone number of at least two persons not on the premises who may be contacted in the event of an emergency occurring on the premises. 
(d)  Term of license. Any license approved for issuance or renewal by the Village Manager, Chief of Police and Director of Community Development shall be effective from and after the date of issuance and for a period of one year. 
(e)  Appeal. If the Village Manager, Chief of Police and Director of Community Development determine that a 24-Hour Business License should not be issued, such determination may be appealed to the President and Board of Trustees, provided that such appeal shall be made within 30 days of the date on which the applicant was notified of such determination. An appeal must be made by the applicant in writing, shall be served on the Village Clerk within the foregoing time limit, and shall state the reasons why the determination to deny the 24-hour license was erroneous and should be reversed. The decision of the Board of Trustees on the appeal shall be final. 
(f)  Standards of review for issuance or renewal. A 24-Hour Business License shall be issued or renewed, as the case may be, unless the Village Manager, Chief of Police and Director of Community Development, in the case of applications processed under subsection (c) of this section, or the President and Board of Trustees, in the case of appeals taken under subsection (e) of this section, find that: 
(1)  The applicant has failed to obtain a special use permit under the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance, appendix A of this Code, to operate the 24-hour business, or such special use permit has been terminated under the provisions of appendix A, the Zoning Ordinance, or otherwise by operation of law; or 
(2)  The operation of the 24-hour business, as described in an application for renewal of a 24-hour license, would violate or exceed the terms of the ordinance granting the special use permit under appendix A, the Zoning Ordinance, originally obtained for operation of the 24-hour business, or as may have been duly amended by the Board of Trustees; or 
(3)  The general business license or a 24-Hour Business License covering the licensed premises has been revoked; or 
(4)  The application does not contain the material required by subsection (c) of this section; or 
(5)  The operation of the 24-hour business in the manner described in the application for original issuance or renewal would violate any other provision of this chapter, the provisions of any other chapter of this Code or the provisions of any state or federal law or regulation which apply to the licensed business. 
(g)  Compliance with other laws and ordinances. 
(1)  A 24-Hour Business License shall be granted only to those businesses for which the Board of Trustees has adopted an ordinance granting special use permit to operate a 24-hour business under the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance, appendix A. Operation of a 24-Hour Business Licensed under this subsection shall be subject to all the terms and conditions of the Zoning Ordinance generally, and to all the terms and conditions that may be imposed by the Board of Trustees in their discretion in the ordinance granting the special use permit to operate the 24-hour business. 
(2)  Nothing in this subsection shall be deemed to permit to allow any operation, practice or conduct that would constitute a violation of the provisions of this chapter, or the provisions of any other chapter of this Code. 
(h)  Suspension and revocation. A 24-Hour Business License may be suspended or revoked for violation of any of the provisions of this section, for violation of any of the other provisions of this article, for violation of appendix A, the Zoning Ordinance, or of the provisions of the ordinance adopted by the Board of Trustees granting the Special Use Permit to operate the 24-hour business, or for violation of state or federal law or regulation that applies to the licensed business. The procedure for suspension or revocation shall be that as provided for in section 24-2(j). Nothing herein shall be deemed to limit or impair the right or authority of the village to prosecute separately any violation of this chapter, or to seek any remedy available at law or in equity for violation of the provisions of this chapter. 
(i)  Scope of license. A 24-Hour Business License shall be effective only with respect to the premises described in the application and license. A new application shall be required, including a new or amended ordinance granting or modifying a special use permit, if the nature or location of the business is changed and if the business as changed or relocated is to be operated between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 5:30 a.m. 
(Code 1993, § 5-2.2; Ord. No. 94-0-5, 3-13-1994; Ord. No. 99-O-34, 4-27-1999) 
Sec. 24-5. - Food Handler License. 
(a)  License required. No food handler shall operate within the village without a valid license issued by the village. 
(b)  Annual fee. The annual fee for a Food Handler License shall be based upon the facility classifications set forth in the Food Service Code (Ill. Admin. Code, ch. 77, pt. 750, 750.10), and are as follows: 
(1)  Category I Facility: $175.00. 
(2)  Category II Facility: $305.00. 
(3)  Category III Facility: $435.00. 
(c)  Single Event Food Handler Permit. 
(1)  Requirement. A Single Event Food Handler Permit is required for any food handler preparing food for a single specified event, including, but not limited to, fairs, festivals, fundraisers, and celebrations, where the food will be prepared on-site at a location other than at a facility where a Food Handler License under this section is otherwise required. 
a.  The Village Sanitarian shall have the authority to require a Single Event Food Handler Permit when in his/her determination the type of food and/or the conditions under which it is being handled or stored at the event, make it is necessary to protect against, or minimize the risk of, public health hazards. 
b.  Food handlers that currently hold a valid Food Handler License issued by the village under subsections (a) and (b) of this section, are not exempt from the requirement to obtain a Single Event Food Handler Permit to the extent that the food preparation is occurring at a location other than at the facility for which the Food Handler License applies. 
(2)  Application submittal. A complete application for a Single Event Food Handler Permit shall be made to the Department of Community Development on a form to be supplied by the village and must be filed with the Department of Community Development at least ten business days, excluding holidays, prior to the proposed specified event. 
(3)  Permit fee and surcharge for late filing. The fee for the issuance of a Single Event Food Handler Permit shall be $25.00. In addition to payment of the permit fee stated herein, any applicant whose permit application is not filed at least ten business days prior to the proposed specified event as required by subsection (c)(2) of this section, shall also pay to the village a surcharge of $25.00 prior to any review of the application by the Department of Community Development. 
(4)  Duration. The Single Event Food Handler Permit shall be valid only for the event and dates specified on the permit. To the extent an event covered by this subsection is held on a subsequent occasion, or on a periodic basis (such as an annual fair), a new permit must be obtained and the permit fee must be paid for each separate event. 
(d)  Unwholesome or adulterated food. No licensee shall sell, offer for sale or keep for the purpose of selling or offering for sale any food or beverages intended for human consumption which is spoiled or tainted or is unwholesome or unfit for human consumption, or which has been adulterated in any material way, or which does not comply with applicable federal, state, and county statutes, regulations, or ordinances. All tainted, unwholesome or adulterated food or beverages intended for human consumption may be condemned by the Sanitarian and shall thereupon be seized and destroyed by the Sanitarian or any police officer. 
(e)  Condition of premises. Premises used for the sale or storage of food or beverages intended for human consumption must be kept in a clean and sanitary condition under regulations prescribed by the Sanitarian. 
(f)  Refrigerated locker. The following regulations shall apply to a food handler that operates a refrigerated locker in which compartments are rented, leased or made available to anyone other than the applicant: 
(1)  The application shall state, in addition to the information required under section 24-2(b), the number of units maintained on the premises, the size of each unit, and the number of separate units which will be rented to or used by persons other than the owner. 
(2)  No license shall be issued if the refrigerated locker does not comply with the laws of the State pertaining thereto. 
(3)  No refrigerated locker shall be operated so as to bear a live load of 100 or more pounds per square foot. 
(4)  No food shall be stored in any refrigerated locker unless such food has been frozen to a temperature of zero degrees Fahrenheit or below before being so stored; and the lockers or compartments used for the refrigerated storage of food must be kept at all times at a temperature below 15 degrees Fahrenheit. 
(g)  Sale from vehicles. It shall be unlawful to sell, offer for sale, or peddle any candy, ice cream, confection, or other food or beverage for human consumption from any motor vehicle or other vehicle or cart of any kind, upon any public street or other public property, unless pursuant to a temporary use permit issued under the provisions of appendix A, the Zoning Ordinance. 
(h)  Incorporation of other laws and regulations. The following federal and state food service sanitation codes, ordinances and regulations are hereby adopted by reference, three copies of which are on file in the office of the Village Clerk: 
(1)  The unabridged form of the 1976 and subsequent editions of the U.S. Food and Drug Administration's Food Service Sanitation Ordinance, or such successor regulations as may be promulgated; 
(2)  Rules 750.540, 750.550 and 750.560 of the current Illinois Department of Public Health's Food Service Sanitation Rules and Regulations, or such applicable successor regulations as may be promulgated by the Illinois Department of Public Health. 
(i)  Inspection. The Sanitarian shall make regular inspections of the building or premises used by a food handler to assure that they are being operated in accordance with this Code, other village ordinances, and the laws of the State pertaining thereto. 
(j)  Reinspection and fee. If the Sanitarian, during the course of a regular inspection, finds that a food handler is not operating in accordance with this Code, other village ordinances, or the laws of the State pertaining thereto, the Sanitarian may allow the food handler to continue to operate, provided that the food handler shall be required to correct the unlawful condition by a specified date, and provided that the conduct of the business or activity pending the correction of the condition will not endanger the public health, safety or welfare. The Sanitarian shall reinspect the building or premises used by the food handler to verify that the condition has been corrected by the specified date. If the Sanitarian is required to make more than one reinspection before the food handler corrects the condition, the food handler shall be required to pay a reinspection fee of $100.00 for each reinspection after the first reinspection. 
(Code 1993, § 5-2.3; Ord. No. 94-0-5, 3-13-1994; Ord. No. 2003-O-89, 11-24-2003; Ord. No. 2005-O-104, 11-21-2005; Ord. No. 2007-O-87, 11-27-2007; Ord. No. 2009-O-72, 11-24-2009; Ord. No. 2010-O-71, 11-23-2010; Ord. No. 2011-O-20, 4-12-2011) 
Sec. 24-6. - Gasoline Service Station License. 
(a)  License required. No gasoline service station shall be operated within the village without a valid gasoline service station license issued by the village. 
(b)  Annual fee. The annual fee for a gasoline service station license shall be $50.00. 
(c)  Storage tanks. Tanks or containers used for the storage of any flammable liquid or gas shall be free from leaks and shall be constructed in accordance with this Code, other village ordinances, and federal and State law and regulations pertaining thereto. Except as permitted by such ordinances and laws, no tank or container for storage of flammable liquids shall be located within any building. 
(d)  Accumulation of waste. It shall be unlawful for any operator of a gasoline service station to permit or maintain any accumulation of waste or other material which is combustible so as to create a fire hazard on any premises used as a gasoline service station. 
(e)  Inspection. The Fire Chief shall make regular inspections of gasoline service stations to ensure that they are being operated in accordance with this Code, any other ordinance of the village, and the federal and state law pertaining thereto. 
(f)  Reinspection and fee. If the Fire Chief, during the course of a regular inspection, finds that a gasoline service station is not operating in accordance with this Code, other village ordinances, or federal or State law pertaining thereto, the Fire Chief may allow the gasoline service station to continue to operate, provided that the gasoline service station shall be required to correct the unlawful condition by a specified date, and provided that the conduct of the business or activity pending the correction of the condition will not endanger the public health, safety or welfare. The Fire Chief shall reinspect the gasoline service station to verify that the condition has been corrected by the specified date. If the Fire Chief is required to make more than one reinspection before the gasoline service station corrects the condition, the gasoline service station shall be required to pay a reinspection fee of $100.00 for each reinspection after the first reinspection. 
(Code 1993, § 5-2.4; Ord. No. 94-0-5, 3-13-1994) 
Sec. 24-7. - Firearms dealers prohibited. 
    No person shall engage in the activity of firearms dealer in the village, and no business license shall be granted by the village to any firearms dealer. 
(Code 1993, § 5-2.5; Ord. No. 94-0-5, 3-13-1994) 
Secs. 24-8-24-32. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OUTDOOR RESTAURANT 

Sec. 24-33. - Outdoor Restaurant Seating and Cooking License. 
(a)  No person or entity shall operate a business licensed as a food handler as provided in section 24-5, which provides outdoor seating for the purpose of serving food or beverages to customers, or provides for the outdoor cooking, through the use of a grill, rotisserie or other heat source, of food, without a valid license as provided in this section. Said license shall be in addition to any other license required by this article, including a Food Handler License. 
(b)  A person or entity lawfully operating a restaurant with outdoor seating pursuant to a special use or variation adopted by ordinance by the village prior to July 1, 1995, shall be bound by the terms of that ordinance and shall not be required to obtain a license under this section. 
(Code 1993, § 5-2.6; Ord. No. 2010-O-23, 4-27-2010) 
Sec. 24-34. - Eligibility; application for license. 
    An Outdoor Restaurant Seating and Cooking License shall be granted only to the operator of a business which holds a valid Category I and II Food Handler License as provided in section 24-5. An application for an Outdoor Restaurant Seating and Cooking License shall be on a form provided by the Director of Community Development and shall provide each of the following: 
(1)  The name and mailing address of the applicant. 
(2)  A detailed drawing to scale of the proposed site indicating the following means the existing facade, the points of ingress and egress, the proposed location of the tables, chairs, serving equipment, planters, borders, awnings, umbrellas, or other facilities to be included in the outdoor seating area. If the application proposes only the outdoor cooking of food, then the drawing shall depict the location and type of cooking equipment. If the outdoor cooking or seating area is proposed to be located on a village sidewalk or other public right-of-way, the drawings must also include the location of existing public improvements, including fire hydrants, street signs, street lights, traffic signals, bus shelters, mail boxes, trees and tree grates, parking meters, planting boxes or planting areas, fire escapes or other overhead obstructions, and any other public obstruction. 
(3)  A copy of a valid Food Handler License. 
(4)  The annual license fee. 
(Code 1993, § 5-2.6.1; Ord. No. 2010-O-23, 4-27-2010) 
Sec. 24-35. - Administrative review. 
    When the Director of Community Development determines that the application is complete, the application shall be reviewed by the Site Plan Review Committee, as defined in chapter 8, who shall determine whether it is in conformance with the requirements of this section, and shall require of the applicant such changes to the application and plan as may be necessary to ensure compliance with the requirements of this section. Upon being advised of the satisfactory completion of this review, the Director of Finance shall issue the Outdoor Restaurant Seating License. 
(Code 1993, § 5-2.6.2; Ord. No. 2010-O-23, 4-27-2010) 
Sec. 24-36. - License requirements. 
    Issuance and continued enjoyment of the Outdoor Restaurant Seating License shall be conditioned on the following: 
(1)  The licensee shall comply with all applicable federal, state, and village health and sanitation laws and regulations, and operation of the outdoor restaurant seating or cooking area shall not be detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare of persons residing or working in the vicinity. 
(2)  No outdoor keeping or storage of food or beverages to be served shall be permitted, except that for immediate cooking. No open keeping or storage of used dishes, utensils or food scraps shall be permitted. Self-closing outside trash containers shall be provided as required by the Village Sanitarian. 
(3)  Operation of outdoor restaurant seating areas shall be permitted only at such times as the main place of business is open, and in no event before 6:00 a.m. or after 11:00 p.m. 
(4)  Doors from a main restaurant to an outdoor restaurant seating area shall be self-closing. 
(5)  No animals, except those assisting the disabled, shall be allowed in the outdoor restaurant seating or cooking area. 
(6)  The sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages in the outdoor seating area shall be restricted by the liquor license governing the restaurant. Any outdoor seating area where alcoholic beverages are sold or consumed shall be enclosed by a border and shall be supervised at all times by an employee of the restaurant. No alcoholic beverages may be removed from the outdoor seating area, except to the interior of the restaurant. 
(7)  The outdoor seating area shall be accessible to the disabled, and the licensee shall at all times comply with all applicable federal, state and village laws, ordinances and regulations concerning accessibility and non-discrimination in the providing of services. 
(8)  The outdoor seating area shall not obstruct any fire exit, fire escape, or other required ingress or egress. 
(Code 1993, § 5-2.6.3) 
Sec. 24-37. - Additional requirements for outdoor restaurant seating and cooking areas located on public sidewalks or the public right-of-way. 
    In addition to the requirements set forth in section 24-36, issuance and continued enjoyment of the Outdoor Restaurant Seating License, where the seating will be located on a public sidewalk or right-of-way, shall be conditioned on the following: 
(1)  The use of public sidewalks or right-of-way for cooking or outdoor restaurant seating shall be permitted only when incidental to the operation of a business licensed as a Category I and II Food Handler on private contiguous property and only along the frontage of said business. 
(2)  Where the frontage of such business on private contiguous property is of such a length which would permit a maximum of fewer than four tables to be established pursuant to this section, the licensee may place additional tables on the public sidewalk immediately adjacent to the licensee's place of business, provided that: 
a.  The additional sidewalk proposed to be used is in front of another commercial use and not a residential or institutional use; and 
b.  The licensee has provided to the village the written consent of the business occupant, or owner if there is no business occupant, of the private contiguous property in front of which the additional tables will be placed; and 
c.  The use of the sidewalk in front of adjacent property will not expand the total linear sidewalk frontage to be used by the licensee more than 100 percent over the linear sidewalk frontage of the licensee's own place of business. 
1.  Upon receipt of notice from the business occupant, or owner if there is no occupant, of the property in front of which the tables will be located that the occupant has revoked the consent required in this subsection (2), the licensee shall promptly vacate the public sidewalk not along its own frontage. 
2.  The licensee shall provide the village, in a form acceptable to the Corporation Counsel, the following: 
(i)  An agreement to indemnify, defend, and hold harmless the village for any and all claims for liability or damages arising from the operation of the outdoor restaurant seating area; and 
(ii)  A certificate of general liability insurance, workers compensation insurance, and, if applicable, dram shop insurance. The amount of required coverage shall be approved by the village's insurance carrier, but in no event shall liability coverage be in an amount less than $1,000,000.00 per occurrence and $500,000.00 per person. The village shall be named as an additional insured on the face of the certificate, and the insurer shall have no less than an "A" rating by the most recent AM Best Insurance Rating Guide. 
3.  In no event shall the operation of the outdoor restaurant seating area or cooking area interfere with the passage of pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or reduce the open portion of the public sidewalk to less than five feet clear of all obstructions, measured from edge of the sidewalk closest to the curb (or lampposts or parking meters where such exist). 
4.  In no event shall the placement of equipment or furnishings for the outdoor restaurant seating area or cooking area, or the operation of the outdoor restaurant seating area or cooking area obstruct access to any taxi stand, bus stop, crosswalk, mailbox, curb cut, parking space or any other public property, or obstruct necessary access to any fire hydrant, fire escape or fire door, or obstruct the clear view of any traffic signal, regulatory sign or street sign. 
5.  The licensee shall be responsible for the maintenance and upkeep of the public right-of-way used for the outdoor restaurant seating area or cooking area and the replacement of damaged public property, including brick pavers. No furniture or furnishings may be attached by any means to the public sidewalk or any other public property. 
6.  In the event of snowfall or when notified by the village to do so, the licensee shall promptly remove all equipment, furnishings and obstructions from the public sidewalk or right-of-way, so as to allow snow removal, to accommodate special events permitted by the village or to accommodate village repair or maintenance of the public sidewalk or right-of-way. 
7.  No electrical appliances or conductors, open flame devices, spillable petroleum products or other flammable liquids, other than candles or lanterns of a type approved by the Site Plan Review Committee, shall be placed or kept in the outdoor seating area. 
8.  The use of cooking devices in an outdoor cooking area, whether operated by electrical conductors or using open flame, charcoal, propane or other heat source, shall be subject to separate review and approval by the Site Plan Review Committee, which may require additional protective measures consistent with protecting public health and safety, including, but not limited to, ensuring safe distances form sources of heat and combustion and providing fire extinguishers or other protective measures. 
9.  All cooking devices used in an outdoor cooking area shall be located in an area that is in compliance with the Wilmette Fire Prevention Code, as adopted and amended in section 8-524 and article XXI of chapter 12, air pollution. 
10.  No furnishings and obstructions shall be permitted on the public sidewalk or right-of-way from November 1 each year through and including March 31 of the succeeding year. 
(Code 1993, § 5-2.6.4; Ord. No. 96-O-40, 6-11-1996; Ord. No. 2010-O-23, 4-27-2010; Ord. No. 2011-O-24, 4-26-2011) 
Sec. 24-38. - Term of license; renewal; revocation; termination. 
(a)  Each license issued pursuant to this article shall be valid for a terms of one year, and may be renewed annually thereafter. A renewal application shall provide all the same information as an original application, but copies of the previous year's Site Plan may be used if there are no changes from the last submission. 
(b)  Licenses issued pursuant to this article may be suspended or revoked by the Village Manager as provided in section 24-2. 
(c)  Licenses issued pursuant to this article for use of the public sidewalk or other public property shall not constitute personal property, and the village shall retain at all times the right to terminate any license for use of public property, or may completely eliminate this class of license, upon 30 days' written notice to the license holders. Should the village terminate any license other than for reason of a violation of the requirements of this section, the village shall refund to the licensee the pro-rated portion of the annual fee paid by the licensee. 
(Code 1993, § 5-2.6.5; Ord. No. 2010-O-23, 4-27-2010) 
Sec. 24-39. - Annual license fee. 
    The annual fee for a license issued pursuant to this article shall be: 
(1)  $25.00 for areas not located on public property. 
(2)  $50.00 for areas located on public property. 
(Code 1993, § 5-2.6.6; Ord. No. 95-O-58, 6-27-1995; Ord. No. 2010-O-23, 4-27-2010) 
Secs. 24-40-24-66. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS 

Sec. 24-67. - State license required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any business licensed under this article, which is a massage establishment, to permit massage or massage therapy to be provided by any employee or other person on the premises of the business, unless that person is one of the following: 
(1)  A certified massage therapist; or 
(2)  A massage apprentice who is under the direct physical supervision of a certified massage therapist while providing massage services; or 
(3)  Otherwise exempt from the requirement to be a licensed massage therapist, pursuant to section 25 of the Illinois Massage Licensing Act (ILCS ch. 225, act 57, § 25), now or hereafter amended. 
(Code 1993, § 5-2.7.1; Ord. No. 2004-O-97, 11-9-2004) 
Sec. 24-68. - Massage Therapist License; availability for inspection. 
    Any massage establishment employing one or more licensed massage therapist shall be required to have each Massage Therapist's License issued by the State, or a copy thereof, available for inspection by the village at any time during the hours of operation of the business. Failure of the owner to keep said licenses available for inspection shall constitute an offense, and shall additionally constitute a basis for suspension or revocation of the massage establishment's business license. 
(Code 1993, § 5-2.7.2; Ord. No. 2004-O-97, 11-9-2004) 
Sec. 24-69. - Operating requirements. 
(a)  Every portion of the massage establishment, including appliances and apparatus, shall be kept clean and operated in a sanitary condition. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person, knowingly, in a massage establishment, to place his hand upon, or to touch with any part of his body, or to fondle in any manner, or to massage, a sexual or genital area of any other person. 
(Code 1993, § 5-2.7.3; Ord. No. 2004-O-97, 11-9-2004) 
Sec. 24-70. - Public nuisance. 
    Any building used as a massage establishment in violation of this article, or in violation of any of the provisions of the Illinois Massage Licensing Act (ILCS ch. 225, act 57, § 1 et seq.), now or hereafter amended, with the intentional, knowing, reckless or negligent permission of the owner thereof, or the agent of the owner managing the building, together with all fixtures and other property used in violation of this chapter, are hereby declared to be a public nuisance. 
(Code 1993, § 5-2.7.4; Ord. No. 2004-O-97, 11-9-2004) 
Secs. 24-71-24-98. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - TOBACCO DEALERS 

Sec. 24-99. - Tobacco Dealer License required; application; term; fee; posting of license. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any business within the village to sell or offer for sale at retail any tobacco product without having first obtained a current Tobacco Dealer License as provided in this article. 
(b)  The requirement to obtain and keep a Tobacco Dealer License as provided for in this article shall be in addition to any other license or permit otherwise required by this article or any other chapter of the Village Code of Ordinances. 
(c)  Application for a Tobacco Dealer License shall be made to the village on a form prescribed by the Finance Director and in the manner prescribed in section 24-2. 
(d)  A Tobacco Dealer License shall be valid for a term of one year from its date of issue, in the same manner as provided in section 24-2(f). 
(e)  The annual fee for a Tobacco Dealer License shall be $50.00. 
(f)  The licensee's current Tobacco Dealer License shall be posted on the premises of the business in the manner provided in section 24-2(k). 
(Code 1993, § 5-2.8.1; Ord. No. 97-O-27, 10-14-1997; Ord. No. 2002-O-79, 2-25-2003; Ord. No. 2007-O-102, 12-11-2007) 
Sec. 24-100. - Unlawful sale or delivery; sale in unlawful quantities; signs; self-service displays unlawful. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, including any licensee, to sell, offer for sale, give away or deliver tobacco products or tobacco paper to any person under the age of 21 years. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any licensee to allow, engage, or permit any person under the age of 21 years to sell, offer for sale, give away or deliver any tobacco products or tobacco paper. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any licensee to sell or offer for sale tobacco products through the use of a tobacco vending machine. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any licensee to sell, offer for sale, give away or deliver individual cigarettes or cigarettes packaged in a quantity of less than 20 cigarettes. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any licensee to sell, offer for sale, give away or deliver any tobacco products in any manner which violates any law, administrative rule or regulation of the State or the United States. 
(f)  A licensee shall be required to post, at or near every place in the licensed premises where tobacco products are sold or offered for sale, a plainly visible sign which shall state in characters no less than one inch high; "THE SALE OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS TO PERSONS UNDER 21 YEARS OF AGE IS PROHIBITED BY LAW," provided that the posting of a substantially similar sign as that provided herein which is required by state or federal law or regulation shall be deemed to constitute compliance with this section. 
(g)  No self-service tobacco products. It shall be unlawful for any licensee to sell, offer for sale, or display for sale any tobacco products or tobacco paper not kept behind a service counter or otherwise kept so that customers may not obtain any tobacco products without the assistance of an employee of the licensee. Self-service display for the sale of tobacco products when said products are displayed for sale enclosed in a fixed, free-standing, walk-in humidor for storing tobacco products in which the air is kept properly humidified and which is of not less than 100 square feet in area shall not constitute a violation of this section. 
(Code 1993, § 5-2.8.2; Ord. No. 97-O-27, 10-14-1997; Ord. No. 2002-O-79, 2-25-2003; Ord. No. 2018-O-17, § 2, 3-13-2018) 
Sec. 24-101. - Responsibility for agents and employees. 
    Every act or omission of whatever nature which constitutes a violation of the provisions of this section governing tobacco products by any officer, director, manager, agent or employee of the licensee shall be deemed and held to be the act of the licensee, and such act shall be punishable in the same manner as if such an act or omission had been committed or omitted by the licensee personally. 
(Code 1993, § 5-2.8.3; Ord. No. 97-O-27, 10-14-1997; Ord. No. 2002-O-79, 2-25-2003) 
Sec. 24-102. - Suspension and revocation of Tobacco Dealer License. 
(a)  In addition to any other penalty provided in this chapter for violation of the provisions of this article, a Tobacco Dealer License may be suspended or revoked by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner, or fines imposed as provided below, in the manner provided for in chapter 10, in accordance with the procedures enumerated in this article. The procedure provided in this section shall be in lieu of, and not in addition to, the procedure for revocation of business licenses provided in section 24-2(j). 
(b)  The Local Liquor Control Commissioner may revoke or suspend up to 30 days any Tobacco Dealer License issued under this article if he determines the licensee has violated any of the provisions of this article. In addition to any such suspension or revocation, or in lieu of suspension or revocation as the case may be, the Local Liquor Control Commissioner may levy a fine on the licensee for such violations. The fine imposed shall not exceed $1,000.00 for the first violation within a 12-month period, $1,500.00 for a second violation occurring within a 12-month period after the date of the preceding offense, and $2,500.00 for a third or subsequent violation within a 12-month period after the date of the first offense. Not more than $15,000.00 in aggregate fines under this subsection may be imposed against any licensee during the time period over which the same license is held and renewed annually by the licensee; however, the time period for the purposes of the limitation on fines in this sentence shall be ended by any change in ownership, voluntary surrender of the tobacco dealers license, or event that requires a new application for said license to be submitted to the village. Subject to the foregoing limitations, in determining the amount of a fine imposed, length of a suspension imposed or revocation of a license under this section, the Local Liquor Control Commissioner may consider in aggravation prior violations of other village laws and ordinances by the same licensee, including, but not limited to, those restricting the sale of alcohol to underage persons. 
(c)  No such license shall be so revoked or suspended, or fine imposed under subsection (b) of this section, except after a public hearing by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner with a minimum three-day written notice to the licensee affording the licensee an opportunity to appear and defend. If the Local Liquor Control Commissioner has reason to believe that any continued operation of a particular licensed premises will immediately threaten the health, safety or welfare of the community, he may, upon the issuance of a written order stating the reason for such conclusion and without notice or hearing, order the licensed premises closed for not more than seven days, giving the licensee an opportunity to be heard during that period, except that if such licensee shall also be engaged in the conduct of another business or businesses on the licensed premises, such order shall not be applicable to such other business or businesses. 
(d)  Public hearings conducted by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner incident to the revocation or suspension of any Tobacco Dealer License issued by the village, or the imposition of a fine, shall be hearings of record. Any order of fine, suspension or revocation shall be based on written findings of fact, and such findings shall be supported by substantial evidence in the light of the whole record. In the event an appeal from the order is taken, review of the order shall be on the record. 
(e)  Appeals from any order of fine, suspension or revocation issued by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner. 
(1)  Appeals from any order of fine, suspension or revocation issued by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner shall be heard by the Village President and Trustees of the Village Board. Such appeal shall be perfected by written notice of same filed by the licensee-appellant with the Village Clerk no more than 30 days after the date on which the order appealed from was issued by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner. Said notice shall state with particularity the order appealed from and the reasons why the order should be reversed or modified. 
(2)  Filing of such notice of appeal shall operate to stay any suspension or revocation of the Tobacco Dealer License until resolution of the appeal. 
(3)  The Local Liquor Control Commissioner shall thereafter certify and file with the Village Clerk the official record of the proceedings taken and prepared by a certified court reporter within ten days after notice of the filing of such appeal. 
(4)  The review of the Local Liquor Control Commissioner's order shall be on the record made before the Local Liquor Control Commissioner, and no new evidence shall be accepted by the Village Board. The Local Liquor Control Commissioner's order shall not be reversed, modified or vacated unless a majority of those members of the Village Board present and voting determine that the order of the Local Liquor Control Commissioner is contrary to law, is not supported by the manifest weight of the evidence presented, or constitutes an abuse of discretion. The Village Board may hear and determine the appeal during the course of a regular or special meeting, as it shall determine, and may in its discretion permit the parties to make written or oral arguments on the record, as it shall determine. Said hearing shall also be a hearing of record. The decision of the Village Board shall be final. 
(Code 1993, § 5-2.8.4; Ord. No. 97-O-27, 10-14-1997; Ord. No. 2002-O-79, 2-25-2003) 
Secs. 24-103-24-132. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - NEWSRACKS 

Sec. 24-133. - Permit. 
(a)  Permit required. No business or other person or entity shall erect, place, maintain or operate on any street or other public place any newsracks without a valid Newsrack Permit specifying the exact location of such newsracks. 
(b)  Fee. There shall be no fee for a Newsrack Permit. 
(c)  Application. Application for a Newsrack Permit shall be made on a form provided by and filed with the Village Manager and signed by the applicant. The application shall state the following information: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant. 
(2)  The proposed specific locations of the newsracks. 
(d)  Conditions for permit. As an express condition of the acceptance of a Newsrack Permit, the applicant agrees to indemnify and save harmless the village and its officers and employees against any loss or liability, including, but not limited to, loss or liability because of personal injury and property damage, sustained by any person as the result of the installation, use or maintenance of a newsrack within the village. 
(e)  Installation and maintenance standards. A newsrack which in whole or in part rests upon any sidewalk or parkway shall comply with the following standards: 
(1)  A newsrack shall not exceed four feet in height, 24 inches in width, and 20 inches in depth. 
(2)  A newsrack shall not be used for advertising signs or publicity other than advertising for the newspaper or news periodical dispensed therefrom. 
(3)  A coin-operated newsrack shall be equipped with a coin-return mechanism to permit a person using the machine to secure an immediate refund in the event he is unable to receive the publication paid for. The coin-return mechanism shall be maintained in good working order. 
(4)  A newsrack shall bear in a conspicuous place the name, address and telephone number of the distributor, enabling a telephone call to be made to the distributor to report a malfunction or to enable the giving of the notices provided for in this subsection. The newsrack shall also bear in a conspicuous place a news rack license decal which shall be issued by the village. 
(5)  A newsrack shall be maintained in a neat and clean condition and in good repair. This requirement includes, but is not limited to, keeping the newsrack reasonably free of dirt, grease, rust, corrosion, and chipped, faded, peeling and cracked paint; and promptly repairing broken parts. 
(6)  A newsrack shall not, either wholly or in part, project over or rest on a roadway. 
(7)  A newsrack shall not, either wholly or in part, project over or rest on a parkway or sidewalk when such location endangers the safety of persons or property; or when such location is used for public utility, public transportation or other governmental purposes; or when such location unreasonably interferes with or impedes the flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
(8)  A newsrack shall not be chained, bolted, or otherwise attached to any fixture located in the street, except to other newsracks. 
(9)  A newsrack shall not be placed next to other news racks if such placement would cause the group of news racks to extend for a distance of more than eight feet. A space of three feet shall separate each group of newsracks. 
(10)  A newsrack shall not be placed within three feet of any marked crosswalk; within 12 feet of the curb return of any unmarked crosswalk; within five feet of any fire hydrant or other emergency facility; within five feet of any driveway; within three feet ahead of or 15 feet to the rear of any sign marking a designated bus stop; within three feet of the outer end of any bus bench; at any location which causes the clear space for the passageway of pedestrians to be reduced to less than five feet; within three feet of any public area improved with lawn, flowers, shrubs, trees, or other landscaping; or within 300 feet of any other news rack on the same side of the street in the same block containing the same issue or edition of the same publication; provided that the foregoing restrictions shall not apply if their effect would be to prevent the placement of a newsrack for a distance of 300 feet on the same side of the street in the same block. 
(f)  Violation of standards. Upon determination by the Village Manager that a newsrack has been installed, used or maintained in violation of the standards of subsection (e) of this section, an order to correct the offending condition will be issued to the distributor of the newsrack. Such order shall be telephoned to the distributor and confirmed by mailing a copy of the order by certified mail return receipt requested. The order shall specifically describe the offending condition and suggest actions necessary to correct the condition. Failure to properly correct the offending condition within seven days (excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays) after the mailing date of the order shall result in the offending news rack being summarily removed and processed as unclaimed property. If the offending newsrack is not properly identified as to owner under subsection (e)(4) of this section, it shall be removed immediately and processed as unclaimed property. The actions prescribed in this subsection shall be the only penalty for the violation of the standards, and the penalties provided in article VII of this chapter shall not apply. 
(g)  Appeals. Any person or entity aggrieved by a finding, determination, notice or action taken under subsection (f) of this section may appeal to the President and Board of Trustees. An appeal must be filed within seven days after receipt of notice of any protested decision or action by filing with the Village Clerk a letter of appeal briefly stating the basis for such appeal. A hearing shall be held within 15 days after receipt of the letter of appeal. The aggrieved party shall be given at least seven days' notice of the time and place of the hearing. The President and Board of Trustees shall give the aggrieved party, and any other interested party, a reasonable opportunity to be heard, in order to show cause why the determination of the Village Manager should not be upheld. In all such cases, the burden of proof shall be upon the Village Manager to show that the finding, determination, notice or action is supported by a preponderance of the evidence. At the conclusion of the hearing, the President and Board of Trustees shall make a final determination. 
(h)  Revocation of permit. In addition to the enforcement procedures provided in subsection (f) of this section, it shall be within the power and discretion of the Village Manager to suspend or revoke a permit if the distributor is found to have violated the standards set forth in subsection (f) of this section on at least three separate occasions during a 12-month period. 
(i)  Abandonment. If a newsrack remains empty for a period of 30 continuous days, it may be deemed abandoned, and may be treated in the manner provided in subsection (f) of this section for newsracks in violation of the standards set forth in subsection (e) of this section. 
(Code 1993, § 5-3; Ord. No. 94-0-5, 3-13-1994) 
Secs. 24-134-24-164. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - REGULATION OF CERTAIN BUSINESS ACTIVITIES 

Sec. 24-165. - Outdoor advertisers. 
(a)  Complying with Sign Ordinance. It shall be unlawful for an outdoor advertiser to place, post or paint any advertisements, notices or displays in a manner which violates the Sign Ordinance of the village. 
(b)  Unlawful distributions. It shall be unlawful for an outdoor advertiser or other business to do any of the following: 
(1)  To distribute any circulars, handbills, advertising materials, or samples in a manner which causes, directly or indirectly, the littering of any street or premises within the village. 
(2)  To distribute circulars, handbills, advertising materials, or samples on or in vehicles parked in any street or public parking place within the village. 
(3)  To ring the doorbell or to create a noise by knocking or otherwise at any private dwelling unit within the village in order to deliver or distribute any commercial circulars, handbills, advertising materials, or samples to the occupant, and the ringing of a doorbell or creation of such noise for this purpose is hereby defined to be a nuisance. 
(4)  To advertise any unlawful business or illegal product or service in the village. 
(5)  To post any circulars, handbills, or advertising material on any property of the village without authorization from the President and Board of Trustees. 
(c)  Identification of advertiser. It shall be unlawful for an outdoor advertiser to place, post or paint any outdoor advertisement, notice or display unless such advertisement, notice, or display contains, in lettering which is visible from a distance of at least five feet, the name and telephone number of the outdoor advertiser. 
(Code 1993, § 5-4.1; Ord. No. 94-0-5, 3-13-1994) 
Sec. 24-166. - Pesticide sprayers. 
    It shall be unlawful for a pesticide sprayer to do any of the following: 
(1)  Spray materials containing chemical substances which are persistent compounds of chlorinated hydrocarbons, including, but not limited to, Aldrin, Chlordane, DDT, Dieldrin, Endrin, Heptachlor, and Lindane. 
(2)  Spray a pesticide in the atmosphere when the true wind velocity at the level of use shall exceed ten miles per hour. 
(3)  Spray a pesticide without posting warning signs in a manner which will notify any person who is outdoors and within 300 feet of the location being sprayed that spraying is in progress. Such warning signs shall contain the following message written in letters at least two inches high in indelible ink or paint means "Pesticide in Use" and the name of the licensee which is spraying the pesticide. 
(4)  Use a pesticide in a manner which does not comply with the safety instructions of the manufacturer with regard to the use and storage of the pesticide and the disposal of the pesticide containers. 
(Code 1993, § 5-4.2; Ord. No. 94-0-5, 3-13-1994) 
Sec. 24-167. - Resale stores. 
    It shall be unlawful for a resale store to purchase or receive any item for resale, other than clothing not containing fur and having a value of less than $100.00, unless a record is made and preserved for a least three years or until one year after the property is resold, whichever occurs later, stating the name and address of the person from whom the purchase was made, an accurate description of the article, the date of the purchase, and the price paid therefor. This record shall be open to inspection by the Chief of Police at any time. 
(Code 1993, § 5-4.4; Ord. No. 94-0-5, 3-13-1994) 
Sec. 24-168. - Laundromats. 
    It shall be unlawful for any laundromat to be open to the public after 7:00 p.m. and before 7:00 a.m. unless there is present and on duty a person at least 21 years of age who shall be responsible for and adequately trained in the proper operation of the coin-operated devices or machines and the premises in which they are located. Any portion of the premises of the laundromat which is used by the public, other than restrooms, shall be open and visible from the adjoining roadway at all times. 
(Code 1993, § 5-4.5; Ord. No. 94-0-5, 3-13-1994) 
Sec. 24-169. - Automatic dry cleaners. 
    It shall be unlawful for any dry cleaner to install an automatic dry cleaning machine as described in section 24-1 without notifying the Director of Community Development and allowing the installation to be inspected by the Director of Community Development, the Sanitarian and the Fire Chief for compliance with the BOCA Mechanical Code. 
(Code 1993, § 5-4.6; Ord. No. 94-0-5, 3-13-1994) 
Secs. 24-170-24-193. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - PENALTIES 

Sec. 24-194. - Operating without a license or permit. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, corporation or other entity to engage in any business or activity prohibited by this chapter, or for which one or more licenses or permits are required by this chapter without first obtaining such licenses or permits. 
(Code 1993, § 5-5.1; Ord. No. 94-0-5, 3-13-1994) 
Sec. 24-195. - Fine; injunctive relief. 
    Any person, corporation, or other entity that violates any provision of this chapter, may be fined as provided for in section 2-1305. 
(Code 1993, § 5-5.2; Ord. No. 94-0-5, 3-13-1994; Ord. No. 96-O-11, 4-9-1996) 
Sec. 24-196. - Penalty for furnishing false fee information. 
    Any person, corporation, or other entity that knowingly furnishes false information required by section 24-2(b)(5) shall be fined $5,000.00. 
(Code 1993, § 5-5.3; Ord. No. 94-0-5, 3-13-1994) 
Secs. 24-197-24-215. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - ALARMS 

Sec. 24-216. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alarm administrator means a person or persons designated by the governing authority to administer, control and review applications, permits and alarm dispatch request. 
    Alarm business means the business by any person, firm, partnership, corporation, association, organization, company, or other entity of selling, leasing, maintaining, servicing, repairing, altering, replacing, moving, monitoring, or installing any alarm system or causing to be sold, leased, maintained, serviced, repaired, altered, replaced, moved, monitored, or installed in or on any building, structure or facility. 
    Alarm dispatch request means a notification to the police by the alarm business that an alarm system, either manual or automatic, has been activated at a particular alarm site. 
    Alarm panel means a device controlling an alarm system, including, but not limited to, arming, disarming and monitoring an alarm system. 
    Alarm service contractor means that person or organization supplying alarm services to the village under the terms of a contract awarded by the village. 
    Alarm site means a single premise or location served by an alarm systems. Each tenancy if served by a separate alarm system in a multi-tenant building or complex shall be considered a separate alarm site. 
    Alarm system means any device, mechanical or electrical, intended to alert the village or any person to the unauthorized entry of another person onto the premises or to the occurrence of a robbery on the premises where the device is installed. Hold-up or similar alarms are included in this definition. 
    Alarm user means any person, firm, partnership, corporation, association, organization, company, or other entity in control of an alarm site where an alarm system is located, but does not include the village. 
    Alarm User Permit means a permit issued by the village that allows an alarm user to use, own or lease an alarm system or to be in control of an alarm site wherein an alarm system is operated or maintained. 
    Alarm zone means a component of an alarm system which monitors and controls a specific area of the alarm site or specific operation of the alarm system. 
    Armed period means the time period from which the alarm systems is armed to the time the alarm systems is disarmed. 
    Automatic Dialer Alarm means any mechanical or electronic device connected to an alarm system which automatically causes a telephone call to be made when the alarm user's alarm system is activated. 
    Communications swinger suppression means a programmable feature of an alarm system's alarm panel that prevents continuous alarm signals from being received at the alarm business, which monitors the alarm system. 
    Conversion means the transaction or process by which one alarm business begins monitoring of an alarm system previously monitored by another alarm business. 
    Duress Alarm means a silent alarm signal generated by the manual activation of a device intended to signal a crisis situation requiring police response. 
    Direct connection alarms means an alarm system connected directly to a receiving point at the Village Police Department. 
    False Alarm means the activation of an alarm system through mechanical failure, malfunction, improper installation, or the improper operation or negligence of the owner or lessee of an alarm system or of his employees or agents. The term "false alarm" includes activation of any alarm system due to an act of nature, such as thunder, snow, ice, and electrical storms. It does not include activation of any alarm system due to any cataclysmic condition resulting in village-wide loss of utility services. 
    Holdup Alarm means a silent alarm signal generated by the manual activation of a device, including, but not limited to, a button or money clip, which is intended to signal a robbery in progress. 
    Keypad means a device on the alarm panel that allows control of an alarm system by the manual entering of a coded sequence of number or letters. 
    Monitoring means the process by which an alarm business receives signals from alarm systems and relays an alarm dispatch request to the village for the purpose of summoning police response to the alarm site. 
    Non-resident alarm means an alarm system installed at an alarm site not located within the corporate limits of the village. 
    One Plus Duress Alarm means the manual activation of a silent alarm signal by entering at a keypad a code that adds one to the last digit of the normal arm/disarm code (e.g., Normal code = 1234, One Plus Duress Code = 1235). 
    Person means any individual, corporation or other entity, but does not include the village. 
    Takeover means the transaction or process by which an alarm user takes over control of an existing alarm system that was previously controlled by another alarm user. 
    Time out means a programmable feature of an alarm system's alarm panel that disables or silences an alarm system's audible signal. 
    Verify means an attempt by the alarm business, or its representative, to contact the alarm site by telephonic or other electronic means, whether or not actual contact with a Person is made, before requesting police response. 
    Village means the Village of Wilmette or an authorized representative. 
    Village Manager means the Village Manager of the Village of Wilmette or an authorized representative. 
(Code 1993, § 5-6.1; Ord. No. 98-O-68, 8-25-1998) 
Sec. 24-217. - Alarm User Permit required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any alarm user to use, own or lease an alarm system or to be in control of an alarm site wherein an alarm system is operated or maintained without having first obtained a permit as provided in this article. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any alarm user to use, own or lease an alarm system or to be in control of an alarm site wherein an alarm system is operated or maintained when a permit therefore pursuant to this article has been revoked. 
(c)  The following bi-annual fees shall be charged to obtain an Alarm User Permit: 
(1)  An initial Alarm Use Permit shall be a $15.00 fee. 
(2)  A renewal of an Alarm User Permit shall be a $10.00 fee. 
(d)  All permits issued are valid for two calendar years unless the permit is revoked; an alarm business commits a conversion; or the alarm user commits a takeover. 
(Code 1993, § 5-6.2; Ord. No. 98-O-68, 8-25-1998) 
Sec. 24-218. - Alarm User Permit application. 
(a)  Each applicant for a permit to maintain an alarm system shall file a written application with the village stating: 
(1)  The full legal name, address, and telephone number of the applicant; 
(2)  The name, address and telephone number of the alarm user who is in control of the alarm site where the alarm systems are located; 
(3)  The name, address and telephone number of the alarm site where the alarm systems are located; 
(4)  The type of alarm system at the alarm site; 
(5)  A list of three persons, including their addresses and telephone numbers, who can be contacted and will respond to the alarm site in the event of an emergency or to reset or deactivate the alarm system, or who could contact the alarm user if the alarm user is not at the alarm site; 
(6)  The name, address and telephone number of the alarm business that installed the alarm system; 
(7)  The name, address and telephone number of the alarm business that is responsible for the maintenance and repair of the alarm system, if applicable; and 
(8)  The name, address and telephone number of the alarm business that is responsible for the monitoring of the alarm system. 
(b)  Incomplete applications shall be returned to the applicant. A permit will not be issued until the completed application is received and the Alarm Administrator has granted approval for the permit. 
(c)  An application for an Alarm User Permit shall be denied if: 
(1)  The applicant has failed to pay false alarm fees required by this section for the alarm site or for a different alarm site under the applicant's ownership or control. 
(2)  The applicant has failed to comply with any provisions of this section or other sections of this Code. 
(3)  The Alarm Administrator shall be responsible for processing and issuing alarm user permits. 
(Code 1993, § 5-6.3; Ord. No. 98-O-68, 8-25-1998) 
Sec. 24-219. - Alarm activations at an alarm site where an Alarm User Permit has not been issued. 
    Any alarm user who does not have a valid Alarm User Permit shall be assessed a user fee in the amount of $300.00 for each notice to the Police Department of an activation of the alarm system at that alarm site. 
(Code 1993, § 5-6.4; Ord. No. 98-O-68, 8-25-1998) 
Sec. 24-220. - Updating Alarm User Permit application. 
    It is unlawful for any alarm user to fail or refuse to amend its Alarm User Permit application within 14 days after any of the information required and contained therein becomes outdated or inaccurate. 
(Code 1993, § 5-6.5; Ord. No. 98-O-68, 8-25-1998) 
Sec. 24-221. - Transfer of Alarm User Permit prohibited. 
    An Alarm User Permit cannot be transferred to another alarm site or to another alarm user or person. 
(Code 1993, § 5-6.6; Ord. No. 98-O-68, 8-25-1998) 
Sec. 24-222. - Alarm system monitoring procedure. 
    An alarm business performing monitoring services shall: 
(1)  Not request dispatch for police response during the first week after installation of an alarm system, but rather use that week to train the alarm user on proper use of an alarm system unless extenuating circumstances necessitate immediate requests for response as determined by the Alarm Administrator; 
(2)  Report alarm signals by using telephone numbers designated by the Alarm Administrator; 
(3)  Attempt to verify every alarm signal, except during a duress or Holdup Alarm activation, before requesting a police response to an alarm signal; 
(4)  Communicate alarm dispatch requests to the village in a manner and form determined by the Alarm Administrator; 
(5)  Communicate verified cancellations of alarm dispatch requests to the village in a manner and form determined by the Alarm Administrator; and 
(6)  Ensure that all alarm users of alarm systems equipped with Duress Alarms and Holdup Alarms are given adequate training as to the proper use of the Duress Alarm and Holdup Alarm. 
(Code 1993, § 5-6.7; Ord. No. 98-O-68, 8-25-1998) 
Sec. 24-223. - Audible alarm system requirements. 
(a)  Except as described in subsection (c) of this section, alarm systems emitting an audible signal that may be heard by persons outside the protected alarm site are prohibited. 
(b)  No audible alarm system shall create a sound similar to that of the village's emergency weather warning sirens. 
(c)  The following alarm systems are exempt from the prohibition set forth in subsection (a) of this section: 
(1)  Any type of warning system maintained by a governmental agency; 
(2)  Those alarms known as water flow alarms required by the Fire Prevention Code for automatic fire suppression equipment installed in any structure; or 
(3)  Those alarm systems equipped with an alarm panel which shall have programmable features which: 
a.  Shall be programmed to time out the audible signal after it has sounded for five consecutive minutes; and 
b.  Shall be programmed either to: 
1.  Activate the Communication Swinger Suppression after three activations of the alarm system; or 
2.  Allow only single alarming per alarm zone per armed period. 
(d)  With respect to alarm systems in existence prior to August 31, 1998, the alarm user shall have until March 1, 1999 to effect the necessary modifications to comply with the foregoing requirements. 
(Code 1993, § 5-6.8; Ord. No. 98-O-68, 8-25-1998) 
Sec. 24-224. - One Plus Duress Alarms. 
    After December 31, 1999, alarm businesses shall not program alarm systems so that they are capable of sending One Plus Duress Alarms. After December 31, 2000, alarm businesses shall remove the One Plus Duress Alarm capability from alarm systems which were programmed with this feature prior to January 1, 2000. 
(Code 1993, § 5-6.9; Ord. No. 98-O-68, 8-25-1998) 
Sec. 24-225. - Duress Alarms and Holdup Alarms. 
    After December 31, 1999, alarm businesses shall not install a device for activating a Holdup Alarm that is a single-action non-recessed button or single money clip. After December 31, 2000, alarm businesses shall convert all alarm systems with Holdup Alarms from a single-action non-recessed button to either a single-action recessed button or double-action button and a single money clip to a double money clip. 
(Code 1993, § 5-6.10; Ord. No. 98-O-68, 8-25-1998) 
Sec. 24-226. - Automatic Dialer Alarms. 
(a)  No alarm user or person shall install, maintain or use an alarm system that incorporates an Automatic Dialer Alarm that, when activated, automatically dials any village telephone line. 
(b)  All Automatic Dialer Alarms shall be equipped with a minimum 15-second activation delay mechanism. 
(c)  Automatic Dialer Alarms shall be equipped such that they shut off or reset within five minutes of initial activation. 
(Code 1993, § 5-6.11; Ord. No. 98-O-68, 8-25-1998) 
Sec. 24-227. - Direct connection alarm systems. 
(a)  The Chief of Police shall be responsible for the regulation of direct connection alarms. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to install or maintain a direct connection alarm except as approved by the Chief of Police. 
(c)  The alarm service contractor shall collect from subscribers and transmit completed applications as required in sections 24-217 and 24-218 to the Chief of Police before any direct connection alarm is installed. 
(d)  The Chief of Police may revoke authorization for a direct connection alarm if he finds that the alarm user has failed to comply with the provisions of this section. Notice of revocation shall be in writing and shall become effective 15 days after delivery of the notice to the alarm user. 
(e)  All direct connection alarms shall be equipped with a minimum 15-second activation delay mechanism. 
(f)  Except for alarm systems exempted in section 24-223(c)(2), direct connection alarms shall be equipped such that they shut off or reset within five minutes of initial activation. 
(Code 1993, § 5-6.12; Ord. No. 98-O-68, 8-25-1998) 
Sec. 24-228. - Contracted direct connection alarm services. 
(a)  The village may, at its discretion, contract for direct connection alarm services. Such contracts may address, but are not necessarily limited to, the following items means designation of an alarm service contractor, duties of the contractor, monitoring equipment and its upkeep, connection protocols, maintenance of village alarm systems, fees for new direct connection alarms and monthly access fees for direct connection alarms. 
(b)  The contract will be renewed at intervals as determined by the village. 
(Code 1993, § 5-6.13; Ord. No. 98-O-68, 8-25-1998) 
Sec. 24-229. - Direct connection alarm fees. 
(a)  The initial fee for a direct connection alarm shall be set by the village and revised on such schedule established by the terms of the alarm services contract, if any. 
(b)  Monthly service fees for direct connection alarms shall be established by the village and revised on such schedule established by the terms of the alarm services contract, if any. 
(c)  Direct connection alarms installed and maintained in all village facilities shall be exempt from all fees. 
(d)  The alarm service contractor shall collect all applicable direct connection alarm fees from subscribers and forward appropriate funds to the village Finance Department on such schedule established by the terms of the alarm services contract, if any. 
(Code 1993, § 5-6.14; Ord. No. 98-O-68, 8-25-1998) 
Sec. 24-230. - Non-resident alarm. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to direct any non-resident alarm to any village department. 
(b)  Any response to a non-resident alarm made by the Police Department shall be subjected to a fee of $300.00 per response. 
(c)  The foregoing provision shall not prevent the Police Department from responding to request for assistance from police agencies of other communities. 
(Code 1993, § 5-6.15; Ord. No. 98-O-68, 8-25-1998) 
Sec. 24-231. - False alarms prohibited; false alarm user fee. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any alarm user to control or possess an alarm system which generates, transmits or issues a false alarm as defined in this section. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person to knowingly activate an alarm system for the purpose of summoning the Police Department except if such person knows or suspects that there is an actual or attempted burglary or robbery on the premises. 
(c)  Any alarm user who has one or more false alarms within a calendar year at a single alarm site will be assessed user fees according to the following user fee schedule: 
(1)  First false alarm: No charge. 
(2)  Second false alarm: $25.00 user fee per false alarm. 
(3)  Third and fourth false alarm: $100.00 user fee per false alarm. 
(4)  Fifth and sixth false alarm: $200.00 user fee per false alarm. 
(5)  Seventh and eighth false alarm: $300.00 user fee per false alarm. 
(6)  Ninth and tenth false alarm: $500.00 user fee per false alarm. 
(7)  More than ten false alarms: $1,000.00 user fee per false alarm. 
(d)  The Alarm Administrator shall notify the alarm user in writing of each instance wherein the Police Department has recorded a false alarm. The alarm user shall have the opportunity within 15 days from the date of mailing or personal delivery to submit a report to the Alarm Administrator or request to meet with the Alarm Administrator for the purpose of showing cause as to whether circumstances exist to warrant voiding the false alarm recordations. The Alarm Administrator shall review the alarm user's report and/or meet with the alarm user and issue a written finding to the alarm user as to whether or not the false alarm recordations will be voided. The finding of the Alarm Administrator shall be final. 
(e)  All user fees are due and payable to the village upon notice to the alarm user. If the alarm user has submitted a report or requested a meeting in accordance with subsection (d) of this section and the Alarm Administrator finds no cause for voiding the false alarm, the user fees are due and payable to the village seven days from the date of the Alarm Administrator's written findings on the false alarms. 
(Code 1993, § 5-6.16; Ord. No. 98-O-68, 8-25-1998; Ord. No. 2007-O-3, 2-27-2007) 
Sec. 24-232. - Alarm User Permit revocation with appeal process. 
(a)  More than ten false alarms within a calendar year shall subject to the alarm user to permit revocation as provided herein. 
(b)  If police records show more than ten false alarms within a calendar year for any alarm site: 
(1)  The Alarm Administrator shall notify the alarm user by certified mail or personal delivery, that its Alarm User Permit shall be revoked 30 days from date of mailing of personal delivery. The alarm user shall have 15 days from the date of mailing or personal delivery to submit a written report to the Alarm Administrator describing actions taken or to be taken to identify and eliminate the cause of the false alarms, and to request that its Alarm User Permit be reinstated. 
(2)  If the alarm user submits a report requesting reinstatement of its Alarm User Permit, the Alarm Administrator shall determine if the action taken or to be taken will substantially reduce the likelihood of false alarms. If the Alarm Administrator determines that the action will substantially reduce the likelihood of false alarms, the Alarm Administrator shall notify the alarm user, via certified mail or personal delivery, that the request to reinstate the Alarm User Permit has been approved. 
(3)  If the Alarm User Permit is reinstated, and the Police Department responds to a subsequent false alarm in the same calendar year at the alarm site, the Alarm Administrator shall proceed with the permit revocation process again as described in this subsection (b). The alarm user shall also be assessed a user fee in the amount of $300.00 for each subsequent false alarm through the remainder of the calendar year. 
(4)  If the Alarm Administrator determines that the action taken, or to be taken, will not substantially reduce the likelihood of false alarms, the request for reinstatement shall be denied. The Alarm Administrator shall give notice by certified mail or personal delivery to the alarm user that the Alarm User Permit will be revoked without further notice. 
(5)  An alarm user whose Alarm Permit has been revoked by the Alarm Administrator may appeal this decision within 15 days of receipt of the notice of revocation, by filing a written request for a review meeting with the Chief of Police. 
(6)  If a review meeting with the Chief of Police is requested, written notice of the time and place of the review meeting will be served on the alarm user by the Chief of Police by certified mail or personal delivery within 15 days of the request by the alarm user. 
(7)  The Alarm Administrator and the alarm user shall have the right to present written and oral evidence, subject to the right of cross-examination by both parties. 
(8)  If the Chief of Police determines that the alarm user has not taken action which substantially reduces the likelihood of false alarms, the Chief of Police shall issue written findings to that effect and an order denying reinstatement of the Alarm User Permit. 
(9)  If the Chief of Police determines that the alarm user has taken action which substantially reduces the likelihood of false alarms, the Chief of Police shall issue written finding to that effect and an order approving reinstatement of the Alarm User Permit. 
(10)  If the Alarm User Permit is reinstated, pursuant to subsection (b)(9) of this section, and the Police Department responds to a subsequent false alarm in the same calendar year at the alarm site, the Alarm Administrator shall proceed with the permit revocation process again as described in this subsection (b). The alarm user shall also be assessed a user fee in the amount of $300.00 for each subsequent false alarm activation through the remainder of the calendar year. 
(11)  If the alarm user's request for reinstatement of the Alarm User Permit has been denied by the Chief of Police, the alarm user may appeal this decision, within 15 days of receipt of the notice of revocation by filing a written request for a review meeting with the Village Manager. 
(12)  If the Village Manager determines that the alarm user has not taken action which substantially reduces the likelihood of false alarms, the Village Manager shall issue written findings to that effect and an order denying reinstatement of the Alarm User Permit. The decision of the Village Manager shall be final. 
(13)  If the Village Manager determines that the alarm user has taken action which substantially reduces the likelihood of false alarms, the Village Manager shall issue written findings to that effect and an order approving reinstatement of the Alarm User Permit. 
(14)  If the Alarm User Permit is reinstated pursuant to subsection (b)(13) of this section, and the Police Department responds to a subsequent false alarm in the same calendar year at the alarm site, the Alarm Administrator shall proceed with the permit revocation process again as described in this subsection (b). The alarm user shall also be assessed a user fee in the amount of $300.00 for each subsequent false alarm through the remainder of the calendar year. 
(c)  Any alarm user who fails to pay user fees, fines or charges provided for under this chapter within 30 days from the date of the invoice requesting payment of same shall have the subject Alarm User Permit revoked. Any such Alarm User Permit shall not be reinstated until all the unpaid user fees, fines and charges are paid in full. 
(Code 1993, § 5-6.17; Ord. No. 98-O-68, 8-25-1998) 
Sec. 24-233. - Testing equipment. 
    No person shall conduct or cause to be conducted, any test or demonstration of any alarm system without first notifying and obtaining permission from the Police Department. 
(Code 1993, § 5-6.18; Ord. No. 98-O-68, 8-25-1998) 
Sec. 24-234. - No liability of village. 
    The village assumes no liability for any defects in the operation of any alarm system, for any failure or neglect of any alarm business, for any failure or neglect of any alarm user or person, for the transmission or receipt of alarm signals or any failure or neglect to respond upon receipt of an alarm from any source. In the event that the village finds it necessary to revoke an Alarm User Permit or to otherwise provide for the disconnection of any alarm system, the village shall have no liability for such action. No special duty or any other duty other than that owed to the general public shall be created by virtue of this article or by virtue of the issuance of an Alarm System Permit, a direct connection alarm or as a result of the transmission to or receipt of alarm signals by the Police Department. 
(Code 1993, § 5-6.19; Ord. No. 98-O-68, 8-25-1998) 
Sec. 24-235. - Penalties. 
(a)  The failure of the alarm user to comply with the provisions of this article constitutes an offense. 
(b)  Any person found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this article shall be punished by a fine of not less than $100.00 nor more than $750.00 for each offense. 
(c)  Each day that a violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1993, § 5-6.20; Ord. No. 98-O-68, 8-25-1998) 
Sec. 24-236. - False fire alarm system fees. 
    The following fees are established in connection with fire alarm systems as required and defined in the Village Code of Wilmette. 
(Code 1993, § 5-7; Ord. No. 2009-O-84, 12-8-2009) 
Sec. 24-237. - Fire alarms; definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(a)  Fire Alarm Administrator means a person or persons designated by the governing authority to administer alarm dispatch requests. 
(b)  Fire alarm user means any person, firm, partnership, corporation, association, organization, company, or other entity in control of an alarm site where a fire alarm system is located, but does not include the village. 
(c)  False fire alarm means the activation of any fire alarm system through mechanical failure, malfunction, improper installation, or the improper operation or negligence of the owner or lessee of any fire alarm system or of his employees or agents. The term "false fire alarm" includes activation of any fire alarm system due to an act of nature, such as thunder, snow, ice, and electrical storms. It does not include activation of any fire alarm system due to any cataclysmic condition resulting in village-wide loss of utility services. 
(d)  Alarm site means a single premise or location served by a fire alarm system. Each tenancy if served by a separate fire alarm system in a multi-tenant building or complex shall be considered a separate alarm site. 
(e)  Fire alarm system means an alarm system designed to detect heat, smoke, operation of a manual fire pull station or alarm, operation of an automatic sprinkler system, operation of a hood suppression system, or other condition indicating danger or risk of fire. 
(Code 1993, § 5-7.1; Ord. No. 2009-O-84, 12-8-2009) 
Sec. 24-238. - False fire alarms prohibited; false alarm user fee. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for a fire alarm system user to control or possess an alarm system which generates, transmits or issues a false alarm as defined in this section. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person to knowingly activate a fire alarm system for the purpose of summoning the Fire Department except if such person knows or suspects that there is an actual fire or related emergency as defined in section 12-60. 
(c)  Any fire alarm user who has one or more false alarms within a calendar year at a single alarm site will be assessed user fees according to the following user fee schedule: 
(1)  First false alarm: no charge. 
(2)  Second false alarm: $25.00 user fee per false alarm. 
(3)  Third and fourth false alarm: $100.00 user fee per false alarm. 
(4)  Fifth and sixth false alarm: $200.00 user fee per false alarm. 
(5)  Seventh and eighth false alarm: $300.00 user fee per false alarm. 
(6)  Ninth and tenth false alarm: $500.00 user fee per false alarm. 
(7)  More than ten false alarms: $1,000.00 user fee per false alarm. 
(d)  The Fire Alarm Administrator shall notify the fire alarm user in writing of each instance wherein the Fire Department has recorded a false alarm. The fire alarm user shall have the opportunity within 15 days from the date of mailing or personal delivery to submit a report to the Fire Alarm Administrator or request to meet with the Fire Alarm Administrator for the purpose of showing cause as to whether circumstances exist to warrant voiding the false alarm recordations. The Fire Alarm Administrator shall review the fire alarm user's report and/or meet with the fire alarm user and issue a written finding to the fire alarm user as to whether or not the false alarm recordations will be voided. The finding of the Fire Alarm Administrator shall be final. 
(e)  All user fees are due and payable to the village upon notice to the fire alarm user. If the fire alarm user has submitted a report or requested a meeting in accordance with subsection (d) of this section and the Fire Alarm Administrator finds no cause for voiding the false alarm, the user fees are due and payable to the village seven days from the date of the Fire Alarm Administrator's written findings on the false alarms. 
(Code 1993, § 5-7.2; Ord. No. 2009-O-84, 12-8-2009) 
Secs. 24-239-24-269. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - FILM PRODUCTION 

Sec. 24-270. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Director of Community Development means the Director of Community Development of the Village of Wilmette, and his designees. 
    Film production means any and all activities relating to the process of recording live action on film, magnetic tape, or any other medium for later commercial sale, use, or distribution as a movie, advertising commercial, video, film, or program, including the activities related to the mobilization, set-up, operation, dismantling, or storage of film production equipment, and site repair/restoration activities, as well as the gathering of persons related to the film production. 
    Film production equipment means any object used in film production, including, but not limited to, lighting and sound equipment, cameras, dressing rooms, trailers, props, furnishings, and vehicles. 
    Film Production Permit means a permit issued in accordance with the procedures and provisions herein. 
    Permittee means the individual or entity to whom a Film Production Permit has been issued. 
    Village means the Village of Wilmette, Cook County, Illinois, its employees, agents, contractors, and designees. 
    Village Manager means the Village Manager of the Village of Wilmette, Illinois, and his designees. 
(Code 1993, § 5-8.1; Ord. No. 2007-O-55, 8-28-2007; Ord. No. 2009-O-84, 12-8-2009) 
Sec. 24-271. - Permit required. 
    Except as hereinafter provided, no person shall engage in, participate in, or initiate film production anywhere within the village, including the interior or exterior of public or private property, without first having obtained a Film Production Permit in accordance with the requirements set forth herein. 
(Code 1993, § 5-8.2; Ord. No. 2007-O-55, 8-28-2007; Ord. No. 2009-O-84, 12-8-2009) 
Sec. 24-272. - Permit exceptions. 
(a)  No Film Production Permit shall be required for: 
(1)  The recording of news events or news features; 
(2)  Film production intended solely for personal use such as private events, weddings, reunions, and parties; or 
(3)  Film production conducted by, or on behalf of, the village. 
(b)  The Director of Community Development shall have the authority and discretion to waive or modify the permit requirements set forth herein. 
(Code 1993, § 5-8.3; Ord. No. 2007-O-55, 8-28-2007; Ord. No. 2009-O-84, 12-8-2009) 
Sec. 24-273. - General Permit Application requirements. 
(a)  Minimum processing period. A complete permit application must be filed with the Department of Community Development at least ten business days, excluding holidays, prior to the proposed start of film production. No applications will be accepted for processing that are received less than the required ten business days or, that fail to include all attachments required by this section. 
(b)  Information required. No permit application shall be deemed complete unless and until the following has been submitted: 
(1)  $75.00 non-refundable application processing fee; 
(2)  Signed and notarized permit application form; and 
(3)  All permit application documentation required by section 24-275, including: 
a.  Certificate of insurance. 
b.  Indemnification and hold harmless agreement. 
c.  Neighbor notification certification. 
d.  Property owner approval form. 
(Code 1993, § 5-8.4; Ord. No. 2007-O-55, 8-28-2007; Ord. No. 2009-O-84, 12-8-2009) 
Sec. 24-274. - Permit application form. 
    Applicants shall submit the following information on an application form to be provided by the village: 
(1)  The name, addresses, and telephone numbers of the applicant, contact persons, and individuals responsible for the day to day operations of the film production; 
(2)  A description and summary of the type of film to be produced; 
(3)  The proposed dates and hours for film production; 
(4)  The proposed locations for film production, including staging and storage locations; 
(5)  Identification of all public rights-of-way and public property for which the applicant seeks to use, requests closures or partial closures, and, for which the applicant seeks alterations of normal parking, vehicular, or pedestrian traffic patterns; 
(6)  A description of the methods and procedures to be used for food service, emergency medical treatment, health and sanitation, and removal of garbage and waste; and 
(7)  Such other and further information as the village may deem necessary to evaluate the permit application. 
(Code 1993, § 5-8.5; Ord. No. 2007-O-55, 8-28-2007; Ord. No. 2009-O-84, 12-8-2009) 
Sec. 24-275. - Permit application documentation. 
    The following documentation must be submitted as attachments to the application form: 
(1)  Certificate of insurance. The applicant shall attach a certificate of insurance, naming the village as an additional insured, in the amount of $5,000,000.00 general liability, including bodily injury and property damage; and automobile liability (if applicable) in the amount of $5,000,000.00 including bodily injury and property damage. The village, its corporate authorities, elected officials, officers, boards, commission, attorneys, employees, and agents shall be designated as an additional insured under the policy with respect to any and all claims which arise out of, or are in any way related to, the film productions activities. The certificate of insurance shall state whether there are any outstanding claims against the policy and whether there are any policy exclusions which would defeat or reduce the coverage amounts. 
(2)  Indemnification and hold harmless agreement. Applications for a Film Production Permit shall be accompanied by an indemnification and hold harmless agreement (in a form acceptable to the village) wherein the applicant agrees to indemnify, defend and hold the village, its officers, employees and agents harmless from any loss, damage, expense, claim and cost of every nature and kind whatsoever, including attorney's fees, arising out of, or in connection with, the film production. 
(3)  Certification of neighborhood notice/objections. 
a.  Applications for a Film Production Permit shall be accompanied by a signed certification (in a form acceptable to the village) stating that written notice has been given to all owners of record and/or occupants of all property situated within a 500-foot radius of each separate proposed film production location. The village reserves the right to require a greater area of notification, if warranted by the size or impact of the proposed film production. The neighborhood notice shall contain a written description of the proposed film production, including the proposed production schedule, type of film production activities and film production equipment to be used, and requested street closures and/or parking restrictions. 
b.  Notice must be either hand delivered, or sent by first class mail, with service being deemed as of the day the notice is postmarked. Those owners or occupants entitled to notice under this subsection shall have five days from the date of service within which to submit to the village, in writing, any objections to the proposed film production. 
(4)  Property owner approval. To the extent any film production will take place on property not owned by the applicant, the permit application shall be accompanied by a signed statement of property owner approval (in a form acceptable to the village) indicating that the owner and/or lessee consent to, and approve of, the use of their property for the purposes of film production. 
(Code 1993, § 5-8.6; Ord. No. 2007-O-55, 8-28-2007; Ord. No. 2009-O-84, 12-8-2009) 
Sec. 24-276. - Approval of permit applications. 
(a)  Review of applications. Each permit application shall be reviewed by the Director of Community Development, as well as by the appropriate operational and administrative departments within the village, including police, fire, and public works. 
(b)  Standards. Applications shall be evaluated in light of all facts and circumstances surrounding the proposed film production, including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Impact film production will have on the use of public property including rights-of-way and public buildings; 
(2)  Impact on governmental functions and the provision of public services; 
(3)  Extent to which the film production would require additional village personnel and/or services; 
(4)  Potential health, safety, or traffic hazards that film production may cause; 
(5)  Nature and extent to which the personal and property rights of village residents and businesses are impacted; and 
(6)  Objections received from those entitled to notice under section 24-275(3). 
(c)  Permit decisions. 
(1)  By the Director of Community Development. Permit applications for film production that will last five days or less shall be evaluated by the Director of Community Development, who shall have the discretion to either deny or grant the permit, with or without additional conditions. If the Director of Community Development determines that the circumstances of the proposed film production warrant consideration by the Village Board of Trustees, then the Director of Community Development may prepare a report along with recommendations and refer the matter to the Board of Trustees for its decision. 
(2)  By the village Board of Trustees. Permit applications for which film production will last more than five days or, in cases that have been referred to the Board by the Director of Community Development, the Board shall have the discretion to either deny or grant the permit, with or without additional conditions. 
(Code 1993, § 5-8.7; Ord. No. 2007-O-55, 8-28-2007; Ord. No. 2009-O-84, 12-8-2009) 
Sec. 24-277. - Permit issuance. 
    Upon approval of the permit application, and prior the issuance of the Film Production Permit, all permit fees, costs, and deposits shall be paid to the village. 
(1)  Permit fees. 
a.  Filming for five days or less: $325.00. 
b.  Filming for more than five days: $550.00. 
c.  The Village Manager shall have the discretion to waive the permit fees for film production to be conducted by students or not-for-profit organizations. 
(2)  Costs for use of village personnel. Applicant shall pay in full, before the initiation of film production, the estimated costs of any police, fire, public works, or other village personnel to be used for the film production. Such costs shall include cost of services specifically requested by the applicant and the cost of services which, in the judgment of the village, are needed as a result of the film production. The costs billed for such direct village labor shall be equal to 1.5 times the hourly rate of pay for each individual village employee so assigned, including any applicable overtime, plus an administrative charge of $5.00 per hour. The village reserves the right to assign additional fire and/or police personnel to the film production or film production location, where in the opinion of the Chief of Police or Fire Chief, such protection is warranted by the nature of the film production. After completion of film production site repair and restoration, the permittee shall reimburse the village for all costs incurred by the village in excess of the estimated cost for use of village personnel. To the extent the actual costs incurred by the village are less than the estimated amounts paid, the village shall reimburse the permittee for any such amounts. No reimbursement shall be made to the permittee, however, until the completion of all film production site repair and restoration. 
(3)  Cost of use of village property. applicant shall pay in full, before film production, the costs for the use of all village property and public rights-of-way. The costs billed for such use shall be at the rates hereinafter set forth, based on the extent of interference with or disruption to the normal use and operation of village property or public ways. The rates shall be as follows: 
a.  Total closure of public or rights-of-way, including sidewalks and parking: $75.00 per hour per block. 
b.  Partial closure of public rights-of-way: $50.00 per hour per block. 
(4)  Deposit. Applicant shall deposit funds in escrow with the village in the amount of $1,000.00 in order to secure the repair and restoration of public property as required herein. Based upon the circumstances of the film production and its potential impact upon public property, the village shall have the discretion to increase the amount of deposit required under this section. The village shall have the right to draw against the escrowed funds in order to pay any portion of repair or restoration costs not paid by the permitee within 14 days of the issuance of an invoice for payment. 
(Code 1993, § 5-8.8; Ord. No. 2007-O-55, 8-28-2007; Ord. No. 2009-O-84, 12-8-2009) 
Sec. 24-278. - Permit conditions. 
    In addition to any conditions imposed pursuant to section 24-276(c), all permits issued under this section are deemed to incorporate by reference and include the following conditions: 
(1)  Hours of film production. Film production, including time for set-up and restoration, shall occur only between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. Monday through Friday and from 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. Saturday, Sunday and holidays. Upon request, the Village Manager shall have the authority and discretion to a allow film production to occur at times other than those stated herein. 
(2)  Permit expiration. Film production permits shall be valid only for the time period stated in the permit. The village shall have the discretion to extend the time period upon written request with a showing of good cause. Any such extension may be conditioned upon the satisfaction of the requirements stated herein, including, but not limited to, additional neighborhood notice. 
(3)  Restoration and repair of property. The permittee shall restore any public property used during film production to the condition it was in prior to the initiation of film production. The permittee shall pay in full promptly upon receipt of invoice, the cost of repair for any and all damage to public property arising out of, or related to, the film production. 
(4)  Emergency access. Notwithstanding the approval of the closure of a public right-of-way, emergency access through the right-of-way must be maintained at all times. The permittee shall immediately comply with any order deemed necessary by the village Police Department for the protection of the public health, safety, or welfare. 
(5)  Inspection. The village shall have the right, but not obligation, to inspect all structures, devices and/or film production equipment to be used in connection with the film production at reasonable times during film production. 
(Code 1993, § 5-8.9; Ord. No. 2007-O-55, 8-28-2007) 
Sec. 24-279. - Permit violations, revocation, and penalties. 
(a)  Revocation of permit. Upon violation of any permit term or condition, or upon violation of any other applicable village ordinance or state law, any permit issued pursuant to this section may be revoked by the village. Such revocation may be in addition to any citation issued or fine imposed for any such violation. 
(b)  General penalty. Any person who violates a provision of this section, who makes a false statement in obtaining a permit under this section, or, who violates a condition of any permit issued under this section shall be subject to a fine of not less than $150.00, but not more than $1,000.00. 
(c)  Separate offenses. Each act of violation and each day on which a violation of this article has occurred shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1993, § 5-8.10; Ord. No. 2007-O-55, 8-28-2007; Ord. No. 2009-O-84, 12-8-2009) 
Secs. 24-280-24-306. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - VALET PARKING SERVICES 

Sec. 24-307. - Place where permitted/license required. 
(a)  Valet parking services shall be permitted only in Downtown Wilmette. Valet parking services shall be accessory to a lawful business located in Downtown Wilmette, which business is operating at the premises where the valet parking services are provided. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to offer or provide valet parking services in the village without a valid Valet Parking License issued in accordance with this section. 
(Code 1993, § 5-10.1; Ord. No. 2016-O-31, 6-28-2016) 
Sec. 24-308. - Application for license. 
(a)  An application for a Valet Parking License shall be filed with the village by the valet parking operator or business on a form supplied by the village and shall include: 
(1)  The valet parking operator's company name and license holder, address, and telephone numbers. 
(2)  The valet parking operator's state tax payer ID. 
(3)  The valet parking operator's village business license number. 
(4)  For the business to be served, the business name, address and telephone numbers, and the name of the local manager for the business. 
(5)  Narrative description of the valet parking services proposed including the size and location of the designated valet loading zone, where vehicles will be parked, hours of operation for the valet parking services, proposed signage, number of valet parking attendants and any other pertinent information. 
(6)  Copies of any leases or other written agreements pursuant to which a business or valet parking operator is authorized to use real property which it does not own for the temporary storage of customers' vehicles. 
(7)  If a valet parking services will be performed for a business by a separate valet parking operator, a copy of a fully executed contract between the business and the valet parking operator. 
(8)  The applicant shall meet the following insurance requirements throughout the term of any license issued under this article: 
a.  Workers compensation insurance with statutory limits as required by state law. 
b.  Commercial general liability insurance with limits not less than $1,000,000.00 each occurrence combined single limit bodily injury and property damage, including contractual liability, personal injury, broad form property damage, products and completed operations coverage. Coverage may be combined with the business automobile coverage. 
c.  Business automobile liability insurance with limits not less than $1,000,000.00 each accident combined single limit bodily injury and property damage, including owned, non-owned and hired auto coverage, as applicable. Coverage may be combined with the comprehensive general liability coverage. 
d.  Garagekeepers' legal liability insurance with limits not less than $500,000.00 each occurrence, including coverage for fire and explosion, theft of the entire vehicle, riot, civil commotion, malicious mischief and vandalism, collision or upset. 
e.  Commercial general liability, business automobile liability and garagekeepers' legal liability insurance policies shall be endorsed to provide the following: 
1.  Name as additional insureds the member, its officials, employees, volunteers and agents. 
2.  Provide additional insured endorsements confirming that such policies provide primary and non-contributory insurance to any other insurance available to the additional insureds, with respect to any claims arising out of activities conducted under the license, and that insurance applies separately to each insured against whom claim is made or suit is brought. 
All policies shall be endorsed to provide that 30 days' advance written notice to the member of any change, cancellation, nonrenewal or reduction in coverage with the member named as cancellation notice recipient. Certificates of insurance and endorsements, satisfactory to the member, evidencing all coverage above shall be furnished to the member prior to issuance of a license or renewal of a license. 
(9)  In addition to the foregoing information, such application shall contain additional information as the village may require. 
(b)  No Valet Parking License shall be issued to an applicant whose license issued under this article has been revoked for cause; or to an applicant who does not have the consent of the owner of the business to which the valet parking services will be accessory, if such owner is different from the applicant; or for premises which are not owned or leased by such owner, which lease is for the full period for which the license is to be issued; or for premises located in a zoning district in which valet parking services are not an authorized use. 
(c)  Each valet parking operator licensed under this article shall maintain its qualifications for licensure in full force and effect during the term of its license. 
(Code 1993, § 5-10.2; Ord. No. 2016-O-31, 6-28-2016) 
Sec. 24-309. - Issuance of license. 
(a)  Upon proper application and payment of the license fee, the Village Engineer or his designee may issue the license. Such license may contain conditions and limitations as are necessary to promote safe and sound passenger loading and unloading, vehicle transfer, and traffic movement, as may be determined by the village. The village may require loading zones to be shared by one or more valet parking operators. 
(b)  License fees. The annual fee for a license required by this section shall be as established in the annual fee ordinance. The village may establish additional fees for valet parking operators who provide services at more than one location. The license fee shall be paid at the time of application. The fee for the license shall be nonrefundable and there shall be no prorating of fees if a license is revoked or suspended. 
(c)  Term of license. An Operator's License under this section shall be valid for one year from the date of issuance. 
(Code 1993, § 5-10.3; Ord. No. 2016-O-31, 6-28-2016) 
Sec. 24-310. - Conditions of license. 
(a)  Location restrictions. A license issued under this section shall license the operations of a valet parking service only at the premises described in the application and license. Such location may be changed only upon review and approval of the Village Engineer and with the issuance of an amended license to cover such additional or changed locations. 
(b)  Transfer restrictions. A license issued under this article is not transferrable. 
(c)  Valet loading zones. Any valet loading zone shall be subject to approval by the Village Engineer, or his designee, and shall be specified on the license application for each location where valet parking services are provided. Loading an unloading shall be conducted as follows: 
(1)  All such loading shall take place in a driveway or private parking lot; or in the approved, authorized valet loading zone on a public way. 
(2)  If on a public way, the valet parking loading zone shall be the on the street immediately adjacent to the curb, or in such other safe location as designated in the Valet Parking License. 
(3)  The loading and unloading operation shall not obstruct traffic at any time. 
(4)  All vehicles accepted for valet parking shall be immediately removed from the valet loading zone to the storage area specified in the Valet Parking License. 
(5)  The Village Engineer, or his designee, may, in his sole discretion, eliminate or relocate a valet loading zone at any time if it is determined that the valet loading zone has increased traffic congestion or hazards in the public way, or otherwise has impaired the public health, safety or welfare. 
(Code 1993, § 5-10.4; Ord. No. 2016-O-31, 6-28-2016) 
Sec. 24-311. - Specified storage areas for valet parking operations. 
(a)  A business or valet parking operator may temporarily store customers' motor vehicles on private nonresidential property only pursuant to a written agreement. 
(b)  No vehicle shall be parked by a valet parking operator on any public street. 
(c)  Valet parking operators may temporarily store customers' motor vehicles in municipal parking lots in Downtown Wilmette, provided parked vehicles do not exceed the posted time restrictions. 
(Code 1993, § 5-10.5; Ord. No. 2016-O-31, 6-28-2016) 
Sec. 24-312. - Signage. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this section, all signage shall comply with the village's sign regulations. One, two-sided, folding sandwich sign may be placed on public property at each valet loading zone for the purpose of alerting drivers and village code enforcement personnel about the service and the location of the valet loading zone. Each such sign shall contain: 
(1)  The name of the business to which the service is accessory; 
(2)  The words "valet parking"; and 
(3)  The cost, if any, for the service. Such sign shall be temporary and shall be free-standing and not affixed to any tree, pole or other structure. 
(b)  Such sign may be located on the public sidewalk at the curb line or within the designated loading zone space, but no further than three feet from the curb. 
(Code 1993, § 5-10.6; Ord. No. 2016-O-31, 6-28-2016) 
Sec. 24-313. - General prohibitions and penalties. 
(a)  No person may park any vehicle in any manner which violates the provisions of this chapter or any other duly adopted parking regulation. 
(b)  In conducting a valet parking operation: 
(1)  No person may obstruct the normal flow of traffic or block or occupy a no parking zone; 
(2)  No person shall provide valet parking at a location not authorized by the village; 
(3)  No person shall park the customers' vehicles on a public street or other unauthorized parking zone; 
(4)  No person shall place signs, cones, or any other object in a traffic lane that would obstruct traffic or hinder movement; 
(5)  No person shall allow vehicles to remain in the authorized valet loading zone longer than 15 minutes; and 
(6)  No person shall violate any state law or local ordinance. 
(c)  Penalties. A license issued under this section may be suspended or revoked for failure to comply with any provision of this Code. Suspension or revocation proceedings shall be conducted in accord with the procedure set forth in section 24-2(j). In addition, violations of this section are punishable by fine or injunction as provided in article VII of this chapter. 
(Code 1993, § 5-10.7; Ord. No. 2016-O-31, 6-28-2016) 
Secs. 24-314-24-344. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - SOLICITORS 

Sec. 24-345. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Contribution means and includes, but is not necessarily limited to, food, clothing, money, subscription, property or donations under the guise of a loan of money or property. 
    Person means any individual, organization, group, association, partnership, joint venture, corporation, trust, or any combination of the forgoing. 
    Registered solicitor means any person who has obtained a valid solicitation permit as hereinafter provided. 
    Residence means every separate living unit in the village occupied for residential purposes by one or more persons, contained within any type of building or structure. 
    Solicitation means seeking to sell, offer for sale, sell and deliver, barter, or exchange any goods or services, or seeking to obtain contributions for a charitable or political purpose, or on behalf of any person or organization. 
    Solicitor means any person engaging in solicitation. 
    Street means the entire area dedicated to public use for public street purposes and shall include, but not be limited to, roadways, parkways, alleys and sidewalks. 
(Code 1993, § 22-1.1) 
Sec. 24-346. - Permit requirement. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, except those expressly exempted in section 24-347(a), to conduct solicitation in the village without having first applied for, obtained, and maintained a valid Solicitor's Permit as hereinafter provided. 
(Code 1993, § 22-1.2) 
Sec. 24-347. - Permit exemption. 
(a)  Any person under the age of 17 years need not obtain a Solicitor's Permit from the Police Department, but shall disclose to any business or resident their organizational affiliation and purpose of the solicitation. 
(b)  Any person exempted from registration in subsection (a) of this section wishing to conduct solicitations in the village shall notify the Police Department and, when requested, shall supply such information needed to verify the permit exemption. 
(Code 1993, § 22-1.3) 
Sec. 24-348. - Permit application. 
(a)  Application for a Solicitor's Permit shall be made in writing on a form provided by and filed with the Police Department. The applicant shall state the following information under oath: 
(1)  The applicant's full name and residence addresses for the past two years, the length of time of the applicant's residence at each address, and the applicant's business address if other than the current residence address; 
(2)  The applicant's date of birth, social security number, driver's license number, and brief physical description including height, weight, hair and eye color; 
(3)  The name and address of the business or other person or entity by whom the applicant is employed or whom the applicant represents, and the initial date of such employment or representation; 
(4)  A description of the nature of the applicant's solicitation; 
(5)  The dates for which the applicant seeks a Solicitor's Permit; 
(6)  Whether the person seeking the permit will receive any monetary compensation or portion of monies solicited; 
(7)  Information regarding the prior application, use or revocation of a Solicitor's Permit in Wilmette, if any, including the date or approximate date of the previous application for a Solicitor's Permit; 
(8)  Information regarding any prior conviction of the applicant of a felony under the laws of the State, any other state, or the United States; 
(9)  Information regarding prior or current violations, if any, by the applicant of any of the provisions of this article, or of the solicitation regulations of any local, state, or federal government. 
(b)  Applications shall be submitted with two photographs of the applicant taken within 30 days immediately prior to the date of filing the application, which photographs shall be one inch by 11/2 inches in size showing the head and shoulders of the applicant in a clear and distinguishing manner. 
(Code 1993, § 22-1.4) 
Sec. 24-349. - Standards for permit issuance. 
(a)  Upon receipt of a completed application for a Solicitor's Permit, the Chief of Police or his designee shall cause an investigation to be made as to the applicant's criminal record, if any, and compliance with all applicable laws and ordinances of the State and the village. Applicants shall cooperate with such investigation and furnish such additional information as may be reasonably requested by the Chief of Police in furtherance of said investigation. 
(b)  Within five business days of receiving an application the Chief of Police shall issue a Solicitor's Permit if he determines and finds that: 
(1)  The material statements made in the application are true; 
(2)  The applicant has not been convicted of a felony under the laws of the State, of any other state, or of the United States within five years of the date of the application; 
(3)  The applicant has not had a previously issued Solicitor's Permit revoked by the village or by any other municipality within five years of the date of the application; 
(4)  The applicant has not been convicted of violating any provisions of this chapter within five years of the date of application. 
(c)  The Police Department shall maintain a record of every application received and acted upon, together with all other information and data pertaining thereto, copies of all Solicitor's Permits issued under the provisions of this article, and a record of all applications denied or revoked pursuant to provisions of this article. 
(Code 1993, § 22-1.5) 
Sec. 24-350. - Denial of permit. 
(a)  If the Chief of Police determines and finds that the applicant has not met one or more of the above conditions, the Chief of Police shall deny issuance of the permit and shall give written notification of such denial to the applicant. Such notice shall be delivered in person or by U.S. mail. 
(b)  No permit shall be issued to any applicant who has unpaid fines, fees, or other financial obligations outstanding with the village. Any applicant having unpaid fines or other fees owed the village for any purpose shall bring those accounts current prior to the issuance of any permit required under this article. 
(Code 1993, § 22-1.6) 
Sec. 24-351. - Revocation of permit. 
(a)  Any Solicitor's Permit issued hereunder shall be revoked by the Chief of Police or his authorized representative if the holder of the permit: 
(1)  Violates any of the provisions of this article; or 
(2)  Has made a false statement or misrepresentation in the permit application; or 
(3)  Perpetrates a fraud or misrepresentation in the course of conducting solicitation activities; or 
(4)  Conducts solicitation activities contrary to the conditions of the permit requirements; or 
(5)  Conducts solicitation activities in an unlawful manner or in such manner as to create a public nuisance or in such way as to constitute a danger to the health, safety or welfare of the public; or 
(6)  Is convicted of any felony. 
(b)  Immediately upon such revocation, written notice thereof shall be given by the Chief of Police or his authorized representative to the permit holder, in person or by U.S. mail addressed to the residence address set forth in the permit application, stating the action taken and the reasons supporting such action. Immediately upon the delivery or mailing of such notice, the Solicitor's Permit shall become null and void. 
(Code 1993, § 22-1.7) 
Sec. 24-352. - Appeal of permit denial or revocation. 
(a)  Any person denied a Solicitor's Permit or whose Solicitor's Permit has been revoked may appeal by filing a written notice of appeal with the Village Manager. 
(b)  Appeals must be filed within ten business days after revocation or denial of the permit, and shall contain a written statement setting forth the grounds for the appeal. The appealing party shall submit whatever documentation it desires to have the Village Manager consider with the written appeal. 
(c)  The written decision of the Village Manager shall be made available to the appealing party not later than ten business days after the village receives the appeal. 
(d)  The decision of the Village Manager is final. 
(Code 1993, § 22-1.8) 
Sec. 24-353. - Village policy on individual privacy and soliciting. 
(a)  It is hereby declared to be the policy of the village that the occupants of any residence located within the village shall make the determination of whether solicitors shall be, or shall not be, invited to their respective residences. 
(b)  Any person or solicitor who is not, pursuant to the provisions contained herein, invited onto the premises of any residence or who has obtained entrance to such premises and does not immediately and peacefully leave the same upon being so requested by the occupant of such premises, shall be deemed a trespasser. 
(c)  No person, whether registered or not under this article, shall solicit within the village or on any premises, either residential or nonresidential, if the same are posted against solicitation by means of a notice, prominently displayed, bearing the words "No Solicitors," "No Trespassing," "No Solicitors Invited" or any other similar notice indicating in any manner that the occupants of such residence or nonresidential premises desire not to have their right of privacy disturbed, unless such occupant has specifically requested such solicitation. 
(d)  Premises shall be deemed to be posted against solicitation if there is exhibited on or near the main entrance to the property, or on or near the main door, a sign measuring approximately three inches by four inches bearing the applicable words with letters at least one-third inch in height. 
(e)  It shall be the duty of each solicitor upon going onto any premise in the village upon which a residence is located to first examine the premises for the notice provided for in subsection (d) of this section. If a notice is posted, then the solicitor, whether registered or not, shall immediately and peaceably depart. 
(Code 1993, § 22-1.9) 
Sec. 24-354. - Other regulations and standards of conduct. 
(a)  It is hereby declared unlawful and shall constitute an offense for any solicitor, whether registered under this article or not, to go in or upon any residential or nonresidential premises for the purpose of soliciting at any time before 9:00 a.m. or after 9:00 p.m. on any day. Solicitations are further prohibited at any time on a Sunday or on a state or national holiday. 
(b)  Each solicitor registered hereunder shall at all times while soliciting in the village wear the Solicitor's Permit on the solicitor's outer clothing, in such a way that the permit may be easily seen and read while in the course of solicitation or distribution activities. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct solicitation on any sidewalk or other public property, way, or place in a manner that completely or substantially impedes the flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic in, on, or around such sidewalk or public property, way or place. No person conducting solicitation shall have the exclusive right to any sidewalk or other public property, way or place, nor to establish a permanent stationary location for such solicitation. 
(d)  No person shall stand in or on a public street for the purpose of soliciting contributions from the occupant of a motor vehicle. 
(e)  Solicitors shall conduct themselves at all times in an orderly and lawful manner and shall not make, or cause to be made, any loud or obnoxious noise of such volume sufficient to disturb the peace of the residents of the village. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for any solicitor to cheat, deceive, or misrepresent any product, service, or organization, whether through himself or through an agent or employee, while acting as a solicitor in the village, or to sell or barter any goods, merchandise or wares other than those specified in his permit application. 
(Code 1993, § 22-1.10; Ord. No. 93-O-23, 7-27-1993) 
Sec. 24-355. - Penalty for noncompliance and payment of penalty without prosecution. 
(a)  Any person violating any provision of this article shall be deemed to have committed an ordinance violation and shall be fined as provided for in section 2-1305. 
(b)  Any violator may avoid prosecution for violating said ordinance by surrendering the citation or other notice of violation and paying the Police Department within ten days from the date appearing on said violation notice, the sum of $50.00, or if more than ten days from the date of said violation notice, then the sum of $60.00, before legal action has been brought against the violator. Any person making such payment shall receive a receipt from the Police Department. 
(Code 1993, § 22-2; Ord. No. 93-O-23, 7-27-1993; Ord. No. 96-O-11, 4-9-1996) 
Secs. 24-356-24-383. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - TOWING AND RELOCATING OF VEHICLES 

Sec. 24-384. - Scope of regulations. 
    The provisions of this article shall only apply to private property. The removal, relocating or towing of unauthorized or trespassing vehicles from residential property shall be governed by 625 ILCS 5/4-203 and 5/18a-302 of the Illinois Vehicle Code. The removal, relocating or towing of unauthorized or trespassing vehicles from village-owned property, village right-of-way, or vehicles that are a nuisance shall be governed by sections 14-367 and 14-368. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-19, § 2(5-11.1), 4-24-2018) 
Sec. 24-385. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Commission means the Illinois Commerce Commission. 
    Licensee means a relocator or operator that has received and is operating under a valid Village Towing License. 
    Operator means any person who, as an employee of a relocator, removes unauthorized vehicles from private property by means of towing or otherwise. The term "operator" includes the driver of any vehicle used in removing an unauthorized vehicle from private property, as well as any person other than the driver who assists in the removal of an unauthorized vehicle from private property. 
    Private property means a parking lot or other parking area located on privately owned and operated property that is sited in the following Village Zoning Districts: 
(1)  Commercial Districts. 
(2)  Planned Commercial Development Districts. 
The term "private property" shall not mean any property, whether privately or publicly owned, located within a Residential District, or any Village of Wilmette property located anywhere within the village limits. Private property shall also not mean any public right-of-way controlled by the village. 
    Private property owner means the owner of the private property or the management company of the private property acting as the owner's duly authorized agent. The term "private property owner" shall not mean a tenant entitled to use the private property. 
    Relocated, relocating , and relocation means the towing of an unauthorized vehicle from private property. A tow from public property is not a relocation tow. A tow from private property pursuant to explicit authorization from the vehicle owner or owner's agent is not a relocation tow. 
    Relocator means any person or entity engaged in the business of removing unauthorized vehicles from private property by means of towing or otherwise, and thereafter relocating and storing such vehicles. 
    Unauthorized vehicle means any vehicle parked or abandoned on private property, without the consent of the owner of the private property or the owner's authorized agent. The term "unauthorized vehicle" shall not mean a vehicle that is to be relocated or towed at the request and consent of the vehicle owner or other person entitled to possession of the vehicle. 
    Village means the Village of Wilmette, Illinois. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-19, § 2(5-11.2), 4-24-2018) 
Sec. 24-386. - Towing License required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to engage in the business of vehicle towing or relocating from private property without first obtaining a Village Towing License. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the private property owner, to allow or authorize the towing or relocation of a vehicle from their private property, without first complying with the provisions of this section. 
(c)  The towing of vehicles from non-private property within the village shall be performed in accordance with state statutes and the Wilmette Village Code, 1993 regulating such activity. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-19, § 2(5-11.3), 4-24-2018) 
Sec. 24-387. - Application, qualifications, fee, late penalty. 
(a)  Prior to the issuance of any Village Towing License, each applicant must comply with the following provisions. 
(b)  The Chief of Police may issue a Village Towing License to any qualified applicant pursuant to an application filed. The Chief of Police may promulgate rules and regulations to further implement and enforce the provisions of this section. 
(c)  Each application for a Village Towing License shall be made in writing to the Chief of Police, shall be verified under oath; shall be in such form and contain such information as required by the Chief of Police, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Sufficient information to identify the applicant, including but not limited to, full legal name, date of formation of legal entity, any trade name under which the applicant operates, telephone number, and all business and residence addresses, as reported to the Secretary of State and/or the Illinois Commerce Commission. 
(2)  Certificate of good standing demonstrating that all corporate or limited liability company applicants are qualified to do business under the laws of Illinois. 
(3)  A copy of the most current Illinois Commerce Commission Relocator's License application or renewal, and a copy of the issued Illinois Commerce Commission Relocator's License. 
(4)  A list of all persons with any ownership interest in the applicant who have previously been denied a license by the village, another municipality or the State of Illinois. 
(5)  A listing, by make, model and license plates of all vehicles which will be used in the relocation of unauthorized vehicles and a photograph or other rendering of the proposed, existing, and previous applicant's service vehicles' colors and markings. 
(6)  A description of the applicant's management plan, which shall include but not be limited to the following: location and description of all places of business, a description of all existing towing equipment, a system for handling complaints and damage caused to towed vehicles during the process of towing, and a description of any communication and payment system. 
(7)  Then name and age, along with a photograph of each employee that will be performing towing operations within the village limits. 
(8)  Days and hours of operation of the relocation service. 
(9)  Proof of insurance as required by this section. 
(10)  The signature of each individual applicant, the signature of the president or vice-president of a corporate applicant, the signature of the managing member of a limited liability company, or the signature of all general partners of a partnership applicant. 
(11)  An affidavit by an authorized agent of the applicant affirming that the information provided in the application is true and accurate, along with an agreement to abide by the provisions of this section, the ordinances of the village, and the laws of the State of Illinois. 
(12)  Such additional information about the applicant as the Chief of Police or his designee may deem appropriate. 
(13)  A listing of the private property owner and the address(es) of any and all private property that the applicant has a contract with the private property owner to relocate vehicles. 
(14)  A listing of the address(es) of any and all impound lots owned by or in the lawful possession or control of the applicant at which unauthorized vehicles will be relocated or stored. 
(d)  The annual fee for a Village Towing License shall be $75.00. 
(e)  The annual fee, along with a completed application, shall be paid to the village no later than January 31 of any given year. Any person or entity that fails to pay the annual fee on or before January 31 shall be required to pay the applicable annual fee, plus a late penalty in the amount of $150.00 for each month the annual fee and late penalty due and owing has not been paid in full thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-19, § 2(5-11.4), 4-24-2018) 
Sec. 24-388. - Private property owner responsibilities. 
    Signage located on private property. Prior to any vehicle being relocated from private property, the private property owner must: 
(1)  Prominently display signage at each driveway access or curb cut allowing vehicular access to the private property within five feet from the public right-of-way line. If there are no curbs or access barriers, the notice must be posted not less than one sign each 100 feet of lot frontage. 
(2)  Clearly indicated on the signage, in not less than two-inch high light-reflective letters on a contrasting background: 
a.  A general statement indicating who is allowed to park on the private property; 
b.  That unauthorized vehicles will be relocated at the vehicle owner's expense; 
c.  The name, address and telephone number of the licensee removing the vehicle and the location where the relocated vehicle will be located if different than the address displayed; 
d.  The fee charged by the licensee to recover the relocated vehicle; 
e.  If the name and number of the licensee is unavailable because there is no agreement between the owner of the private parking and the licensee to remove all unauthorized vehicles and such removal is performed on a case by case basis, then the name and current telephone number of the private property owner or the owner's authorized agent must be provided. 
(3)  Install said notice on an affixed sign that is erected with the bottom of the sign not less than four feet above ground level and not more than seven feet above ground level, for a period of not less than 24 hours prior to the relocation of any vehicle. 
(4)  A private property owner shall not perform any towing or relocating services for the private property owned by the private property owner. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-19, § 2(5-11.5), 4-24-2018) 
Sec. 24-389. - Licensee's duties. 
(a)  Reporting requirements for relocating vehicles. 
(1)  Within 30 minutes prior to relocating any unauthorized vehicle, the licensee shall notify the Wilmette Police Department by using the nonemergency police telephone number or in any other manner as determined by the Chief of Police to report the year, make, model and state license plate number of the vehicle and the location to where the vehicle is located. 
(2)  Within 30 minutes after relocating any unauthorized vehicle, the licensee shall notify the Wilmette Police Department by using the nonemergency police telephone number or in any other manner as determined by the Chief of Police to report that the vehicle which was the subject of the report provided in subsection (a)(1) of this section was in fact relocated and the location of where that vehicle will be relocated and remain for the next 24 hours. 
(3)  In addition to the notifications required above, within 24 hours after relocating an unauthorized vehicle, the licensee shall submit a written report to the Chief of Police, or his designee, containing the following information: 
a.  Name, address and telephone number of the licensee and of the operator who relocated the unauthorized vehicle; 
b.  State license plate number of the vehicle relocated; 
c.  Vehicle identification number of the vehicle relocated; 
d.  Color, make and model of the relocated vehicle; 
e.  Date and time of the relocation; 
f.  Address of place from which vehicle was relocated; 
g.  Names and addresses of any witnesses to the relocation; 
h.  Name of person with whom the relocation agreement was made; 
i.  Address of place where the vehicle is stored; 
j.  State license plate number of the tow truck which made the relocation; and 
k.  Name of the individual or company that made the request for the vehicle's relocation. 
(4)  Prior to relocating any unauthorized vehicle, the licensee shall take at least one photograph of the unauthorized vehicle which clearly shows: 
a.  The date and time the photograph was taken; 
b.  The entire vehicle and its location on the date and time the photograph was taken; and 
c.  The vehicle's license plate. 
The licensee shall maintain the photographs, in electronic format, for a period of two years from the date on which it was taken. The licensee shall provide the photographs, without charge, to the relocated vehicle's owner and the Chief of Police, upon request. 
(5)  Governmental vehicles shall not be relocated. If at any point a governmental vehicle is in the process of being relocated, the licensee must relinquish the vehicle immediately and without any payment to the governmental official on site and claiming the vehicle. If a governmental vehicle is relocated, the vehicle must be released to the governmental official claiming the vehicle, immediately and without payment. 
(b)  Prerequisites to relocations. 
(1)  Before a licensee relocates an unauthorized vehicle, the licensee shall first obtain written consent from the owner of the private property or the owner's authorized agent to relocate the specific vehicle in question. If the licensee has an agreement to relocate all unauthorized vehicles from that private property, then the licensee shall verify that the private property owner is making such a request to have the unauthorized vehicle relocated. 
(2)  Vehicles shall not be relocated without such request being made by the private property owner. The licensee shall note the individual or company name that has made a request for vehicle relocation. 
(3)  No vehicle shall be relocated if: 
a.  The owner of the vehicle or the owner's agent is present or arrives on the scene before the vehicle is completely removed from the private property; 
b.  Such owner or agent can produce the ignition key or other ignition device for the vehicle; and 
c.  Such owner or agent is able to remove and immediately does remove the vehicle from the private property. 
(4)  No licensee shall relocate a vehicle if said vehicle contains one or more passengers; including pets. 
(5)  No licensee shall demand, collect or receive anything of value or compensation from the vehicle owner, agent or lessee of a relocated vehicle other than the amount indicated on the signs posted on the private property from which the vehicle was relocated, or the rate established by the commission, whichever is less; provided that this subsection shall not apply to storage fees prescribed by the commission which are posted in compliance with the commission's rules and regulations at the locations where the relocated vehicle may be reclaimed. 
(6)  Licensee must accept any of the following methods of payment for lawful rates, fees and charges both at the private property or any impound lots where the relocated vehicle may be stored: United States currency, commonly recognized traveler's checks, money orders, cashier's checks, certified checks, and commonly accepted credit cards and debit cards. Licensee must be able to accept these forms of payments onsite and at any other location where a vehicle may be relocated. 
(7)  Provide the owner of a relocated vehicle with a legible receipt, which shall indicate: 
a.  The date and time the vehicle was relocated; 
b.  The date and time the vehicle owner or agent arrived at the storage facility and the location of such storage facility; 
c.  The date and time the vehicle was returned; and 
d.  The name of the person who relocated the vehicle. 
(8)  Keep on file, for a period of at least three years from the date of its issuance, a copy of the receipts which shall be provided upon request by any authorized village official and shall make a copy of such receipt(s) available for inspection by such authorized village official. 
(c)  Insurance for licensees. No licensee shall relocate any vehicle from private property nor shall any person accept in storage an unauthorized vehicle relocated unless at the time of the relocation the licensee had liability insurance in effect in the name of such licensee as follows: 
(1)  Every licensee shall maintain a commercial general liability insurance policy insuring the licensee with a limit of not less than $1,000,000.00 per occurrence, for bodily injury, personal injury and property damage, arising in any way from the issuance of a license or activities conducted pursuant to the license. 
(2)  Such insurance policy shall be issued by a firm properly qualified to do business in the State of Illinois; shall name the Village of Wilmette as an additional insured on a primary, noncontributory basis for any liability arising directly or indirectly from the licensee's operations; and shall not be cancelled, revoked, reduced in limits or subject to lapsing without first providing 30 days' advance notice to the Chief of Police. A certificate of the policy shall be carried in the cab of such tow truck and displayed on demand to a police officer or other authorized government official. 
(d)  Storage and relocation. 
(1)  Unauthorized vehicles shall be relocated directly from the initial point of tow to the licensee's facility that is indicated on the sign posted at the private property. 
(2)  No unauthorized vehicle shall be relocated to a storage lot or facility that is not identified on signs posted at the location from which the unauthorized vehicle is relocated in compliance with state law. 
(3)  Following the initial relocation, no vehicle shall be subsequently transported to any other lot or facility except to a secondary storage lot in compliance with state law, which must be indicated on the required signage. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-19, § 2(5-11.6), 4-24-2018) 
Sec. 24-390. - Towing Bill of Rights. 
(a)  Wilmette Towing Bill of Rights; posting; required. Each licensee shall post a copy of the Wilmette Towing Bill of Rights, as set forth in subsection (b) of this section, conspicuously in the area of their lot or facility where persons retrieve relocated vehicles. Such posting, which shall be labeled the Wilmette Towing Bill of Rights, shall be on a page or poster not less than 11 inches in width and 17 inches in height. In addition, the licensee shall provide a paper copy of the Wilmette Towing Bill of Rights to all persons retrieving a vehicle from the licensee's lot or facility. 
(b)  Wilmette Towing Bill of Rights; required contents. The Wilmette Towing Bill of Rights shall provide the following: 
Wilmette Towing Bill of Rights 
Pursuant to the Illinois Compiled Statutes, Illinois Administrative Code, and Wilmette Village Code, 1993, the following requirements apply when any vehicle is towed from private property: 
(1)  No vehicle shall be relocated from any private property without the consent of the private property owner or his authorized agent to conduct such removals. 
(2)  No vehicle shall be relocated from a lot which does not, at the time of the tow and for at least 24 hours prior thereto, have signs posted in compliance with applicable laws and regulations. 
(3)  Licensees shall print and make available to the public all authorized rates and charges for towing or for otherwise moving and storing vehicles in connection with the removal of unauthorized vehicles from private property. 
(4)  No vehicle shall be relocated if: 
a.  The owner of the vehicle or the owner's agent is present or arrives on the scene before the vehicle is completely removed from the private property; 
b.  Such owner or agent can produce the ignition key or other ignition device for the vehicle; and 
c.  Such owner or agent is able to remove and immediately does remove the vehicle from the private property. 
(5)  Licensees must notify the Wilmette Police Department within 30 minutes after relocating any unauthorized vehicle. 
(6)  Licensees must accept any of the following methods of payment for lawful fees and charges: United States currency, commonly recognized traveler's checks, money orders, cashier's checks, certified checks, and commonly accepted credit cards and debit cards. 
(7)  In the event the owner of any relocated vehicle is not able to immediately pay to retrieve the vehicle, the licensee must provide the owner with access to the vehicle to retrieve any of the owner's personal belongings. The licensee is permitted to accompany the owner to the vehicle while the owner removes his or her belongings. 
(8)  Upon request, the licensee must provide the owner of any relocated vehicle with a photograph of the vehicle taken before it was towed that clearly shows the date and time the photograph was taken, the vehicle's location, and the vehicle's license plate number. Upon request, the licensee must also provide the vehicle owner with relevant electronic video records of the relocation. 
(9)  When the owner retrieves his or her vehicle, or upon request, the licensee must provide the owner of the relocated vehicle with a copy of this "Bill of Rights" along with other relevant statutes, regulations, and ordinances governing relocation operations. 
(10)  Formal complaints about the licensee can be made by contacting the Illinois Commerce Commission at (847) 294-4326 or can be filed online at www.icc.illinois.gov. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-19, § 2(5-11.7), 4-24-2018) 
Sec. 24-391. - Booting not authorized. 
    A Village Towing License shall not authorize the booting or immobilization of any motor vehicle located within the corporate limits of the village at any time. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-19, § 2(5-11.8), 4-24-2018) 
Sec. 24-392. - Violation; penalty. 
(a)  In addition to the provisions of this chapter, every licensee shall operate in a manner prescribed by this article and by the Illinois Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/1 et seq.) and the Illinois Administrative Code (92 Ill. Admin. Code 1710.10 et seq.). 
(b)  Every act or omission constituting a violation of any provision of this section by any operator, officer, director, manager, agent or employee of any licensee shall be deemed and held to be the act of such employer or licensee and the employer or licensee shall be punishable in the same manner as if such act or omission had been committed or omitted by licensee. 
(c)  Every act or omission constituting a violation of any provision of this section by any owner, officer, director, manager, agent or employee of any owner of the private property where an unauthorized vehicle may be relocated from, shall be deemed and held to be the act of such owner of the private property and the owner of the private property shall be punishable in the same manner as if such act or omission had been committed or omitted by him or her personally. 
(d)  Any licensee or private property owner violating any of the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a business offense and upon conviction thereof shall be fined in an amount not less than $200.00 and not exceeding $2,000.00. Each day that such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder. 
(e)  In addition to any other penalty provided for in this section, if a licensee engages in more than one violation of this article within the term of any Village Towing License, or for other good cause shown, the Corporation Counsel, per the procedure provided in this article or via the Village's Administrative Adjudication, may suspend the Village Towing License of the licensee for 30 days. If violations of the provisions of this section thereafter continue during the license period, the Corporation Counsel may, following the procedures provided for in this article or via the Village's Administrative Adjudication, may revoke the Village Towing License of a licensee for a period not to exceed one year. The licensee may apply for a new license pursuant to the procedures set forth in this article, after the one-year revocation period. The Chief of Police may suspend the Village Towing License of the licensee, without a hearing, for a period not to exceed ten days, in the event that the Chief of Police determines that such temporary suspension is required. 
(f)  Licensees shall not have any property rights or expectation of continuation of their licenses. The village reserves the right to revoke, suspend or terminate any Village Towing License issued hereunder at any time. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-19, § 2(5-11.9), 4-24-2018) 
Secs. 24-393-24-424. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIII. - BOOTING AND IMMOBILIZATION OF VEHICLES 

Sec. 24-425. - Scope of regulations. 
    The provisions of this section shall apply to all booting or immobilization of vehicles within the village limits. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-19, § 3(5-12.1), 4-24-2018) 
Sec. 24-426. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Boot, booting, or immobilization means the act of placing on a parked motor vehicle, a lockable vehicle wheel clamp or similar device that is designed to be placed on a parked vehicle to prevent the operation of the vehicle until the device is unlocked and removed. The term "boot" shall also include the devices used for this purpose. 
    Immobilize means to place a boot on a parked vehicle to prevent the operation of the vehicle until the boot is unlocked and removed. The term "immobilize" shall also include any installation, adjustment, or removal of a boot. 
    Licensee means a person or entity that has received and is operating under a valid Village Boot License. 
    Private property means a parking lot or other parking area located on privately owned and operated property that is sited in the following Village Zoning Districts: 
(1)  Commercial Districts. 
(2)  Planned Commercial Development Districts. 
The term "private property" shall not mean any property, whether privately or publicly owned, located within a residential district, or any Village of Wilmette property located anywhere within the village limits. The term "private property" shall also not mean any public right-of-way controlled by the village. 
    Private property owner means the owner of the private property or the management company of the private property acting as the owner's duly authorized agent. The term "private property owner" shall not mean a tenant entitled to use the private property. 
    Unauthorized vehicle means any vehicle parked or abandoned on private property, without the consent of the owner of the private property or the owner's authorized agent. 
    Village means the Village of Wilmette, Illinois. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-19, § 3(5-12.2), 4-24-2018) 
Sec. 24-427. - Booting License required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to engage in the business of vehicle immobilization or booting without first receiving a Village Booting License. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the private property owner to allow or authorize the immobilization of a vehicle upon their private property, without first complying with the provisions of this article. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful, for any person or entity to immobilize or boot a vehicle located on any non-private property within the village. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-19, § 3(5-12.3), 4-24-2018) 
Sec. 24-428. - Application; qualifications; fee, late penalty. 
(a)  Prior to the issuance of any Village Boot License, each applicant must comply with the following provisions. 
(b)  The Chief of Police may issue a Village Boot License to any qualified applicant pursuant to an application filed. The Chief of Police may promulgate rules and regulations to further implement and enforce the provisions of this section. 
(c)  Each application for a license to immobilize or boot a vehicle shall be made in writing to the Chief of Police, shall be verified under oath; shall be in such form and contain such information as required by the Chief of Police, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Sufficient information to identify the applicant, including but not limited to, full legal name, date of formation of legal entity, any trade name under which the applicant operates, telephone number, and all business and residence addresses, as reported to the Secretary of State. 
(2)  Certificate of good standing demonstrating that all corporate or limited liability company applicants are qualified to do business under the laws of Illinois. 
(3)  A list of all persons with any ownership interest in the applicant who have previously been denied a license by the village, another municipality or the State of Illinois. 
(4)  A photograph or other rendering of the proposed, existing, and previous applicant's service vehicles' colors and markings. 
(5)  A description of the applicant's management plan, which shall include but not be limited to the following: location and description of all places of business, a description of all existing immobilization equipment, a system for handling complaints and damage caused to immobilized vehicles during the process of immobilization, and a description of any communication and payment system. 
(6)  Then name and age, along with a photograph of each employee that will be performing booting operations within the village limits. 
(7)  Days and hours of operation of the immobilization service and/or operator. 
(8)  The 24-hour/365-day phone service number. 
(9)  Proof of insurance as required in by this section. 
(10)  The signature of each individual applicant, the signature of the president or vice-president of a corporate applicant, the signature of the managing member of a limited liability company, or the signature of all general partners of a partnership applicant. 
(11)  An affidavit by an authorized agent of the applicant affirming that the information provided in the application is true and accurate, along with an agreement to abide by the provisions of this section, the ordinances of the village, and the laws of the State of Illinois. 
(12)  Such additional information about the applicant as the Chief of Police or his designee may deem appropriate. 
(d)  The annual fee for a Village Boot License shall be $75.00. 
(e)  The annual fee, along with a completed application, shall be paid to the village no later than January 31 of any given year. Any person or entity that fails to pay the annual fee on or before January 31 shall be required to pay the applicable annual fee, plus a late penalty in the amount of $150.00 for each month the annual fee and late penalty due and owing has not be paid in full thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-19, § 3(5-12.4), 4-24-2018) 
Sec. 24-429. - Owner of private property responsibilities. 
(a)  Signage located on private property. Prior to any vehicle being immobilized upon private property, the private property owner must prominently display no fewer than 14 days prior to the commencement of a booting operation at each and every location where a booting operation is to be conducted, and to maintain at each driveway access or curb cut allowing vehicular access to the private property within five feet from the public right-of-way line, a minimum of one sign no smaller than 24 inches in height and 36 inches in width, which must be illuminated upon sunset, setting forth: 
(1)  The date upon which a booting operation shall commence; 
(2)  The terms of use of the subject property; 
(3)  The fee for removal of a boot; 
(4)  The name, address and a 24-hour telephone number for the licensee; 
(5)  The name and telephone number of the property owner or manager; and 
(6)  A statement notifying consumers of their rights under this section will be provided at time of removal of the boot or upon request. 
(b)  The private property owner must remove the signs required under this subsection, upon discontinuation of immobilization operations at the private property. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-19, § 3(5-12.5), 4-24-2018) 
Sec. 24-430. - Licensee's duties. 
    Each licensee engaged in the business of immobilizing unauthorized vehicles shall have a duty to: 
(1)  Conduct booting operations exclusively on private property, and only pursuant to a written agreement with the owner or manager of the private property; 
(2)  Refrain from conducting booting operations if the required signage is not installed, visibly lighted or otherwise obstructed at the private property. Such signs shall remain in place as long as a booting operation is being conducted; 
(3)  Station, at every location where a licensee conducts booting operations, at least one employee or agent to install and remove boots and to receive payments. Each such employee or agent shall: 
a.  Wear, in a conspicuous manner, an identification placard clearly displaying the name of such employee or agent and the name, address and telephone number of the licensee; and 
b.  Carry on his or her person a copy of the license issued under this section. 
Prior to leaving the private property where booting operations are conducted, the employee or agent stationed at the private property shall remove all boots from vehicles at that location; 
(4)  Place on the windshield of every vehicle that is booted a copy of the "Consumer Bill of Rights", the text of which shall be provided by the department, and to make copies of this document available to persons upon request; 
(5)  Keep copies of the "Consumer Bill of Rights" at the licensed premises and, upon request by any person, to make copies of this document available to such person; 
(6)  Maintain sufficient copies of this section for distribution to any person requesting a copy of this article; 
(7)  Immediately remove a boot from any motor vehicle, at no charge if: 
a.  The owner of the vehicle or the owner's agent is present or arrives on the scene before the vehicle is completely immobilized from the private property; 
b.  Such owner or agent can produce the ignition key or other ignition device for the vehicle; and 
c.  Such owner or agent is able to remove and immediately does remove the vehicle from the private property; 
(8)  Not demand, collect, or receive anything of value or compensation from the vehicle owner, agent or lessee of a booted vehicle other than the amount indicated on the signs posted on the private property from which the vehicle was booted; which shall not exceed $100.00; 
(9)  Accept any of the following methods of payment for compensation: United States currency, commonly recognized traveler's checks, money orders, cashier's checks, certified checks, and commonly accepted credit cards and debit cards. The licensee must be able to accept these forms of payment onsite; 
(10)  Maintain a 24 hours a day, 365 days per year phone number that is staffed by a live operator to communicate immediately with a driver of a vehicle that has been immobilized by the vehicle immobilization service; 
(11)  Provide the owner of a booted vehicle with a legible receipt, which shall indicate: 
a.  The date and time the boot was placed on the vehicle; 
b.  The date and time the owner returned to the vehicle; 
c.  The date and time the boot was removed from the vehicle; 
d.  The name of the person who installed the boot; and 
e.  That the vehicle owner has the option to pay any fees assessed in connection with the booting operation by credit card; 
(12)  Keep on file, for a period of at least three years from the date of its issuance, a copy of the receipts which shall be provided upon request by any authorized village official and shall make a copy of such receipts available for inspection by such authorized village official; 
(13)  Refrain from immobilizing governmental vehicles. If at any point a governmental vehicle is in the process of being immobilized, the licensee must relinquish the vehicle immediately and without any payment to the governmental official on site and claiming the vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-19, § 3(5-12.6), 4-24-2018) 
Sec. 24-431. - Prerequisites to immobilization. 
(a)  Before a licensee can immobilize a vehicle, the licensee shall first have a valid agreement with the private property owner authorizing the licensee to engage in booting activity upon the private property. Prior to immobilizing a vehicle, the licensee shall verify that private property owner is making such a request to have the unauthorized vehicle immobilized. 
(b)  Vehicles shall not be immobilized without such request being made by the private property owner. The licensee shall note the individual or company name that has made a request for vehicle immobilization. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-19, § 3(5-12.7), 4-24-2018) 
Sec. 24-432. - Insurance for licensee. 
    No licensee shall immobilize any vehicle on private property unless at the time of the immobilization the licensee had liability insurance in effect in the name of such licensee as follows: 
(1)  Every licensee shall maintain a commercial general liability insurance policy insuring the licensee with a limit of not less than $1,000,000.00 per occurrence, for bodily injury, personal injury, and property damage, arising in any way from the issuance of a license or activities conducted pursuant to the license. 
(2)  Such insurance policy shall be issued by a firm properly qualified to do business in the State of Illinois; shall name the Village of Wilmette as an additional insured on a primary, noncontributory basis for any liability arising directly or indirectly from the licensee's operations; and shall not be cancelled, revoked, reduced in limits or subject to lapsing without first providing 30 days' advance notice to the Chief of Police. A certificate of the policy shall be carried in the onsite vehicle, or with the licensee's agent located at the private property and displayed on demand to a police officer or other authorized government official. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-19, § 3(5-12.8), 4-24-2018) 
Sec. 24-433. - Booting Bill of Rights. 
(a)  Wilmette Booting Bill of Rights; posting; required. Each licensee shall post a copy of the Wilmette Booting Bill of Rights, as set forth in subsection (b) of this section, conspicuously on the private property. Such posting, which shall be labeled the Wilmette Booting Bill of Rights, shall be on a page or poster not less than 11 inches in width and 17 inches in height. In addition, the licensee shall provide a paper copy of the Wilmette Booting Bill of Rights to all persons seeking their vehicle released from immobilization from the private property. 
(b)  Wilmette Booting Bill of Rights; required contents. The Wilmette Booting Bill of Rights shall provide the following: 
Wilmette Booting Bill of Rights 
    Pursuant to the Wilmette Village Code, 1993, the following requirements apply when any vehicle is booted on private property: 
(1)  No vehicle shall be booted on any private property without the written consent of the private property owner to conduct such removals. 
(2)  No vehicle shall be booted on a lot which does not, at the time of the immobilization and no fewer than 14 days prior thereto, have signs posted in compliance with applicable laws and regulations. 
(3)  No vehicle shall be booted if: 
a.  The owner of the vehicle or the owner's agent is present or arrives on the scene before the vehicle is completely removed from the private property; 
b.  Such owner or agent can produce the ignition key or other ignition device for the vehicle; and 
c.  Such owner or agent is able to remove and immediately does remove the vehicle from the private property. 
(4)  Licensees must accept any of the following methods of payment for lawful fees and charges: United States currency, commonly recognized traveler's checks, money orders, cashier's checks, certified checks, and commonly accepted credit cards and debit cards. 
(5)  In the event the owner of any booted vehicle is not able to immediately pay to retrieve the vehicle, the licensee must provide the owner with access to the vehicle to retrieve any of the owner's personal belongings. The licensee is permitted to accompany the owner to the vehicle while the owner removes his or her belongings. 
(6)  When the owner retrieves his or her vehicle, or upon request, the licensee must provide the owner of the booted vehicle with a copy of this Bill of Rights along with other relevant statutes, regulations, and ordinances governing booting operations. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-19, § 3(5-12.9), 4-24-2018) 
Sec. 24-434. - Towing or relocating of vehicles prohibited. 
    A Village Booting License shall not authorize the towing or relocation of any motor vehicle located within the corporate limits of the village at any time. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-19, § 3(5-12.10), 4-24-2018) 
Sec. 24-435. - Violation; penalty. 
(a)  Every licensee shall operate in a manner prescribed by this article and any applicable section of Wilmette Village Code, 1993. 
(b)  Every act or omission constituting a violation of any provision of this article by any licensee, officer, director, manager, agent or employee of any licensee shall be deemed and held to be the act of such employer or licensee and the employer or licensee shall be punishable in the same manner as if such act or omission had been committed or omitted by him or her personally. 
(c)  Every act or omission constituting a violation of any provision of this article by any owner, officer, director, manager, agent or employee of any private property owner where an unauthorized vehicle may be booted, shall be deemed and held to be the act of such private property owner and private property owner shall be punishable in the same manner as if such act or omission had been committed or omitted by him or her personally. 
(d)  Any licensee or private property owner violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a business offense and upon conviction thereof shall be fined in an amount not less than $200.00 and not exceeding $2,000.00. Each day that such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder. 
(e)  In addition to any other penalty provided for in this article, if a licensee engages in more than one violation of this article within the term of any Wilmette Booting License, or for other good cause shown, the Corporation Counsel, per the procedure provided in this chapter or via a hearing at the Village's Administrative Adjudication, may suspend the Wilmette Booting License for 30 days. If violations of the provisions of this section thereafter continue during the license period, the Corporation Counsel may, following the procedures provided for in this chapter or via a hearing at the Village's Administrative Adjudication, may revoke the Wilmette Booting License for a period not to exceed one year. The licensee may apply for a new license pursuant to the procedures set forth in this article, after the one-year revocation period. The Chief of Police may suspend the Wilmette Booting License, without a hearing, for a period not to exceed ten days, in the event that the Chief of Police determines that such temporary suspension is required. 
(f)  Licensees shall not have any property rights or expectation of continuation of their licenses. The village reserves the right to revoke, suspend or terminate any Wilmette Booting License issued hereunder at any time, with or without cause. 
(g)  The village may modify, suspend, or revoke any of the provisions found in this article. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-19, § 3(5-12.11), 4-24-2018) 
Secs. 24-436-24-454. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIV. - GROUP HOMES 

Sec. 24-455. - License required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, conduct, or maintain a group home, in the absence of a current valid Group Home License therefor, which has not been suspended, revoked, or surrendered. 
Sec. 24-456. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Applicant means the person or entity which applied for a Group Home License. 
    Group home means a group home as defined by appendix A of this Code (Wilmette Zoning Ordinance). 
    Group Home License means the license issued under this section for a group home. 
    Licensee means the person or entity to whom a valid and current Group Home License has been issued. 
Sec. 24-457. - Application, issuance and expiration of a license. 
(a)  Application. Application for a Group Home License shall be made to the Community Development Director in the manner prescribed in this chapter. Application for a renewal Group Home License shall be made at least 60 days prior to the expiration of the current Group Home License. 
(b)  Issuance. An initial Group Home License shall be issued by the Community Development Department if it finds that the applicant satisfies the requirements of this article. The application for an initial Group Home License and renewal of the same, should such license not be suspended, revoked or surrendered, shall be approved or denied by the Community Development Department within a reasonable amount of time. 
(c)  Expiration. An initial Group Home License and a renewal Group Home License shall expire at the end of one year from the date of issuance (which date shall be stated upon the face of the license) unless sooner suspended, revoked or surrendered. 
(d)  Fee. The annual fee for a Group Home License shall be $100.00. 
(e)  Form. A Group Home License shall be issued on a form prescribed by the Community Development Department. Such license shall set forth any conditions which the Community Development Department determines are necessary and appropriate to assure the licensee's compliance with the requirements set forth in this article, including but not limited to the maximum number of residents who may reside in the group home. 
(f)  Transferability. A Group Home License shall not be transferrable, either as to the identity of the licensee or as to the facility covered by the license. 
Sec. 24-458. - Requirements for a license. 
    A Group Home License shall not be issued unless the Community Development Department finds that the applicant meets the requirements set forth below, provided that if the applicant does not currently meet certain of these requirements, a Group Home License may nevertheless be issued conditioned upon the applicant meeting such requirements at a future date specified by the Community Development Department: 
(1)  The applicant has obtained all licenses or approvals required by the State of Illinois for the operation of the proposed group home. A copy of all approvals must be submitted by the applicant. 
(2)  The proposed group home meets the definition of "group home" as provided in appendix A of this Code (Wilmette Zoning Ordinance). 
(3)  The number of residents proposed for the group home is consistent with other ordinances of the village. The maximum number of persons who may reside in a group home at any one time shall be as provided for in appendix A of this Code (Wilmette Zoning Ordinance). 
(4)  The proposed group home meets the requirements of all other provisions of this Code, including, but not limited to, the Village's Building Codes, Property Maintenance Code, Fire Prevention Code and Life Safety Code. 
(5)  The proposed group home satisfies the applicable regulations, if any, of the State and county. 
Sec. 24-459. - State and county regulations. 
(a)  Compliance with state statutes and regulations. Group homes shall at all times comply with the statutes and regulations of the State. Copies of all reports or other documents which a group home licensed under this article is required to file with the State of Illinois shall be filed simultaneously with the Community Development Director. 
(b)  Deferral to state findings. The village, in deciding whether to issue, suspend or revoke a license for a group home, may consider relevant findings of the State concerning the applicant, licensee or group home facility in question. 
Sec. 24-460. - Inspection. 
(a)  Prior to issuance of license. The village shall inspect the group home facility prior to the issuance of an initial Group Home License or renewal Group Home License to determine that it complies with the village's codes. 
(b)  During the term of the license. The village shall have the right to inspect a facility covered by a Group Home License to determine whether the requirement for a license set forth in section 22-458 and the conditions of the license (and any other conditions imposed as a result of zoning relief) are being met. During such an inspection, the village may request the opportunity to speak with staff and residents. 
(c)  Notice. The village shall give the applicant or licensee reasonable notice of an inspection of a group home facility, provided that no notice shall be required if the village has reasonable grounds to believe that there is an imminent threat to the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the group home. 
Sec. 24-461. - Penalty. 
    In addition to the administrative procedures of this section, any person or entity found guilty by a court of competent jurisdiction of operating a group home without a valid Group Home License shall be liable and shall be fined as provided for in section 2-1305. 
Chapter 26 - SEWER AND WATER FACILITIES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 26-1-26-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WATER MAINS 

Sec. 26-19. - Village installation. 
    The water system of the village shall be extended in such a manner that every lot or parcel of land covered by this chapter may be serviced by means of a house connection within its own frontage. Water mains shall be not less than six inches internal diameter. Valves shall conform with those being generally used in the village and shall be installed in 48-inch valve vaults constructed of six-inch pre cast concrete or eight-inch solid concrete block. The valves shall be so placed that in the event of any single break it will not be necessary to shut down more than 800 feet of water main. Water mains shall be connected to the existing water system in such a way that the system will be circulating. House service stubs are to be installed extending outside of the paved area at the time of the water main installation before a permanent type of roadway is constructed. 
(Code 1993, § 18-1.1) 
Sec. 26-20. - Liability of village. 
    In consideration for the installation and maintenance of the water main system, the village shall not be responsible for claims against the village or any officer or employee on account of interruption of the water supply caused by the breaking or failure of pipe or machinery, or by stoppage for repairs, on account of fire, or other emergency, and no claims shall be allowed for any damages caused by the breaking or other failure of any pipe or equipment. The village will not be responsible for accidents, damages, whether direct or consequential, or injuries to persons or property resulting from improperly maintained or malfunctioning boilers or from variation in the water pressure or the surge of water from the mains, or from collapse of any water fixture due to any cause whatsoever. 
(Code 1993, § 18-1.2) 
Secs. 26-21-26-43. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - EXTENSIONS TO WATER DISTRIBUTION SYSTEMS 

Sec. 26-44. - Application; permit. 
(a)  No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any extension to, connection with, or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any portion of the water distribution system of the village or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the Village Engineer. The application for a permit shall be made to the Village Engineer. It shall include: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant; 
(2)  The legal description of the premises to be served by the extension; 
(3)  The number of acres, excluding streets and alleys contained in the area to be served; 
(4)  The number of linear feet in the extension; 
(5)  The proposed location of the extension; 
(6)  A copy of the completed Illinois EPA (Environmental Protection Agency) construction permit application; and 
(7)  Such other information as is required by the Village Engineer, and it shall be accompanied by complete plans and specifications of the proposed extension. 
(b)  The extension shall be constructed at the cost of the owner of the property to be served and shall be of a type and size adequate to meet the needs of the area in which it is located as approved by the Village Engineer. No permit shall be issued until such approval has been given. 
(Code 1993, § 18-1.3.1; Ord. No. 98-O-38, 5-26-1998) 
Sec. 26-45. - Inspection fees. 
    There shall be paid to the village, under section 26-44, at the time the application for permit is made, an inspection fee of $100.00 for each connection with the water distribution system of the village, an inspection fee of $25.00 for each hydrant to be installed in the extension, and an inspection fee of $25.00 for each valve vault to be installed in the extension. 
(Code 1993, § 18-1.3.2) 
Sec. 26-46. - Notice. 
    The applicant under this article shall give at least 48 hours' notice to the village prior to commencing any of the work authorized by the permit. 
(Code 1993, § 18-1.3.3) 
Sec. 26-47. - Inspection. 
    The Village Engineer shall inspect all extensions to the water distribution system of the village and shall see that the work is done in a professional manner and in accordance with the plans and specifications approved for the extension. If it is found that any of the work is not done in this manner and/or is not done in accordance with the approved plans and specifications, the Village Engineer shall require such work to be corrected. 
(Code 1993, § 18-1.3.4; Ord. No. 98-O-38, 5-26-1998) 
Secs. 26-48-26-67. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - WATER SERVICE 

Sec. 26-68. - Approval for service. 
    No water from the municipal water supply shall be approved for service into any premises by any person other than Village Engineer or designee. 
(Code 1993, § 18-2.1; Ord. No. 98-O-38, 5-26-1998) 
Sec. 26-69. - Application. 
    Application for water service shall be made in writing, and shall contain an agreement by the applicant to abide by and accept all of the provisions of this chapter as conditions governing the use of the village water supply by the applicant. All applicants shall provide property owner's name, address and phone number on the application. 
(Code 1993, § 18-2.2) 
Sec. 26-70. - Resale of water. 
    No water shall be resold or distributed by the recipients thereof from the municipal supply to any premises other than that for which application has been made and a meter installed. 
(Code 1993, § 18-2.3; Ord. No. 96-O-52, 10-8-1996) 
Sec. 26-71. - Separate service pipes. 
    Two or more premises with separate owners or occupants shall not be supplied from the same service pipe. Owners of buildings who lease or subdivide shall be responsible for all water used on or in such premises. 
(Code 1993, § 18-2.4; Ord. No. 96-O-52, 10-8-1996) 
Sec. 26-72. - Water from fire hydrants and service lines. 
    No person, except as authorized by the Village Engineer shall open, take water from or in any way interfere with any fire hydrant or other service line belonging to the village. 
(Code 1993, § 18-2.5; Ord. No. 96-O-52, 10-8-1996; Ord. No. 98-O-38, 5-26-1998) 
Secs. 26-73-26-102. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - WATER SERVICE REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 26-103. - Owner's cost; supervision. 
    All water service pipes from the mains to the premises to be served shall be installed by a licensed plumber and at the cost of the owner of the property or the applicant for the service. The installation shall be made under the supervision of the Village Engineer or designee. 
(Code 1993, § 18-3.1; Ord. No. 98-O-38, 5-26-1998) 
Sec. 26-104. - Installation requirements. 
    Excavations for installing service pipes, or repairing the same, shall be made in compliance with the most recent regulations of the Illinois Sanitary Water Board and the Illinois EPA relating to the separation of water and sewer pipes. 
(Code 1993, § 18-3.2) 
Sec. 26-105. - Licensed plumbers. 
    No person, except a state licensed plumber, or an employee under the direction of the plumber, or an authorized employee of the village, shall be permitted to do any work on any water service pipes or connections made with the water mains or in any way connected with the water supply of the village. No licensed plumber shall, directly or indirectly, allow any other person to do any work referred to in this section under the plumber's license. 
(Code 1993, § 18-3.3; Ord. No. 98-O-38, 5-26-1998) 
Sec. 26-106. - Taps and connections. 
    All connections of any service pipe to a water main shall be made by the village. Application for a permit to connect any service pipe with a water main shall be made to the Director of Engineering and Public Works and shall state the day on which the applicant requests that the tap be inserted into the water main by the village. No connection to the water distribution system shall be permitted which, in the judgment of the Village Engineer, will result in exceeding the adequacy of the water main which supplies the area in which the property to be served is located. 
(Code 1993, § 18-3.4; Ord. No. 96-O-52, 10-8-1996; Ord. No. 98-O-38, 5-26-1998) 
Sec. 26-107. - Fees. 
    The schedules of fees shall be as follows: 
Permit Amount Plumbing permit $45.00 Fixture permit (each) $8.00 Water meter village cost plus $45.00 Installation and re-inspection $45.00 Tap installation village cost plus $45.00 Lawn sprinkler permit $68.00  
(Code 1993, § 18-3.5; Ord. No. 96-O-52, 10-8-1996; Ord. No. 2002-O-100, 12-10-2002; Ord. No. 2003-O-89, 11-24-2003; Ord. No. 2004-O-104, 11-22-2004; Ord. No. 2005-O-104, 11-21-2005; Ord. No. 2006-O-94, 11-28-2006; Ord. No. 2007-O-87, 11-27-2007; Ord. No. 2008-O-88, 12-9-2008; Ord. No. 2009-O-72, 11-24-2009; Ord. No. 2010-O-71, 11-23-2010; Ord. No. 2011-O-74, 11-22-2011; Ord. No. 2012-O-63, 11-27-2012; Ord. No. 2013-O-71, 11-26-2013) 
Sec. 26-108. - Specifications for installation. 
(a)  All water service pipes shall be laid at least five feet below the established grade of the street. Such service pipes shall consist of type K copper pipe one-inch minimum or ductile iron in standard sizes. Services of two-inch internal diameter or larger shall be constructed of ductile-iron pipe of a size and quality conforming to the specifications of the American Water Works Association. 
(b)  No other materials for service pipes, other than that specified above, shall be permitted between the water main and the meter. 
(c)  Where a service pipe enters a building, it shall be provided with a mechanical connection to the building and stop or valve placed within 12 inches of the inside wall where the service enters the building between the meter and the wall, and a similar stop or valve shall be placed on the opposite side of the meter within 12 inches thereof. Such stops or valves shall have a handle or wrench attached thereto for the purpose of turning same so that the water may be turned off in case of leaks in the building. Such stops or valves shall be kept accessible at all times. 
(Code 1993, § 18-3.6) 
Sec. 26-109. - Shut-off boxes. 
    Shut-off boxes or service boxes shall be placed on every water service pipe, be located at finished grade between the curb line and the property line and be easily accessible. 
(Code 1993, § 18-3.7) 
Sec. 26-110. - Owner's responsibility. 
(a)  All owners shall, at their own expense, keep their service pipe from the first shut-off valve to the building, and all other related apparatus, including, but not limited to, the shut-off boxes, in good repair and properly protected from frost and other dangers. Leaks in the service pipe between the first shut-off valve and the building shall be repaired, or such pipe shall be replaced, at the expense of the property owner, when the Village Engineer considers replacement necessary. If such service pipe is not repaired or replaced within ten days after receiving notice from the Village Engineer, the water shall be shut off until the repair or replacement is made. 
(b)  If, in the opinion of the Village Engineer, a leak is of sufficient size to cause a noticeable loss of water from the water system, or the public health or welfare otherwise requires, the Village Engineer may forthwith shut off the service until the repair or replacement is made. If excavation is required by the village to shut off the service, the property owner shall reimburse the village therefor. 
(Code 1993, § 18-3.8; Ord. No. 76-O-24, 6-15-1976; Ord. No. 98-O-38, 5-26-1998) 
Sec. 26-111. - Village's responsibility. 
    In the event of a leak in, or damage to, the service pipe between the public water main and the first shut-off valve, the Director of Engineering and Public Works shall, in the Village Engineer's sole discretion, determine whether the pipe in question shall be repaired or replaced. The cost of the repair or replacement shall be borne by the village, except in the event of leaks or damage caused by the act of some individual or entity other than a village employee, in which case that individual or entity shall be liable for the cost of said repair or replacement. 
(Code 1993, § 18-3.9; Ord. No. 98-O-38, 5-26-1998) 
Sec. 26-112. - Water service disconnection. 
    All buildings being demolished shall have their water service disconnected at the main at the expense of the owner. 
(Code 1993, § 18-3.10) 
Secs. 26-113-26-137. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - WATER METERS 

Sec. 26-138. - Meters required. 
(a)  In order to provide a means to record water usage, all premises using water from the water supply system of the village shall be equipped with an adequate size water meter purchased from the village and, to the extent possible, a remote reading device. All such meters shall be installed at the expense of the property owner. Water service when no meter has been installed, shall be a violation of this section except when a village permit or the Water Meter Supervisor has authorized the use of unmetered water. Water service, when no meter has been installed, whether used in violation of this Code or not, shall be supplied at the rates provided for in this article. 
(b)  Prior to occupation of any premises, a water meter shall be installed. Before being installed, all meters shall be tested by the Department of Engineering and Public Works and shall conform to the requirements for meters hereinafter set forth. Only one meter will be installed for each service except where a separate irrigation system is provided. 
(Code 1993, § 18-4.1; Ord. No. 98-O-38, 5-26-1998) 
Sec. 26-139. - Location of meters. 
    All meters shall he placed inside the building (in the basement where a basement exists) and shall be placed on the service pipe not to exceed two feet from the inside wall where such pipe enters the building, with a stop valve between the meter and the wall. Every meter shall be easily accessible and shall be kept from all obstructions so that the same may be easily read and inspected, and shall be protected by the customer from freezing and other danger. All meters shall have an appropriately sized test tee and opening inserted between the meter and the stop valve on the outlet of the meter. Each test tee shall be provided with either a suitable valve or brass plug. All water meters shall have a continuous electrical grounding conductor connected to both the service entry pipe and the distribution pipe at each side of the water meter, in accordance with the National Electrical Code. 
(Code 1993, § 18-4.2) 
Sec. 26-140. - Remote reading device. 
(a)  Every water meter shall be connected to a remote reading device which allows for meter reading to be performed without entering the premises. In the event that a reading from the remote reading device differs from the reading from the inside water meter, the water meter shall be considered the true and accurate reading for billing purposes. The property owner shall be responsible for comparing the accuracy of the remote reading used for billing purposes to the inside water meter reading. 
(b)  Every remote reading device shall be easily accessible and shall be kept from all obstructions so that the same may be easily read and inspected. 
(Code 1993, § 18-4.3) 
Sec. 26-141. - Obstructed meter or remote reading device. 
    In the event that a meter or remote reading device is situated in a location that is inaccessible or difficult to access, the Village Engineer shall notify the owner or consumer of such condition. If the condition is not remedied in a satisfactory manner within 15 days after receipt of the notice, the water will be shut off and remain shut off until the condition is remedied. 
(Code 1993, § 18-4.4; Ord. No. 98-O-38, 5-26-1998) 
Sec. 26-142. - Tampering with meters or remote reading device. 
(a)  No person shall break or tamper with any seal placed upon any village meter, remote reading device or fixture. 
(b)  No person shall, without the permission of the Village Engineer, move or disturb a village water meter or remote reading device except that, duly licensed plumbers, when making repairs to frozen services, water meters, or remote reading devices, may remove the water meter or remote reading device provided that it is immediately delivered to the Water Plant Superintendent for inspection, and that an electrical bond wire is installed prior to the removal. 
(c)  In no case shall a pipe coupling be inserted in the line in place of a meter. Any person violating this provision shall be guilty of an ordinance violation and subject to a fine as provided for in section 2-1305, for every day from the last known village water meter read to time compliance with this section has been achieved. 
(Code 1993, § 18-4.5; Ord. No. 98-O-38, 5-26-1998) 
Sec. 26-143. - Testing meters. 
(a)  The village may at any time remove a meter temporarily for the purpose of testing its accuracy. Any meter so tested and found to register within the American Water Works Association standard shall be considered acceptable, and its registration shall be considered correct. Any meter which fails to register within the American Water Works Association standard shall be repaired or replaced within 15 days at the expense of the village. 
(b)  The owner may request an accuracy test on their own water meter when there is reasonable doubt about the accuracy of the reading. Such a test shall be performed by the Village or the Village's agent and shall be subject to a $150.00 fee for each test conducted. 
(Code 1993, § 18-4.6) 
Sec. 26-144. - Liability for repair. 
    No claims shall be made against the village by reason of breaking of any of the service pipes or appurtenances, or from any other damages that may result from shutting off water for repairing, or for any other purpose or for any variation in pressure. The owner shall be liable for damage to meters due to freezing, water back-up and damages resulting from negligence. 
(Code 1993, § 18-4.7) 
Sec. 26-145. - Right of entry. 
(a)  The Village Engineer shall be permitted at all reasonable hours to enter the premises or buildings of consumers for the purpose of repairing, replacing or reading meters or testing and examining water pipes, fixtures and remote reading devices. 
(b)  The Village Engineer may cause the disconnection of service to any consumer who fails to permit entry as provided in subsection (a) of this section. In the event of an emergency or other situation under which the Village Engineer reasonably believes that failure to permit entry immediately threatens the public health or safety, the Village Engineer may immediately disconnect service and shall that same day post a notice of said disconnection on the premises. In all other cases, the Village Engineer may disconnect service to the consumer if entry is not permitted within 15 days of a written demand for entry has been served on the consumer, said notice to be served either by personal delivery to the service address of the consumer, or by certified mail, which shall be treated as having been served on the day it was deposited in U.S. mail for delivery. 
(Code 1993, § 18-4.8; Ord. No. 98-O-35, 5-12-1998) 
Sec. 26-146. - Estimated meter reading. 
    Where a water meter fails to accurately register the amount of water passing through it or if the village is unable obtain a reading, for any reason whatsoever, the quantity used shall be estimated. No reduction will be made from the regular rates as billed due to leaking pipes or fixtures. 
(Code 1993, § 18-4.9) 
Sec. 26-147. - Penalties. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of an ordinance violation guilty of an ordinance violation and subject to a fine as provided for in section 2-1305. 
(Code 1993, § 18-4.10; Ord. No. 2012-O-69, 11-27-2012) 
Sec. 26-148. - Water meter fees. 
    The following fees are hereby established for water customers within the village and are intended to reimburse the village for the cost of the water meter. The Water Meter Fee shall be added to each customer's water bill whether or not a water meter has been installed. 
Table 26-148. Water Meter Fee 
Meter Size Quarterly Fee 5/8" $0.67 3/4" $1.08 1" $1.33 1.5" $5.41 2.0" $19.16 3.0" $43.45 4.0" $63.33  
(Code 1993, § 18-4.11; Ord. No. 2015-O-68, 11-24-2015) 
Secs. 26-149-26-179. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - WATER RATES AND BILLS 

Sec. 26-180. - Rates within the village. 
    The following rates are hereby established for consumers within the village receiving water from the water system of the village. 
(1)  The minimum charge for each three-months period shall be $21.44. The charge for water used shall be $2.68 per 100 cubic feet. The minimum charge, as provided for in this section, shall not be applicable to water consumed at a service address where the consumer is a political subdivision of the State or other local public entity. 
(2)  Water service provided to a service address that is not equipped with a water meter, including water service for construction activities temporarily supplied, shall be required to pay a flat rate of $5.00 per day for every day water service is supplied to such a service address. On and after January 1, 2014, the rate shall be $5.15 per day. Nothing in this section shall be deemed or interpreted to restrict the village from requiring the consumer of the service address to install a water meter. 
(Code 1993, § 18-5.1; Ord. No. 88-O-1, 1-19-1988; Ord. No. 90-O-90, 12-18-1990; Ord. No. 98-O-49, 6-23-1998; Ord. No. 2001-O-80, 12-11-2001; Ord. No. 2002-O-99, 12-10-2002; Ord. No. 2003-O-92, 11-24-2003; Ord. No. 2004-O-103, 11-22-2004; Ord. No. 2005-O-102, 11-21-2005; Ord. No. 2006-O-96, 11-28-2006; Ord. No. 2007-O-86, 11-27-2007; Ord. No. 2008-O-89, 12-9-2008; Ord. No. 2009-O-71, 11-24-2009; Ord. No. 2010-O-70, 11-23-2010; Ord. No. 2012-O-69, 11-27-2012; Ord. No. 2013-O-72, 11-26-2013; Ord. No. 2015-O-68, 11-24-2015; Ord. No. 2017-O-82, 12-12-2017) 
Sec. 26-181. - Rates outside the village. 
    The following rates are hereby established for non-wholesale consumers outside of the village limits receiving water from the water system of the village. The minimum charge for each three-months period shall be $42.88. The charge for water used shall be $5.36 per 100 cubic feet. 
(Code 1993, § 18-5.2; Ord. No. 90-O-90, 12-18-1990; Ord. No. 2001-O-80, 12-11-2001; Ord. No. 2002-O-99, 12-10-2002; Ord. No. 2003-O-92, 11-24-2003; Ord. No. 2004-O-103, 11-22-2004; Ord. No. 2005-O-102, 11-21-2005; Ord. No. 2006-O-96, 11-28-2006; Ord. No. 2007-O-86, 11-27-2007; Ord. No. 2008-O-89, 12-9-2008; Ord. No. 2009-O-71, 11-24-2009; Ord. No. 2010-O-70, 11-23-2010; Ord. No. 2018-O-06, § 2, 1-23-2018) 
Sec. 26-182. - Wholesale water rates. 
    Rates for wholesale consumers receiving water from the water system of the village are established by contract. The term "wholesale consumer," within the meaning of this section, means: 
(1)  Any individual, partnership, association or corporation who purchases water from the village for the purposes of resale; 
(2)  The United States of America or any political subdivision or duly authorized governmental agency thereof; 
(3)  The State or any political subdivision or duly authorized governmental agency thereof; or 
(4)  Any local public entity. 
(Code 1993, § 18-5.3; Ord. No. 88-O-1, 1-19-1988; Ord. No. 90-O-90, 12-18-1990) 
Sec. 26-183. - Water bills. 
(a)  All water bills to consumers within the village and non-wholesale consumers outside the village shall be due and payable quarterly on the fifteenth day after the billing date. For detached dwellings, a penalty of $1.00 per day shall attach to any unpaid water bills 30 days after the date of issuance. For multi-unit structures, wherein each unit that is part of the multi-unit structure does not receive individual water service metered separately for that unit, the penalty shall be the total of $1.00 per day multiplied by the number of all units in that multi-unit structure. If not paid within 60 days of the issuance of such bills, the water service shall be turned off and will not be turned on again until full payment is made to the village including a charge for restoring water service. The reconnection charge shall be $75.00 on regular business days between 7:00 a.m. and 3:30 p.m. and $100.00 for all other times. 
(b)  When the village has disconnected and subsequently reconnected service due to delinquency in the payment of water bills, the Director of Finance may require the customer to post a deposit not to exceed the total of the amount of the bills issued to the customer over the two quarters immediately preceding the date of disconnection, as a condition of reconnection. The deposit required by this section shall be returned to the customer upon the discontinuance of service and the payment for all water previously furnished. 
(c)  All bills to wholesale consumers as defined in section 26-182 shall be payable in the manner established by contract with such consumers. 
(d)  The owner of the premises, the occupant thereof and the user of the service shall be jointly and severally liable to pay for the service to such premises. The service will be furnished to the premises by the village only upon the condition that the owner of the premises, occupant and user of the services are jointly and severally liable therefor to the village. 
(e)  When an owner or tenant intends to vacate the premises and does not desire to assume further responsibility for the Water Service Charge, notification shall be made to the Finance Director whereupon a final reading from the inside meter will be taken and final bill prepared. 
(Code 1993, § 18-5.4; Ord. No. 88-O-1, 1-19-1988; Ord. No. 96-O-52, 10-8-1996; Ord. No. 2005-O-102, 11-21-2005; Ord. No. 2006-O-96, 11-28-2006; Ord. No. 2008-O-2, 1-22-2008; Ord. No. 2009-O-71, 11-24-2009) 
Sec. 26-184. - Lien for unpaid bills. 
(a)  Whenever a bill due the village for water service remains unpaid 90 days after it has been rendered, the village may file with the Recorder of Deeds of the County a statement of a lien claim. This statement shall contain the legal description of the premises served, the amount of the unpaid bill plus costs incurred by the village in filing the lien, and a notice that the village claims a lien for this amount as well as for all charges for water served subsequent to the period covered by the bill. 
(b)  If the consumer of water whose bill is unpaid is not the owner of the premises and the village has notice of this, notice shall be mailed to the owner of the premises, if his address be known to the village, whenever such bill remains unpaid for a period of 90 days after it has been rendered. 
(c)  The failure of the village to record such lien claim or to mail such notice or the failure of the owner to receive such notice shall not affect the right to foreclose a lien for unpaid water bills as mentioned in the following section. The owner shall be responsible for recordation and costs of recording any release of lien or related documents. 
(Code 1993, § 18-5.5) 
Sec. 26-185. - Foreclosure of lien. 
    Property subject to a lien for unpaid water charges may be sold for nonpayment of the same, and the proceeds of such sale shall be applied to pay the charges, after deducting costs, as is the case in the foreclosure of statutory liens. Such foreclosure shall be by complaint in equity in the name of the village. The Corporation Counsel is hereby authorized to institute such proceedings in the name of the village in any court having jurisdiction over such matters, against any property for which the water bill remains unpaid 90 days after it has been rendered. 
(Code 1993, § 18-5.6) 
Secs. 26-186-26-208. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - CROSS CONNECTIONS 

Sec. 26-209. - Protection of the potable water system. 
(a)  Prohibited connections. All plumbing installed within the village shall be installed in accordance with the Illinois Plumbing Code and this Code. Cross connections between the potable water system and any plumbing line, connections, fixtures or appurtenances are strictly prohibited. 
(b)  Cross connection control devices. All potable water service connections shall be protected from backflow and back-siphonage by means of cross connection control devices approved by the Illinois Plumbing Code and the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency. For existing plumbing, an approved cross connection control device will be required if, in the judgement of the Village Plumbing Inspector, it is necessary for the safety of the public water supply system. 
(c)  Installation and maintenance. It shall be the responsibility of the owner at his/her sole expense, to install, maintain, test and repair the cross connection control device. Cross connection control devices shall be installed at the location directed by the Village Plumbing Inspector. 
(d)  Testing and reporting requirements. Except as hereinafter provided, cross connection control devices shall be tested by a Cross Connection Control Device Inspector (CCDI) prior to initial operation and at least annually thereafter. Written results of all testing performed shall be submitted to the village for verification. For those cross connection control devices that are in use on a seasonal basis only, such as those operating in conjunction with lawn irrigation systems or swimming pools, testing must be performed, and test results submitted, each spring prior to reactivation of the system. 
(Code 1993, § 18-6.1; Ord. No. 2006-O-10, 2-28-2006) 
Sec. 26-210. - Private water supply. 
    No owner shall maintain a private water supply connected to the village's water supply or distribution system. 
(Code 1993, § 18-6.2) 
Sec. 26-211. - Inspections. 
    It shall be the duty of the Director of Community Development to cause inspections to be made of commercial, industrial, multifamily or other properties served by the public water supply to determine whether actual or potential hazards to the water supply exist. Such inspections shall be made a matter of public record and shall be repeated at least every two years, or as often as the Director of Community Development shall deem necessary. Records shall be maintained and available for review for at least five years by the village. 
(Code 1993, § 18-6.3) 
Sec. 26-212. - Right of entry. 
    The Director of Community Development, or authorized agent, shall have the right to enter, at any reasonable time, any property served by a connection to the public water supply for the purpose of verifying the presence or absences of cross connections. The owner shall furnish to the Director of Community Development any information the Director may request regarding the piping system or water use of such property. The refusal of such access or refusal to provide the requested information shall be cause to terminate the water service until access is granted or the requested information is provided. 
(Code 1993, § 18-6.4) 
Sec. 26-213. - Service termination. 
(a)  The Director of Community Development shall recommend to the Village Engineer to discontinue the water service to any property in violation of the provisions of this article. The Village Engineer shall also take such precautionary measures as deemed necessary to eliminate any danger of contamination to the public water supply. Such action shall be followed by written notification of the cause of disconnection. Water service to such property shall not be restored until such conditions have been eliminated or corrected and a reconnection fee of $50.00 has been paid to the village. 
(b)  Immediate disconnection, without any notice to any party, shall be effected provided that, in the opinion of the Village Engineer, such action is required to prevent actual or potential contamination of the public water supply. 
(Code 1993, § 18-6.5; Ord. No. 98-O-38, 5-26-1998) 
Sec. 26-214. - Village liability. 
    Neither the village nor its agents shall be liable to any owner for any injuries, damages or lost revenue which may result from termination of the water service within the terms of this article. 
(Code 1993, § 18-6.6) 
Sec. 26-215. - Owner's liability. 
    Any owner who causes contamination to the water supply, as a result of his/her failure to comply with any requirement of this article, shall be liable for all costs, damages, and expenses incurred by the village as a result of, or arising out of, the contamination to the water supply. 
(Code 1993, § 18-6.7; Ord. No. 92-O-90, 10-20-1992; Ord. No. 2006-O-10, 2-28-2006) 
Secs. 26-216-26-238. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - SEWER USE 

Sec. 26-239. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Basic Sewer User Charge means the basic assessment levied on all users of the public sewer system attributable to operation, maintenance and replacement costs. 
    Building sewer means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal. 
    Best management practices means control measures taken to reduce stormwater volume, peak flows and/or nonpoint source pollution through evapotranspiration, infiltration and detention. 
    Combined sewer means a sewer which is designed and intended to receive wastewater, storm, surface and groundwater drainage. 
    Debt Service Charge means the amount to be paid each billing period for payment of interest and principal and shall be computed by dividing the annual debt service by the number of users connected to the wastewater facilities. 
    Green infrastructure means the management of stormwater runoff through the use of natural systems, or engineered systems that mimic natural systems, to treat polluted runoff. 
    Industrial waste means any solid, liquid or gaseous substance discharged, permitted to flow or escaping from any industrial, manufacturing, commercial or business establishment or process or from the development, recovery or processing of any natural resource as distinct from sanitary sewage. 
    Public sewer means a sewer provided by or subject to the jurisdiction of the village. It shall also include sewers within or outside the village boundaries that serve one or more persons and ultimately discharge into the village sanitary (or combined) sewer system, even though those sewers may not have been constructed with village funds. 
    Replacement costs means expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment, accessories, or appurtenances which are necessary during the service life of the collection system to maintain the capacity and performance for which such systems were designed and constructed. The term "operation and maintenance" includes replacement. 
    Sanitary sewer means a sewer that conveys sewage or industrial wastes or a combination of both, and into which storm, surface, and ground waters or unpolluted industrial wastes are not intentionally admitted. 
    Sewage means and is used interchangeably with the term "wastewater." 
    Sewer means a pipe or conduit for conveying sewage or any other waste liquids, including storm, surface and groundwater drainage. 
    Sewer Fund means the principal accounting designation for all revenues received in the operation of the sewerage system. 
    Sewer User Rate means the basic assessment levied on users of the public sewer system. 
    Slug means any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24-hour concentration or flows during normal operation. 
    Storm sewer means a sewer that carries storm, surface and groundwater drainage but excludes sewage and industrial wastes other than unpolluted cooling water. 
    Unpolluted water means water of quality equal to or better than the effluent criteria in effect or water that would not cause violation of receiving water quality standards and would not be benefitted by discharge to the sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided. 
    User means any owners of a building which is connected to the separate sanitary or combined sewer systems and which have a connection permit from the village. 
    Wastewater means the spent water of a community which may be a combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water, and stormwater that may be present. 
    Wastewater Service Charge means the charge per billing period levied on all users of the wastewater facilities. The service charge shall be computed as outlined in section 26-291 and shall consist of the total of the Basic User Charge and the Debt Service Charge. 
(Code 1993, § 18-7.1; Ord. No. 2010-O-08, 2-9-2010; Ord. No. 2015-O-51, 6-14-2016) 
Sec. 26-240. - Sewers required. 
    Private sewage disposal systems are unlawful in the village. The owner of any structure used for human occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes situated within the village and abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way in which there is now located or may in the future be located any public sanitary (or combined) sewer of the village, is hereby required, at the owner's expense, to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this chapter within 90 days after date of official notice to do so, provided that said public sewer is within 200 feet of the property line. 
(Code 1993, § 18-7.2) 
Sec. 26-241. - Sewer Permits. 
(a)  No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the Village Engineer. 
(b)  There shall be two classes of sewer permits: 
(1)  For residential, institutional, governmental, and commercial services; and 
(2)  For services to establishments producing industrial wastes. 
(c)  In either case, the owner or agent shall make application to the village. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications, or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the village. Any industrial user as a condition of permit authorization, must provide information describing its wastewater constituents, characteristics, and type of activity. 
(d)  Sewer permits for storm, sanitary and combined sewer connections shall be allowed only if it can be demonstrated that the downstream sewer facilities, including sewers, pump stations and wastewater treatment facilities have sufficient reserve capacity to adequately and efficiently handle the additional anticipated waste load. 
(e)  All new storm sewer permits carrying groundwater or rainwater shall utilize best management practices to manage stormwater runoff. No new sump pump, downspout, yard drain, courtyard drain or other stormwater source will be allowed connection to the storm sewer system or combined sewer system unless it can be demonstrated that best management practices cannot feasibly be implemented. In such limited cases, a permit may be issued by the Village Engineer if a restrictor and adequate detention are provided by the applicant. 
(f)  The costs and expense incident to the maintenance, installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the village from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. 
(g)  The Village Engineer may waive any of the above requirements, as deemed necessary by the Village Engineer, for the issuance of a permit for the maintenance or repair of an existing connection. 
(Code 1993, § 18-7.3; Ord. No. 2010-O-08, 2-9-2010; Ord. No. 2017-O-48, 9-12-2017) 
Sec. 26-242. - Bond requirement. 
    Every permit applicant shall file with the Director of Community Development a bond in the amount of $10,000.00 and shall indemnify and hold harmless the village from all accidents and damages caused by any negligence in either the execution or protection of the applicant's work, either by the applicant or anyone acting under the direction of the applicant, for any inadequate work done pursuant to the permit or outside the scope of the permit. The bond shall also provide that said permittee will conform to the ordinances of the village, and will pay the cost of restoring any street, alley, sidewalk, or pavement. 
(Code 1993, § 18-7.4) 
Sec. 26-243. - Licensed plumber. 
    No person, firm or corporation shall be granted any permit to build any building sewer or lay any drain within the village without first providing a certificate of competency to engage in such business, as required by the Department of Registration and Education in Springfield, Illinois. 
(Code 1993, § 18-7.5) 
Sec. 26-244. - Permit revocation. 
    The Director of Community Development shall have the power to suspend or revoke the permit to work on sewers for violation of any of the provisions of this Code. 
(Code 1993, § 18-7.6) 
Sec. 26-245. - Right-of-Way Permit. 
    Before any street or highway can be opened up for the purpose of constructing a house sewer, a written permit must be obtained from the Village Engineer. No such permit shall be issued except to bonded licensed plumbers upon deposit by the applicant therefor of a sufficient sum to secure the cost of restoring such pavement or sidewalk, which deposit shall be not less than $1,000.00 and shall be returned to the person making it upon such restoration being approved by the Village Engineer. 
(Code 1993, § 18-7.7; Ord. No. 98-O-38, 5-26-1998) 
Sec. 26-246. - Responsibility for repairs. 
(a)  All repairs to that portion of the main public sewer line or pipe encompassed within its outer circumference shall be made by and at the expense of the village. All repairs to the building sewer, including that portion of the joint connection, "Y" or "T" lying outside of the outer circumference of the main public sewer line or pipe, shall be made by and at the expense of the owner of the premises served. Where the depth of a portion of the building sewer requiring repair exceeds 12 feet below grade, repairs shall require the inspection and approval of the Village Engineer prior to the commencement of and at the completion of any repair work, and the village shall reimburse the owner of the premises served 50 percent of the reasonable and customary cost of the below grade sewer repair work approved by the Village Engineer. Notwithstanding any of the foregoing, the owner of the premises served shall in all circumstances be responsible for the entire cost of surface restoration required as the result of any repair work. 
(b)  In the event that failure develops or occurs in that portion of the building sewer to be maintained by the owner of the premises, the village may close the public water service valve and discontinue the service of water to the premises until the required repairs are made to the defective portion of the building sewer by the owner of the premises. 
(Code 1993, § 18-7.8; Ord. No. 88-O-34, 9-6-1988; Ord. No. 96-O-20, 4-23-1996; Ord. No. 98-O-38, 5-26-1998) 
Sec. 26-247. - Stub installation. 
(a)  Whenever it may be found necessary to make a connection between a building drain and the public sewer in the street where no "Y" or "T," was originally placed in the sewer, a stub will be installed by a licensed plumber. 
(b)  Where no stub, "Y" or "T" exists, an entire length of the public sewer shall be removed and replaced with a "Y" or "T" length unless a special saddle cap cut in connection, or equal, which will not allow the spigot end of the house sewer to project beyond the inner surface of the main sewer, is used. No cut-in connection, made by breaking or cutting a hole in the main and inserting the spigot end of an ordinary sewer pipe shall be permitted. 
(Code 1993, § 18-7.9) 
Sec. 26-248. - Roof and surface drainage. 
    No downspouts or roof drains shall be connected to the sanitary or combined sewer system. No window well drains and/or area-way drains shall be connected to the sanitary sewer system. 
(Code 1993, § 18-7.10; Ord. No. 2010-O-08, 2-9-2010) 
Sec. 26-249. - Steam discharge. 
    No steam or exhaust from any steam trap or heating apparatus shall connect directly with the public sewer or with any building drain, soil, waste pipe, or rain water pipe. The water steam or condensation from such pipes shall be discharged into a suitable intercepting basin before it shall enter any sewer or drain. 
(Code 1993, § 18-7.11) 
Sec. 26-250. - Drain, soil and waste pipe connection. 
    Any drain, soil or waste pipe connected to any sewer from a building, structure or premises, shall connect such drain, soil or waste pipe so as to convey and allow to pass freely whatever may properly enter the same, and in no case shall any such drain be less than four inches in diameter. 
(Code 1993, § 18-7.12) 
Sec. 26-251. - Other waste. 
    Waste from any kitchen sinks, floor drains or other fixtures likely to contain greasy matter, from structures other than single-family detached dwellings, including, but not limited to, hotels, multifamily dwellings, restaurants, butcher shops, manufacturing establishments, bakeries, laundries, cleaning establishments, garages, stables, yard and floor drains and drains from gravel roofs, shall be made through intervening receiving basins. 
(Code 1993, § 18-7.13) 
Sec. 26-252. - Placement of intercepting basins. 
    Intercepting basins for sinks, floor drains, downspouts, steam or heating boilers, or such basins, constructed for any purpose, shall not be placed outside the property line. 
(Code 1993, § 18-7.14) 
Sec. 26-253. - Connections to public sewers. 
(a)  All existing connections to area drains located outside of buildings may be connected to the storm drain whenever the grade of the main storm sewer permits. All existing roofs and paved areas, yards, courts, and courtyards may be drained into the stormwater sewer system, but not into sewers intended for sanitary sewage only. Paved areas, yards, courts and courtyards may be drained into the combined sewer system by permit only in accordance with village standards. When existing drains used for this purpose are connected with the combined sewer systems, they shall be properly trapped. One trap may serve for all such connections, but traps must be set below the frost line or on the inside of the building. 
(b)  No persons shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains, areaway drains, storm sump pump or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer. 
(c)  All existing stormwater inflow sources connected to the public combination sewer shall be disconnected from the public combination sewer and connected to the public storm sewer, within a reasonable time after a public storm sewer becomes available for such connection, but in no event later than such time as the property owner obtains a permit for work on said sewer connection, whether under this chapter or chapter 16, at which time said sewer connections shall be brought into compliance with this section. 
(d)  Any new building domestic waste sewer service shall be distinct from the building inflow connection, to facilitate disconnection if a storm sewer becomes available. 
(e)  New connections shall comply with section 26-241. 
(Code 1993, § 18-7.15; Ord. No. 2003-O-102, 12-9-2003; Ord. No. 2010- O-08, 2-9-2010; Ord. No. 2017-O-48, 9-12-2017) 
Sec. 26-254. - Drains below grade. 
    All drains below grade shall discharge into an airtight sump or receiving tank so located as to receive the sewage by gravity, from which sump or receiving tank the sewage shall be lifted and discharged into the building sewer by pumps, ejectors, or any equally efficient method. All sumps shall have pumps that automatically discharge. 
(Code 1993, § 18-7.16) 
Sec. 26-255. - Foundation drain. 
(a)  All existing foundation drains shall discharge into a sump or receiving tank, the contents of which shall be automatically lifted and may be discharged into the storm system or splashed onto the ground. Existing foundation drain discharges that adversely impact the public right of way or adjacent property shall be deemed a hazard in accordance with section 8-242(b). Any such drains that are deemed a hazard shall be altered in order to discharge as required by section 26-255(b). 
(b)  New connections shall comply with section 26-241 and the following requirements: 
(1)  Foundation drain discharges must splash on grade and flow overland toward the street or alley: 
a.  Discharges shall be located no greater than ten feet from the building foundation; or 
b.  Discharges may be located greater than ten feet from the building foundation but must flow overland or underground to green infrastructure with point source discharges, if applicable, no closer than ten feet from the public right-of-way. 
(2)  Green infrastructure shall be of sufficient size to accommodate the foundation drain discharges. High volume foundation drain discharges that adversely impact the public right of way or adjacent property will be required to increase the size or type of the green infrastructure to accommodate high volume discharges. 
(Code 1993, § 18-7.17; Ord. No. 2010-O-08, 2-9-2010) 
Sec. 26-256. - Building sewer. 
    A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building. The building sewer connection to the sewer main shall be made under the supervision of the Director of Engineering and Public Works. The building sewer's point of connection to the house shall be under the supervision of the Director of Community Development. The licensed plumber for the building sewer permit shall notify the Director of Community Development when the building sewer is ready for inspection. 
(Code 1993, § 18-7.18) 
Sec. 26-257. - Construction requirements. 
(a)  The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer, and the methods used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing, and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the appropriate specifications of the American Society of Testing Materials, and Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois. Any deviation from the manual procedures for administration of the Metropolitan Water Reclamation District sewer permit ordinance must be approved by the Village Engineer. 
(b)  Old building sewers may not be used in connection with new buildings, unless otherwise approved by the Village Engineer. The old building sewer shall be abandoned and plugged at the main. 
(Code 1993, § 18-7.19; Ord. No. 98-O-38, 5-26-1998) 
Sec. 26-258. - Installation requirements. 
(a)  All excavations in the public right-of-way for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with lighted barricades. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the Village Engineer. 
(b)  Whenever any length of the public sewer or building sewer becomes broken or cracked during construction of a building, such defective length shall be entirely replaced at no cost to the village. No patching of such break will be accepted. 
(c)  All building sewers shall be maintained at the cost of the owner of the premises to be served thereby. All such installations shall be under the supervision of the Director of Community Development. 
(Code 1993, § 18-7.20; Ord. No. 98-O-38, 5-26-1998) 
Sec. 26-259. - Village liability. 
    In the event of an emergency, the village may, but shall not be obligated to, repair any such building sewer, but any repairs made by the village shall be at the cost and risk of the owner of the premises to be served. The village shall not be liable for any damage resulting from the undertaking of repairs, nor for any damage or loss caused by or resulting from obstructions in such building sewer, or from any disrepair thereof, or from failure to make needed repairs. 
(Code 1993, § 18-7.21) 
Sec. 26-260. - Sewer discharge. 
    All disposal by any person into the sewer system is unlawful except those discharges in compliance with Federal Standards or more stringent state and local standards. 
(Code 1993, § 18-7.22) 
Sec. 26-261. - Prohibited discharge-Sanitary sewer. 
    No person shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer. 
(Code 1993, § 18-7.23) 
Sec. 26-262. - Prohibited discharge-Storm and combined sewer. 
    Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as combined sewers or storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the village. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any sewage or polluted waters to a storm sewer or natural outlet. 
(Code 1993, § 18-7.24) 
Sec. 26-263. - Prohibited discharge-General. 
    No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any public sewers: 
(1)  Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid, or gas. 
(2)  Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids, or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant. 
(3)  Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5, or in excess of 9.5, or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment or personnel. 
(4)  Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage works such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, or blood components, hair and fleshings, entrails and paper or plastic products, either whole or ground by garbage grinders. 
(Code 1993, § 18-7.25) 
Sec. 26-264. - Industrial users; requirements. 
    Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged, on approval of the village, to a storm sewer, combined sewer, or natural outlet. No industrial user may discharge sewage into any public sewer until the village has adopted an industrial cost recovery system which: 
(1)  Meets the current requirements of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, which may be amended from time to time, and any other applicable federal regulations; and 
(2)  Has been approved in accordance with the conditions of any grant made to the village by the United States Environmental Protection Agency or by the State for the construction of any part of the sewer system or sewage treatment works of the village. 
(Code 1993, § 18-7.26) 
Sec. 26-265. - Prohibited discharge; industrial waste. 
(a)  In addition to the prohibitions stated in section 26-263; No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described substances, materials, waters, or wastes if it appears likely in the opinion of the Village Engineer that such wastes can harm either the sewers, sewage treatment process or equipment; have an adverse effect on the receiving stream; or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property, or constitute a nuisance. In forming an opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the Village Engineer will give consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant, and maximum limits established by regulatory agencies. The substances described herein are: 
(1)  Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150 degrees Fahrenheit. 
(2)  Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous materials; or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/L or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32 and 150 degrees Fahrenheit. 
(3)  Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. 
(4)  Any waters or wastes containing strong acid, iron pickling wastes, or concentrated plating solutions whether neutralized or not. 
(5)  Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.5. 
(6)  Any mercury or any of its compounds in excess of 0.0005 mg/L as Hg at any time in compliance with applicable state and federal regulations. 
(7)  Any cyanide in excess of 0.025 mg/L at any time. 
(8)  Materials which exert or cause: 
a.  Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not limited to, Fullers earth, lime slurries, and lime residues) or of dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfite); 
b.  Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dyewastes and vegetable tanning solutions); 
c.  Unusual biological, chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine requirements in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment works; 
d.  Unusual volume of flow or concentrations of wastes constituting of "slugs" as defined herein. 
(9)  Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters. 
(10)  Water or wastes which are prohibited by any regulations of the Metropolitan Water Reclamation District of Greater Chicago. 
(b)  If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be discharged into the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in this section, and/or which are in violation of the U.S. EPA and MWRD standards for pretreatment provided in Chapter 1, EPA Rules and Regulations, subchapter D, Water Programs part 128, Pretreatment Standards, Federal Register Volume 38, No. 215, Thursday, November 8, 1973, and any amendments thereto, and which in the judgment of the village may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works, process, equipment, or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the village may: 
(1)  Reject the wastes; 
(2)  Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers (The design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the Director of Engineering and Public Works, and subject to the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances, and laws.); 
(3)  Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or 
(4)  Require payment to cover the added costs of handling and treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges, under the provisions of this article. 
(c)  If the village permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the village, and subject to the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances, and laws. 
(Code 1993, § 18-7.27; Ord. No. 98-O-38, 5-26-1998) 
Sec. 26-266. - Interceptors required. 
    Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the village they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand, or other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the Director of Community Development, and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. 
(Code 1993, § 18-7.28) 
Sec. 26-267. - Damage to sewer systems. 
    No unauthorized person shall break, damage, destroy, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment which is a part of the sewer system. Any violation of this provision shall constitute property damage under section 12-229. 
(Code 1993, § 18-7.29) 
Sec. 26-268. - Authority of inspectors. 
(a)  Duly authorized employees of the village, Metropolitan Water Reclamation District, the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and testing in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance. The village or its representative shall have no authority to inquire into any processes, including metallurgical, chemical, oil refining, ceramic, paper, or other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the sewers or waterway or facilities for waste treatment. 
(b)  Duly authorized employees of the village bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the village holds an easement, for the purpose of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion of the public sewers lying within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement, shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the easement pertaining to the private property involved. 
(c)  In the event that permission to enter the property is denied, the Village Engineer may close the water service valve and discontinue the source of water to the premises until entry is permitted. 
(Code 1993, § 18-7.30; Ord. No. 98-O-38, 5-26-1998) 
Sec. 26-269. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person found to be violating any provision of this article (except section 26-267) shall be served by the village with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations. The village may revoke any permit for sewage disposal as a result of any violation of any provision of this article. 
(b)  Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit provided for in this section shall be guilty of an ordinance violation and subject to a fine as provided for in section 2-1305. 
(Code 1993, § 18-7.31; Ord. No. 96-O-11, 4-9-1996) 
Sec. 26-270. - Engineering and Public Works standards. 
(a)  Sanitary building sewers shall be at least six inches in diameter except where cast iron pipe is used, it may be four inches in diameter. 
(b)  Drainage in separate system areas. In those parts of the village which are served by a separate sanitary sewer system, no building shall discharge roof top stormwater directly into either the separate sanitary sewer system or the separate storm sewer system by means of downspouts from the building gutters. All downspouts shall be: 
(1)  Terminated at grade or at the nearest hub to grade and sealed with cement to provide a positive disconnection of the downspout from the separate sewer; or 
(2)  The disconnected downspout must be directed to splash toward the street or alley or green infrastructure, but no closer than ten feet from the public right-of-way, and should splash in such a manner as to prevent basement seepage into the building foundation or the expulsion of runoff onto adjacent property. Building downspouts adjacent to public sidewalks in business districts may drain into the separate storm sewer system so as not to drain across the sidewalk. 
(c)  Responsibility. It shall be the responsibility of the property owner and occupant of each structure to provide, at their own expense, evidence to the Department of Engineering and Public Works that their downspouts are disconnected from the sewer system. 
(d)  Drainage in combined system areas. In those parts of the village which are served by a combined storm sewer system, no building shall discharge roof top stormwater directly into the combined sewer system by means of downspouts from the building gutters. All connected downspouts to the combined system shall be terminated at grade or at the nearest hub to grade and sealed with cement to provide a positive disconnection of the downspout from the sewer. The disconnected downspout must be directed to splash toward green infrastructure, the street or alley, but no closer than ten feet from the public right-of-way, and should splash in such a manner as to prevent basement seepage into the building foundation or the expulsion of runoff onto adjacent property. Building downspouts adjacent to public sidewalks in business districts may drain into the sewer system so as not to drain across the sidewalk. 
(e)  Stormwater runoff from other areas, such as paved areas, yards, courts and courtyards, shall be managed through the use of green infrastructure best management practices and may only discharge into the combined or separate sewer systems if it is demonstrated that best management practices cannot feasibly be implemented. In such limited cases, a permit may be issued by the Director of Engineering and Public Works if a restrictor and adequate detention are provided by the applicant. 
(f)  All flood control systems must be a minimum of 15 feet outside of the existing foundation wall. Flood control systems must be installed in a concrete vault with a minimum inside diameter of four feet. All material inside the vault must be cast iron. 
(g)  Floor drains. 
(1)  In combined sewer areas, floor drains in basements shall be connected to sump pumps and discharged into the combined sewers only upon issuance of a permit approved by the Village Engineer. 
(2)  In separate sewer areas, floor drains in basements shall be connected to sump pumps and discharged into the sanitary sewers only upon issuance of a permit approved by the Village Engineer. 
(h)  All footing drains shall be connected to sump pumps. No footing drains or drain tile shall be connected directly to the combined sewers or to the separate sanitary sewers or storm sewers. 
(Code 1993, § 18-7.32; Ord. No. 2015-O-51, 6-14-2016) 
Secs. 26-271-26-288. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - SEWER USER RATE 

Sec. 26-289. - Basis for Sewer User Rate. 
(a)  The Sewer User Rate for the use of and for service supplied by the sewer wastewater facilities of the village shall consist of a Basic Sewer User Charge for operation and replacement costs, plus a Debt Service Charge. The charge assessed to sewer users shall be based on water usage as recorded by water meters. 
(b)  The adequacy of the Sewer User Rate shall be reviewed annually by the village. The Sewer User Rate shall be revised periodically to reflect a change in debt service or a change in operation, maintenance and replacement costs. 
(Code 1993, § 18-8.1) 
Sec. 26-290. - Measurement of flow. 
    The volume of flow used for computing basic user charges shall be the metered water consumption read in cubic feet. 
(1)  If the user discharging wastes into the public sewers procures any part, or all, of the water from sources other than the village water system, all or a part of which is discharged into the public sewers, a water meter of a type approved by the village shall be installed and maintained by the user for the purpose of determining the volume of water obtained from these other sources. 
(2)  Water used for yard sprinkling, if measured by a separate irrigation meter, shall be exempt from the portion of the Sewer User Rate applicable to the operation, maintenance and replacement costs as defined in section 26-291. Such water shall not be exempt from the portion of the Sewer User Rate applicable to debt service, unless said water is used for sprinkling or irrigation on property owned or leased for its use by a political subdivision of the State or other local public entity that is responsible for payment of water and sewer fees attributable to the public use of said property. 
(Code 1993, § 18-8.2; Ord. No. 93-O-50, 7-27-1993; Ord. No. 98-O-49, 6-23-1998; Ord. No. 2001-O-94, 1-8-2002) 
Sec. 26-291. - Sewer User Rate. 
(a)  There shall be and there is hereby established a Sewer User Rate for the use of and for service supplied by the sanitary and combined sewerage system of the village. The Sewer User Rate shall be $3.44 per 100 cubic feet of water consumption, and shall be applied to all users except otherwise exempted in section 26-290. On and after March 1, 2014, the rate under this section shall be $3.84 per 100 cubic feet of water consumption. On and after, March 1, 2015, the rate under this section shall be $4.24 per 100 cubic feet of water consumption. 
(b)  This rate shall be computed in the following manner: 
(1)  Estimate the annual operation, maintenance and replacement costs plus debt service costs for all financing and improvements for the sanitary and combined sewerage system; 
(2)  Estimate annual water usage by users of the sewerage system; 
(3)  Divide estimated annual costs (subsection (a) of this section) by estimated annual water usage (subsection (b) of this section) to determine rate. 
(c)  The operation, maintenance and replacement cost portion of the Sewer User Rate shall be $1.07 per 100 cubic feet of water consumption, and the Debt Service Charge of the basic user rate shall be $2.37 per 100 cubic feet of water consumption. On and after March 1, 2014, the operation, maintenance and replacement cost portion of the Sewer User Rate shall be $1.07 per 100 cubic feet of water consumption, and the Debt Service Charge of the basic user rate shall be $2.77 per 100 cubic feet of water consumption. On and after March 1, 2015, the operation, maintenance and replacement cost portion of the Sewer User Rate shall be $1.07 per 100 cubic feet of water consumption, and the Debt Service Charge of the basic user rate shall be $3.17 per 100 cubic feet of water consumption. These are dedicated sources of revenue for these purposes. 
(Code 1993, § 18-8.3; Ord. No. 93-O-67, 12-1-1993; Ord. No. 95-O-71, 9-12-1995; Ord. No. 96-O-52, 10-8-1996; Ord. No. 2001-O-80, 12-11-2001; Ord. No. 2003-O-92, 11-24-2003; Ord. No. 2004-O-103, 11-22-2004; Ord. No. 2005-O-102, 11-21-2005; Ord. No. 2006-O-96, 11-28-2006; Ord. No. 2007-O-86, 11-27-2007; Ord. No. 2008-O-89, 12-9-2008; Ord. No. 2009-O-71, 11-24-2009; Ord. No. 2010-O-70, 11-23-2010; Ord. No. 2013-O-72, 11-26-2013) 
Sec. 26-292. - Sewer bills. 
(a)  Said rates or charges for sewer service shall be payable at the same time and for the same periods as Water Service Charges. 
(b)  The owner of the premises, the occupant thereof and the user of the service shall be jointly and severally liable to pay for the service to such premises and the service is furnished to the premises by the village only upon the condition that the owner of the premises, occupant and user of the services are jointly and severally liable therefor to the village. 
(c)  When an owner or tenant vacates premises and does not desire to assume further responsibility for the sewer user charge, notification shall be made, to the Finance Director, requesting termination of such charge, and upon receipt of such notice, a final reading from the inside meter will be taken. The charge shall terminate as of the end of the month in which the notice is received. 
(d)  The minimum sewer user charge for each sewer bill issued under this section shall be $27.52. On and after March 1, 2014, such minimum charge shall be $30.72. On and after March 1, 2015, such minimum charge shall be $33.92. 
(Code 1993, § 18-8.4; Ord. No. 95-O-71,1-1-1996; Ord. No. 96-O-52, 10-8-1996; Ord. No. 2001-O-80, 12-11-2001; Ord. No. 2003-O-92, 11-24-2003; Ord. No. 2004-O-103, 11-22-2004; Ord. No. 2005-O-102, 11-21-2005; Ord. No. 2006-O-96, 11-28-2006; Ord. No. 2007-O-86, 11-27-2007; Ord. No. 2008-O-89, 12-9-2008; Ord. No. 2009-O-71, 11-24-2009; Ord. No. 2010-O-70, 11-23-2010; Ord. No. 2013-O-72, 11-26-2013) 
Sec. 26-293. - Penalty for nonpayment. 
    A penalty of 1.5 percent per month shall attach to any unpaid bills 30 days after the date of issuance. If not paid within 60 days of issuance of such bills, the water service shall be turned off and will not be turned on again until full payment is made to the village including a charge for restoring water service. The reconnection charge shall be $75.00 on regular business days between 7:00 a.m. and 3:30 p.m. and $150.00 for all other times. 
(Code 1993, § 18-8.5; Ord. No. 88-O-1, 1-19-1988; Ord. No. 2001-O-80, 12-11-2001; Ord. No. 2003-O-4, 2-11-2003) 
Sec. 26-294. - Lien for unpaid bills. 
(a)  Whenever a bill for sewer service remains unpaid for 90 days after it has been rendered, the village may file with the County Recorder of Deeds a statement of lien claim. This statement shall contain the legal description of the premises served, the amount of the unpaid bill plus costs incurred by the village in filing the lien, and a notice that the village claims a lien for this amount as well as for all charges subsequent to the period covered by the bill. 
(b)  If the user whose bill is unpaid is not the owner of the premises and the village has notice of this, notice shall be mailed to the owner of the premises if his address be known to the village, whenever such bill remains unpaid for the period of 90 days after it has been rendered. 
(c)  The failure of the village to record such lien or to mail such notice or the failure of the owner to receive such notice shall not affect the right to foreclose the lien for unpaid bills as mentioned in the foregoing section. 
(Code 1993, § 18-8.6) 
Sec. 26-295. - Foreclosure of lien. 
    Property subject to a lien for unpaid charges may be sold for nonpayment of the same, and the proceeds of the sale shall be applied to pay the charges, after deducting costs, as is the case in the foreclosure of statutory liens. Such foreclosure shall be by bill-in-equity in the name of the village. The Corporation Counsel is hereby authorized to institute such proceedings in the name of the village in any court having jurisdiction over such matters against any property for which the bill has remained unpaid 90 days after it has been rendered. The owner shall be responsible for recordation and costs of recording any release of lien or related documents. 
(Code 1993, § 18-8.7) 
Sec. 26-296. - Revenues. 
    All revenues derived from the operation of the sewer system including any funds incident to the operation of the sewer system shall be deposited in the sewer fund. All such revenues shall be held by the Finance Director separate and apart from all other funds of the village. 
(Code 1993, § 18-8.8) 
Sec. 26-297. - Accounts. 
(a)  The Finance Director shall establish a proper system of accounts and shall keep proper books, records, and accounts in which complete and correct entries shall be made of all transactions relative to the sewer system, and at regular annual intervals he shall cause to be made an audit by an independent auditor to show the receipts and disbursements of the sewer fund. 
(b)  The financial information to be shown in the audit report shall include the following: 
(1)  Billing data to show total number of cubic feet billed. 
(2)  Debt service for the next succeeding fiscal year. 
(3)  Number of users connected to the system. 
(Code 1993, § 18-8.9) 
Sec. 26-298. - Notice of rates. 
    Each user will be notified at least annually, in conjunction with a regular water bill, of the rate and that portion of the user charges attributable to the sewer wastewater facilities of the village. 
(Code 1993, § 18-8.10) 
Sec. 26-299. - Access to records. 
    The Illinois Environmental Protection Agency or its authorized representative shall have access to any books, documents, papers, and records of the village which are applicable to the village system of user charges for the purpose of making audit, examination, excerpts and transcriptions thereof to ensure compliance with the terms of the special and general conditions to any state grant. 
(Code 1993, § 18-8.11; Ord. No. 85-O-53, 1-21-1986) 
Secs. 26-300-26-316. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - LAWN SPRINKLING 

Sec. 26-317. - Lawn sprinkling restricted. 
(a)  During the period from May 15 to September 15, it is unlawful for any person to conduct lawn sprinkling: 
(1)  On an even-numbered day of the month, unless the person's property bears an even-numbered street address; 
(2)  On an odd-numbered day of the month, unless the person's property bears and odd-numbered address; and 
(3)  Between the hours of 12:00 noon and 6:00 p.m on any day. 
(b)  Hand-watering of gardens, trees, shrubs, and flowers will be permitted only with buckets/sprinkling cans. 
(c)  Subject to other provisions of the Illinois Plumbing Code, 77 Ill. Admin. Code 890 et seq., and the Law Irrigation Contractor and Law Sprinkler System Registration Code, 77 Ill. Admin. Code 892 et seq., new and replacement sprinkler systems installed on properties connected to the village water supply system shall bear the WaterSense label (as designated by the United States Environmental Protection Agency WaterSense Program), when such labeled sprinkler systems are available. 
(Code 1993, § 18-9.1; Ord. No. 2015-O-51, 6-14-2016) 
Sec. 26-318. - Special circumstances/exemptions. 
(a)  In the event that special or unusual circumstances would warrant watering/lawn sprinkling on a daily basis other than the hours permitted, the Village Engineer may authorize waiving of the sprinkling regulations set forth above for a period of not to exceed two weeks' duration at any one address. 
(b)  New lawns which are less than three months old are exempt from the provisions of section 26-317 and may be watered at anytime for three months from the date of installation or planting. 
(Code 1993, § 18-9.2; Ord. No. 98-O-38, 5-26-1998; Ord. No. 2015-O-51, 6-14-2016) 
Sec. 26-319. - Emergency restrictions. 
    In case of mechanical failure of the system providing water for the village or in case of a water shortage, the Village Engineer, upon declaration of the emergency by the Village Manager, is hereby authorized to implement an emergency water use plan and to impose immediate restrictions upon non-essential uses of the water system such as watering and/or sprinkling lawns and/or gardens, filling and/or refilling swimming pools, or washing automobiles. 
(Code 1993, § 18-9.3; Ord. No. 98-O-38, 5-26-1998) 
Sec. 26-320. - Penalties. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of an ordinance violation and subject to a fine as provided for in section 2-1305. 
(Code 1993, § 18-9.4; Ord. No. 90-O-32, 5-15-1990) 
Chapter 28 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 28-1. - Purpose. 
    The purpose and intent of this chapter is to: 
(1)  Establish a local policy concerning telecommunications providers and services; 
(2)  Establish clear local guidelines, standards and time frames for the exercise of local authority with respect to the regulation of telecommunications providers and services; 
(3)  Promote competition in telecommunications; 
(4)  Minimize unnecessary local regulation of telecommunications providers and services; 
(5)  Encourage the provision of advanced and competitive telecommunications services on the widest possible basis to the businesses, institutions and residents of the village; 
(6)  Permit and manage reasonable access to the public ways of the village for telecommunications purposes on a competitively neutral basis; 
(7)  Conserve the limited physical capacity of the public ways held in public trust by the village; 
(8)  Ensure that the village's current and ongoing costs of granting and regulating private access to and use of the public ways are fully paid by the persons seeking such access and causing such costs; 
(9)  Secure fair and reasonable compensation to the village and the residents of the village for permitting private use of the public ways; 
(10)  Ensure that all telecommunications carriers providing facilities or services within the village comply with the ordinances, rules and regulations of the village; 
(11)  Ensure that the village can continue to fairly and responsibly protect the public health, safety and welfare; 
(12)  Enable the village to discharge its public trust consistent with rapidly evolving federal and state regulatory policies, industry competition and technological development; and 
(13)  To provide for the orderly administration and collection of such fees and compensation as may be due to the village pursuant to applicable State law and local ordinance. 
(Code 1993, § 17-1.1; Ord. No. 97-O-70, 9-23-1997; Ord. No. 2007-O-73, 10-23-2007) 
Sec. 28-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Cable service means that term as defined in 47 USC 522(6). 
    Commission means the Illinois Commerce Commission. 
    Holder means a person or entity that has received authorization to offer or provide cable or video service from the commission pursuant to ILCS ch. 220, act 5, § 21-401. 
    Public right-of-way or right-of-way means any municipal street, alley, water or public right-of-way dedicated or commonly used for utility purposes, including utility easements wherein the village has acquired the right and authority to locate or permit the location of utilities consistent with telecommunications facilities. Public right-of-way or right-of-way shall not include any real or personal village property that is not specifically described in the previous sentence, and shall not include village buildings, structures, or other improvements regardless of whether they are situated in the public right-of-way. 
    Service means the provision of cable service or video service to subscribers and the interaction of subscribers with the person or entity that has received authorization to offer or provide cable or video service from the commission pursuant to ILCS ch. 220, act 5, § 21-401. 
    Telecommunications means and includes, but is not limited to, messages or information transmitted through use of local, toll and wide area telephone service, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter service, computer exchange service, private line services, mobile radio services, cellular mobile telecommunications services, stationary two-way radio, paging service and any other form of mobile or portable one-way or two-way communications, and any other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar means, between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite, or similar facilities. The term "private line" means a dedicated non-traffic sensitive service for a single customer that entitles the customer to exclusive or priority use of a communications channel, or a group of such channels, from one or more specified locations to one or more other specified locations. Telecommunication shall not include value added services in which computer processing applications are used to act on the form, content, code and protocol of the information for the purposes other than transmission. Telecommunications shall not include purchase of telecommunications by a telecommunications service provider for use as a component part of the service provided by such provider to the ultimate retail consumer who originates or terminates the end-to-end communications. Telecommunications shall not include the provision of cable services through a cable system as defined in the Cable Communications Act of 1984 (47 USC 521 et seq.), as now or hereafter amended, or cable or other programming services subject to an open video system fee payable to the village through an open video system as defined in the Rules of the Federal Communications Commission (47 CFR 76.1500 et seq.), as now or hereafter amended. 
    Telecommunications provider means any person or entity that installs, owns, operates or controls equipment in the public right-of-way that is used or designed to be used to transmit telecommunications in any form. 
    Video service means video programming and subscriber interaction, if any, that is required for the selection or use of such video programming services, and which is provided through wireline facilities located at least in part in the public right-of-way without regard to delivery technology, including Internet protocol technology. This definition does not include any video programming provided by a commercial mobile service provider defined in 47 USC 332(d) or any video programming provided solely as part of, and via, service that enables users to access content, information, electronic mail, or other services offered over the public Internet. 
    Wireless telecommunications means and includes cellular mobile telephone services, personal wireless services as defined in section 704(C) of the Telecommunications Act of 1996 (Public Law No. 104-104), 42 USC 332(c)(7), as now or hereafter amended, including all commercial mobile radio services, and paging services. 
(Code 1993, § 17-1.2; Ord. No. 97-O-70, 9-23-1997; Ord. No. 2002-O-61, 9-10-2002; Ord. No. 2007-O-73, 10-23-2007) 
Sec. 28-3. - Registration. 
    Except as otherwise provided herein, all telecommunications providers with equipment located in the public rights-of-way of the village shall register with the village in the manner provided in article II of this chapter. 
(Code 1993, § 17-1.3; Ord. No. 97-O-70, 9-23-1997; Ord. No. 2002-O-61, 9-10-2002; Ord. No. 2007-O-73, 10-23-2007) 
Sec. 28-4. - Access to public rights-of-way. 
(a)  Payment of the Simplified Municipal Telecommunications Tax provided for in article IV of this chapter shall be the only fee for compensation for the use of public rights-of-way within the village by telecommunications providers other than cable service providers and video service providers. Imposition of the Simplified Municipal Telecommunications Tax provided under this chapter does not, however, serve as a limitation on the levying of any other taxes or the imposition of any fees otherwise authorized by law. Cable service and video service providers shall be subject to such fees as provided in article IV of this chapter. 
(b)  Any telecommunications provider locating facilities or equipment in the public right-of-way shall be subject to generally applicable rules of construction in the public right-of-way as provided in chapter 20. 
(Code 1993, § 17-1.4; Ord. No. 2002-O-61, 9-10-2002; Ord. No. 2007-O-73, 10-23-2007) 
Sec. 28-5. - Cable television franchise. 
    Except as otherwise provided herein, any telecommunications provider or retailer who desires to construct, install, operate, maintain or locate telecommunications facilities in any public way of the village for the purpose of providing cable service to persons in the village shall first obtain a cable franchise from the village as provided in article IV of this chapter, or be authorized to deliver video service or cable service as a holder. 
(Code 1993, § 17-1.5; Ord. No. 97-O-70, 9-23-1997; Ord. No. 2002-O-61, 9-10-2002; Ord. No. 2007-O-73, 10-23-2007) 
Sec. 28-6. - Application to existing franchise ordinances and agreements. 
    The provisions of this chapter, with the exception of any cable and video customer service and protection requirements made applicable to a cable franchisee or holder under the provisions of the Illinois Cable and Video Customer Protection Law (ILCS ch. 220, act 5, § 22-501 et seq.) and incorporated by reference in this chapter, shall have no effect on any existing franchise ordinance or franchise agreement until: 
(1)  The expiration of said franchise ordinance or agreement; or 
(2)  An amendment to an unexpired franchise ordinance or franchise agreement, unless both parties agree to defer full compliance to a specific date not later than the present expiration date. 
(Code 1993, § 17-1.6; Ord. No. 97-O-70, 9-23-1997; Ord. No. 2002-O-61, 9-10-2002; Ord. No. 2007-O-73, 10-23-2007) 
Sec. 28-7. - Penalties. 
    Unless otherwise specifically provided for in this chapter, any person found guilty of violating, disobeying, omitting, neglecting or refusing to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined not less than $100.00 nor more than $750.00 for each offense. A separate and distinct offense shall be deemed committed each day on which a violation occurs or continues. 
(Code 1993, § 17-1.7; Ord. No. 97-O-70, 9-23-1997; Ord. No. 2002-O-61, 9-10-2002; Ord. No. 2007-O-73, 10-23-2007) 
Sec. 28-8. - Other remedies. 
    Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as limiting any judicial remedies that the village may have, at law or in equity, for enforcement of this chapter. 
(Code 1993, § 17-1.8; Ord. No. 2002-O-61, 9-10-2002; Ord. No. 2007-O-73, 10-23-2007) 
Sec. 28-9. - Registration of telecommunications providers. 
(a)  Every telecommunications provider, as defined in this chapter, that locates equipment or facilities in the public right-of-way shall register with the village within 30 days after the effective date of this section or 30 days after becoming a telecommunications provider, whichever is later, on a form to be provided by the village. 
(b)  Every telecommunications provider who has registered with the village pursuant to subsection (a) of this section has an affirmative duty to submit an amended registration form to the village within 30 days from the date of the occurrence of any changes in the information provided by the telecommunications provider in the registration form on file with the village. 
(c)  A cable service provider or video service provider that either holds a franchise with the village or is a holder as defined in this chapter, shall not be required to separately register with the village under this section insofar as it is locating facilities in the public right-of-way under the terms of its franchise or for the purpose of providing video or cable service as a holder. 
(Code 1993, § 17-2; Ord. No. 97-O-70, 9-23-1997; Ord. No. 2002-O-61, 9-10-2002; Ord. No. 2007-O-73, 10-23-2007) 
Secs. 28-10-28-36. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - 911 EMERGENCY TELEPHONE SYSTEM SURCHARGE 

Sec. 28-37. - Authority. 
    This article, and all subsections thereof, is enacted pursuant to the home rule authority of the village granted under article VII of the 1970 Constitution of the State, and additionally, pursuant to the powers granted in ILCS ch. 50, act 750, § 0.01 et seq., and pursuant to approval of same by referendum on November 5, 2002 authorized by Ordinance No. 2002-O-57. 
(Code 1993, § 17-3.1; Ord. No. 2002-O-101, 12-10-2002) 
Sec. 28-38. - Emergency Telephone System Surcharge imposed. 
(a)  In order to provide for funding of a 911 Emergency Telephone System in the village, in addition to any other Telecommunications Tax imposed by the village, including, but not limited to, a tax levied pursuant to ILCS ch. 65, act 5, § 8-11-2, a Telecommunications Infrastructure Maintenance Fee, or a simplified Telecommunications Tax as may be enacted pursuant to Public Act 92-526 of the State, a monthly surcharge is hereby imposed on all billed subscribers of network connections provided by telecommunication carriers engaged in the business of transmitting messages by means of electricity originating within the corporate limits of the village at the rate per network connection of $1.50 per month, provided, however: 
(1)  That where multiple voice grade communications channels are connected between the subscriber's premises and a public switched network through private branch exchange (PBX) or Centrex-type service, five such surcharges shall be imposed per network connection, as determined in accordance with ILCS ch. 50, act 750, § 12.2(a) and (d), now or hereafter amended; and 
(2)  That for mobile telecommunications services, the surcharge shall be imposed based upon the municipality or county that encompasses the customer's place of primary use as defined in ILCS ch. 35, act 638 § 1 et seq., now or hereafter amended. 
(b)  For the purposes of computing the surcharge imposed: 
(1)  The network connections to which the surcharge shall apply shall be those in-service network connections, other than those network connections assigned to the village, where the service address for each such network connection or connections is located within the corporate limits of the village. 
(2)  Except for mobile telecommunication services, the term "service address" means the location of the primary use of the network connection or connections. For mobile telecommunication services, the term "service address" means the customer's place of primary use as defined in ILCS ch. 35, act 638, § 1 et seq. 
(3)  With respect to network connections provided for use with pay telephone services for which there is no billed subscriber, the telecommunications carrier providing the network connection shall be deemed to be its own billed subscriber for the purposes of applying the surcharge. 
(4)  The definition of the term "network connection" shall be as provided in ILCS ch. 50, act 750, § 2.12, now or hereafter amended. 
(5)  The definition of the term "transmitting messages" shall be as provided in ILCS ch. 50, act 750, § 2.13, now or hereafter amended. 
(Code 1993, § 17-3.2; Ord. No. 2002-O-101, 12-10-2002) 
Sec. 28-39. - Emergency Telephone System Surcharge. 
(a)  The surcharge shall be collected from the subscriber by the telecommunications carrier providing the subscriber the network connection as a separately stated item on the subscriber's bill. The amount of surcharge collected by the telecommunications carrier shall be paid to the village not later than 30 days after the surcharge is collected by the telecommunications carrier, net of any network or other 911 or sophisticated 911 system charges then due the particular telecommunications carrier, as shown on an itemized bill. The telecommunications carrier collecting the surcharge shall also be entitled to deduct three percent of the gross amount of surcharge collected to reimburse the telecommunications carrier for the expense of accounting and collecting the surcharge. 
(b)  The Village Clerk shall provide any telecommunications carrier subject to the surcharge with a certified list of those network connections assigned to the village to be exempt from imposition of said surcharge. The certified list may be revised by the municipality on 60 days prior written notice provided to the telecommunication carriers. 
(c)  The surcharge shall be imposed on the first day of the month following the expiration of 90 days from the date the Village Clerk certifies to any of the telecommunication carriers that they are subject to the surcharge. 
(d)  Simultaneously with the remittance subscribed in subsection (a) of this section, each telecommunication carrier shall submit a return to the Finance Director for the period to which the remittance applies, stating as follows: 
(1)  The name of the telecommunication carrier. 
(2)  The telecommunication carrier's principal place of business. 
(3)  The number of network connections to which the surcharge applies. 
(4)  The amount of surcharge due. 
(5)  Such other reasonable and related information as the Finance Director may require. 
(Code 1993, § 17-3.3; Ord. No. 2002-O-101, 12-10-2002) 
Sec. 28-40. - Refunds; limitations. 
(a)  If it shall appear that an amount of surcharge has been paid which was not due under the provision of this article, whether as the result of a mistake of fact or an error of law, then such amount shall be credited against any surcharge due, or to become due, under this article from the telecommunication carrier who made the erroneous payments; provided that no amount erroneously paid more than three years prior to the filing of a claim therefore shall be so credited. 
(b)  No action to recover any amount of surcharge due under the provisions of this this article shall be commenced more than three years after the due date of such amount. 
(Code 1993, § 17-3.4; Ord. No. 2002-O-101, 12-10-2002) 
Sec. 28-41. - Trust created for surcharge collections. 
    As provided in ILCS ch. 50, act 750, § 15.3(k), any surcharge collected by or imposed on a telecommunications carrier pursuant to this article shall be held to be a special fund in trust for the village, and except for the three percent deduction provided in section 28-39, said special fund shall not be subject to the claims of creditors of the telecommunication carrier. 
(Code 1993, § 17-3.5; Ord. No. 2002-O-101, 12-10-2002) 
Sec. 28-42. - Expenditure of surcharge collections. 
    All monies received by the village pursuant to the surcharge imposed under this article shall be deposited into a separate interest-bearing Emergency Telephone System Fund account, which shall be subject to the jurisdiction of the Emergency Telephone System Board established in chapter 2. The treasurer of the village shall be custodian of the Fund. All interest accruing on the Fund shall remain in the Fund. No expenditures may be made from such Fund except upon the direction of the Board by resolution passed by a majority of all members of the Board. Expenditures may be made only to pay for the costs associated with the following: 
(1)  The design of the Emergency Telephone System. 
(2)  The coding of an initial Master Street Address Guide data base, and update and maintenance thereof. 
(3)  The repayment of any monies advanced for the implementation of the system. 
(4)  The charges for Automatic Number Identification and Automatic Location Identification equipment, a computer aided dispatch system that records, maintains, and integrates information, mobile data transmitters equipped with automatic vehicle locators, and maintenance, replacement and update thereof to increase operational efficiency and improve the provision of emergency services. 
(5)  The non-recurring charges related to installation of the Emergency Telephone System and the ongoing network charges. 
(6)  The acquisition and installation, or the reimbursement of costs therefor to other governmental bodies that have incurred those costs, of road or street signs that are essential to the implementation of the emergency telephone system and that are not duplicative of signs that are the responsibility of the jurisdiction charged with maintaining road and street signs. 
(7)  Other products and services necessary for the implementation, upgrade, and maintenance of the system and any other purpose related to the operation of the system, including costs attributable directly to the construction, leasing, or maintenance of any buildings or facilities or costs of personnel attributable directly to the operation of the system. Costs attributable directly to the operation of an emergency telephone system do not include the costs of public safety agency personnel who are and equipment that is dispatched in response to an emergency call. 
(Code 1993, § 17-3.6; Ord. No. 2002-O-101, 12-10-2002) 
Secs. 28-43-28-72. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SIMPLIFIED MUNICIPAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS TAX 

Sec. 28-73. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Amount paid means the amount charged to the taxpayer's service address in this municipality regardless of where such amount is billed or paid. 
    Department means the Illinois Department of Revenue. 
    Gross charge means the amount paid for the act or privilege of originating or receiving telecommunications in the village and for all services and equipment provided in connection therewith by a retailer, valued in money whether paid in money or otherwise, including cash, credits, services and property of every kind or nature, and shall be determined without any deduction on account of the cost of such telecommunications, the cost of the materials used, labor or service costs or any other expense whatsoever. In case credit is extended, the amount thereof shall be included only as and when paid. The term "gross charges" for private line service shall include charges imposed at each channel point within the village, charges for the channel mileage between each channel point within this municipality, and charges for that portion of the interstate inter-office channel provided within Illinois. However, the term "gross charge" shall not include: 
(1)  Any amounts added to a purchaser's bill because of a charge made pursuant to: 
a.  The tax imposed by this article; 
b.  The tax imposed by the Telecommunications Excise Tax Act; 
c.  The tax imposed by section 4251 of the Internal Revenue Code; 
d.  Any 911 surcharges; or 
e.  Charges added to customers' bills pursuant to the provisions of section 9221 or 9-222 of the Public Utilities Act, as amended, or any similar charges added to customers' bills by retailers who are not subject to rate regulation by the Illinois Commerce Commission for the purpose of recovering any of the tax liabilities or other amounts specified in those provisions of the Public Utilities Act; 
(2)  Charges for a sent collect telecommunication received outside of the village; 
(3)  Charges for leased time on equipment or charges for the storage of data or information for subsequent retrieval or the processing of data or information intended to change its form or content. Such equipment includes, but is not limited to, the use of calculators, computers, data processing equipment, tabulating equipment or accounting equipment and also includes the usage of computers under a time-sharing agreement; 
(4)  Charges for customer equipment, including such equipment that is leased or rented by the customer from any source, wherein such charges are disaggregated and separately identified from other charges; 
(5)  Charges to business enterprises certified as exempt under section 9-222.1 of the Public Utilities Act to the extent of such exemption and during the period of time specified by the Department of Commerce and Community Affairs; 
(6)  Charges for telecommunications and all services and equipment provided in connection therewith between a parent corporation and its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries when the tax imposed under this ordinance has already been paid to a retailer and only to the extent that the charges between the parent corporation and wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries represent expense allocation between the corporations and not the generation of profit for the corporation rendering such service; 
(7)  The term "bad debt" means any portion of a debt that is related to a sale at retail for which gross charges are not otherwise deductible or excludable that has become worthless or uncollectible, as determined under applicable federal income tax standards; if the portion of the debt deemed to be bad is subsequently paid, the retailer shall report and pay the tax on that portion during the reporting period in which the payment is made; 
(8)  Charges paid by inserting coins in coin-operated telecommunication devices; or 
(9)  Amounts paid by telecommunications retailers under the Telecommunications Infrastructure Maintenance Fee Act. 
    Interstate telecommunications means all telecommunications that either originate or terminate outside this State. 
    Intrastate telecommunications means all telecommunications that originate and terminate within this State. 
    Person means any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association, joint stock company, joint venture, corporation, limited liability company, or a receiver, trustee, guardian, or other representative appointed by order of any court, the federal and state governments, including state universities created by statute, or any city, town, county, or other political subdivision of this State. 
    Purchase at retail means the acquisition, consumption or use of telecommunications through a sale at retail. 
    Retailer means and includes every person engaged in the business of making sales at retail as defined in this section. The department may, in its discretion, upon application, authorize the collection of the tax hereby imposed by any retailer not maintaining a place of business within this State, who, to the satisfaction of the department, furnishes adequate security to insure collection and payment of the tax. Such retailer shall be issued, without charge, a permit to collect such tax. When so authorized, it shall be the duty of such retailer to collect the tax upon all of the gross charges for telecommunications in this State in the same manner and subject to the same requirements as a retailer maintaining a place of business within this State. The permit may be revoked by the department at its discretion. 
    Retailer maintaining a place of business in this State , or any like term, means and includes any retailer having or maintaining within this State, directly or by a subsidiary, an office, distribution facilities, transmission facilities, sales office, warehouse or other place of business, or any agent or other representative operating within this State under the authority of the retailer or its subsidiary, irrespective of whether such place of business or agent or other representative is located here permanently or temporarily, or whether such retailer or subsidiary is licensed to do business in this State. 
    Sale at retail means the transmitting, supplying or furnishing of telecommunications and all services and equipment provided in connection therewith for a consideration, to persons other than the federal and state governments, and state universities created by statute and other than between a parent corporation and its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries for their use or consumption and not for resale. 
    Service address means the location of telecommunications equipment from which telecommunications services are originated or at which telecommunications services are received by a taxpayer. In the event this may not be a defined location, as in the case of mobile phones, paging systems, and maritime systems, service address means the customer's place of primary use as defined in the Mobile Telecommunications Sourcing Conformity Act. For air-to-ground systems and the like, the term "service address" shall mean the location of a taxpayer's primary use of the telecommunications equipment as defined by telephone number, authorization code, or location in Illinois where bills are sent. 
    Taxpayer means a person who individually or through his agents, employees, or permittees engages in the act or privilege of originating or receiving telecommunications in the village and who incurs a tax liability as authorized by the ordinance. 
    Telecommunications , in addition to the meaning ordinarily and popularly ascribed to it, means and includes, without limitation, messages or information transmitted through use of local, toll, and wide area telephone service, private line services, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter, computer exchange services, cellular mobile telecommunications service, specialized mobile radio, stationary two-way radio, paging service, or any other form of mobile and portable one-way or two-way communications, or any other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar means, between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite, or similar facilities. As used in this section, the term "private line" means a dedicated non-traffic sensitive service for a single customer, that entitles the customer to exclusive or priority use of a communications channel or group of channels, from one or more specified locations to one or more other specified locations. The definition of the term "telecommunications" shall not include value added services in which computer processing applications are used to act on the form, content, code, and protocol of the information for the purposes other than transmission. The term "telecommunications" shall not include purchases of telecommunications by a telecommunications service provider for use as a component part of the service provided by such provider to the ultimate retail consumer who originates or terminates the taxable end-to-end communications. Carrier access charges, right of access charges, charges for use of inter-company facilities, and all telecommunications resold in the subsequent provision of, used as a component of, or integrated into, end-to-end telecommunications service shall be non-taxable as sales for resale. Prepaid telephone calling arrangements shall not be considered telecommunications subject to the tax imposed under this section. For the purposes of this section, "prepaid telephone calling arrangements means that term as defined in section 2-27 of the Retailers' Occupations Tax Act. The term "telecommunications" shall not include the provision of cable services through a cable system as defined in the Cable Communications Act of 1984 (47 USC 521 et seq.), as now or hereafter amended or cable or other programming services subject to an open video system fee payable to the village through an open video system as defined in the Rules of the Federal Communications Commission (47 CFR 76.1550 et seq.), as now or hereafter amended. 
(Code 1993, § 17-4.1; Ord. No. 2002-O-61, 9-10-2002) 
Sec. 28-74. - Simplified municipal telecommunications tax imposed. 
    Effective January 1, 2003, a tax is hereby imposed upon any and all the following acts or privileges: 
(1)  The act or privilege of originating in the village or receiving in the village intrastate telecommunications by a person at a rate of six percent of the gross charge for such telecommunications purchased at retail from a retailer. 
(2)  The act or privilege of originating in the village or receiving in the village interstate telecommunications by a person at a rate of six percent of the gross charge for such telecommunications purchased at retail from a retailer. To prevent actual multi-state taxation of the act or privilege that is subject to taxation under this subsection, any taxpayer, upon proof that the taxpayer has paid a tax in another state on such event, shall be allowed a credit against any tax enacted pursuant to or authorized by this section to the extent of the amount of such tax properly due and paid in such other state which was not previously allowed as a credit against any other state or local tax in this State. 
(3)  The tax imposed by this section is not imposed on such act or privilege to the extent such act or privilege may not, under the Constitution and statutes of the United States, be made the subject of taxation by the municipality. 
(Code 1993, § 17-4.2; Ord. No. 2002-O-61, 9-10-2002) 
Sec. 28-75. - Collection of simplified municipal telecommunications tax by retailers. 
(a)  The tax authorized by this section shall be collected from the taxpayer by a retailer maintaining a place of business in this State and shall be remitted by such retailer to the department. Any tax required to be collected pursuant to or as authorized by this section and any such tax collected by such retailer and required to be remitted to the department shall constitute a debt owed by the retailer to the State. Retailers shall collect the tax from the taxpayer by adding the tax to the gross charge for the act or privilege of originating or receiving telecommunications when sold for use, in the manner prescribed by the department. The tax authorized by this section shall constitute a debt of the taxpayer to the retailer until paid, and, if unpaid, is recoverable at law in the same manner as the original charge for such sale at retail. If the retailer fails to collect the tax from the taxpayer, then the taxpayer shall be required to pay the tax directly to the department in the manner provided by the department. 
(b)  Whenever possible, the tax authorized by this section shall, when collected, be stated as a distinct item separate and apart from the gross charge for telecommunications. 
(Code 1993, § 17-4.3; Ord. No. 2002-O-61, 9-10-2002) 
Sec. 28-76. - Returns to department. 
    On or before the last day of February, and on or before the last day of every month thereafter, the tax imposed under this section on telecommunication retailers shall be returned with appropriate forms and information as required by the department pursuant to the Illinois Simplified Municipal Telecommunications Tax Act (Public Act 92-526, section 5-50) and any accompanying rules and regulations created by the department to implement the Act. 
(Code 1993, § 17-4.4; Ord. No. 2002-O-61, 9-10-2002) 
Sec. 28-77. - Resellers. 
(a)  If a person who originates or receives telecommunications claims to be a reseller of such telecommunications, such person shall apply to the department for a resale number. Such applicant shall state facts which will show the department why such applicant is not liable for the tax authorized by this article on any of such purchases and shall furnish such additional information as the department may reasonably require. 
(b)  Upon approval of the application, the department shall assign a resale number to the applicant and shall certify such number to the applicant. The department may cancel any number which is obtained through misrepresentation, or which is used to send or receive such telecommunication tax-free when such actions in fact are not for resale, or which no longer applies because of the person's having discontinued the making of resales. 
(c)  Except as provided hereinabove in this section, the act or privilege of originating or receiving telecommunications in this State shall not be made tax-free on the ground of being a sale for resale unless the person has an active resale number from the department and furnishes that number to the retailer in connection with certifying to the retailer that any sale to such person is non-taxable because of being a sale for resale. 
(Code 1993, § 17-4.5; Ord. No. 2002-O-61, 9-10-2002) 
Secs. 28-78-28-97. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - VIDEO SERVICE AND CABLE SERVICE 

Sec. 28-98. - Franchise requirement. 
    No person or entity shall provide video service or cable service in the village unless that person or entity is a holder or has first obtained a franchise for cable service from the village. 
(Code 1993, § 17-5; Ord. No. 2007-O-73, 10-23-2007) 
Secs. 28-99-28-124. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - VIDEO SERVICE AND CABLE SERVICE HOLDERS 

Sec. 28-125. - Fees required. 
    No holder shall provide video service or cable service in the village unless it remits to the village the Service Provider Fee and PEG Access Support Fee imposed by this chapter. 
(Code 1993, § 17-5.1; Ord. No. 2007-O-73, 10-23-2007) 
Sec. 28-126. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Gross revenues means all consideration of any kind or nature, including, without limitation, cash, credits, property, and in-kind contributions received by the holder for the operation of a cable or video system to provide cable service or video service within the holder's cable service or video service area within the village. 
(1)  Gross revenues shall include the following: 
a.  Recurring charges for cable or video service. 
b.  Event-based charges for cable service or video service, including, but not limited to, pay-per-view and video-on-demand charges. 
c.  Rental of set top boxes and other cable service or video service equipment. 
d.  Service charges related to the provision of cable service or video service, including, but not limited to, activation, installation, and repair charges. 
e.  Administrative charges related to the provision of cable service or video service, including, but not limited to, service order and service termination charges. 
f.  Late payment fees or charges, insufficient funds check charges, and other charges assessed to recover the costs of collecting delinquent payments. 
g.  A pro rata portion of all revenue derived by the holder or its affiliates pursuant to compensation arrangements for advertising or for promotion or exhibition of any products or services derived from the operation of the holder's network to provide cable service or video service within the village. The allocation shall be based on the number of subscribers in the village divided by the total number of subscribers in relation to the relevant regional or national compensation arrangement. 
h.  Compensation received by the holder that is derived from the operation of the holder's network to provide cable service or video service with respect to commissions that are received by the holder as compensation for promotion or exhibition of any products or services on the holder's network, such as a home shopping or similar channel, subject to subsection (1)i of this definition. 
i.  In the case of a cable service or video service that is bundled or integrated functionally with other services, capabilities, or applications, the portion of the holder's revenue attributable to the other services, capabilities, or applications shall be included in the gross revenue unless the holder can reasonably identify the article or exclusion of the revenue from its books and records that are kept in the regular course of business. 
j.  The Service Provider Fee permitted by ILCS ch. 220, act 5, § 21-801(b). 
(2)  Gross revenues do not include any of the following: 
a.  Revenues not actually received, even if billed, such as bad debt, subject to ILCS ch. 220, act 5, § 21-801(c)(1)(vi). 
b.  Refunds, discounts, or other price adjustments that reduce the amount of gross revenues received by the holder of the State-issued authorization to the extent the refund, rebate, credit, or discount is attributable to cable service or video service. 
c.  Regardless of whether the services are bundled, packaged, or functionally integrated with cable service or video service, any revenues received from services not classified as cable service or video service, including, without limitation, revenue received from telecommunication services, information services, or the provision of directory or Internet advertising, including yellow pages, white pages, banner advertisement, and electronic publishing or any other revenues attributed by the holder to non-cable service or non-video service in accordance with the holder's books and records and records kept in the regular course of business and any applicable laws, rules, regulations, standards, or orders. 
d.  The sale of cable services or video services for resale in which the purchaser is required to collect the Service Provider Fee from the purchaser's subscribers to the extent the purchaser certifies in writing that it will resell the service within the village and pay the fee permitted by ILCS ch. 220, act 5, § 21-801(b) with respect to the service. 
e.  Any tax or fee of general applicability imposed upon the subscribers or the transaction by a city, state, federal, or any other governmental entity and collected by the holder of the state-issued authorization and required to be remitted to the taxing entity, including sales and use taxes. 
f.  Security deposits collected from subscribers. 
g.  Amounts paid by subscribers to home shopping or similar vendors for merchandise sold through any home shopping channel offered as part of the cable service or video service. 
(3)  Revenue of an affiliate of a holder shall be included in the calculation of gross revenues to the extent the treatment of the revenue as revenue of the affiliate rather than the holder has the effect of evading the payment of the fee permitted by ILCS ch. 220, act 5, § 21-801(b) which would otherwise be paid by the cable service or video service. 
    PEG means public, education and governmental programming. 
    PEG Access Support Fee means the amount paid under this chapter and ILCS ch. 220, act 5, § 21-801(d) by the holder to the village for the service areas within the village's territorial jurisdiction. 
    Service Provider Fee means the amount paid under this chapter and ILCS ch. 220, act 5, § 21-801 by the holder to a village for the service areas within its territorial jurisdiction. 
(Code 1993, § 17-5.1.1; Ord. No. 2007-O-73, 10-23-2007) 
Sec. 28-127. - Video and cable Service Provider Fee imposed. 
(a)  Service Provider Fee imposed. A Service Provider Fee is hereby imposed on any holder providing cable service or video service in the village. 
(b)  Amount of fee. The amount of the Service Provider Fee imposed hereby shall be five percent of the holder's gross revenues. 
(c)  Notice to the village. The holder shall notify the village in writing of its intent to provide cable service or video service at least ten days prior to the date on which the holder begins to offer cable service or video service in the village. 
(d)  Holder's liability. The holder shall be liable for and pay the Service Provider Fee to the village. The holder's liability for the Service Provider Fee shall commence on the first day of the calendar month following 30 days after receipt of a copy of the provisions of this chapter, or a copy of the ordinance adopting same, by the holder. The ordinance adopting this chapter, as amended, or the provisions thereof, as the case may be, shall be sent by mail, postage prepaid, to the address listed on the holder's application notice sent pursuant to ILCS ch. 220, act 5, § 21-401(b)(6) to the village. 
(e)  Payment date. The payment of the Service Provider Fee shall be due on a quarterly basis, 45 days after the close of the calendar quarter. If mailed, the fee is considered paid on the date it is postmarked. Each payment shall include a statement explaining the basis for the calculation of the fee. 
(f)  Exemption. The Service Provider Fee hereby imposed does not apply to an existing cable service or video service provider that is operating under a current and existing franchise agreement with the village, pursuant to which a franchise fee is paid. 
(g)  Credit for other payments. An incumbent cable operator that elects to terminate an existing franchise or other agreement pursuant to ILCS ch. 220, act 5, § 21-301(c) with credit for prepaid franchise fees under that agreement, may deduct the amount of such credit from the fees that operator owes under this section. 
(Code 1993, § 17-5.1.2; Ord. No. 2007-O-73, 10-23-2007) 
Sec. 28-128. - PEG Access Support Fee imposed. 
(a)  PEG Access Support Fee imposed. A PEG Access Support Fee is hereby imposed on any holder providing cable service or video service in the village, in addition to the Service Provider Fee imposed pursuant to section 28-127. 
(b)  Amount of fee. The amount of the PEG Access Support Fee imposed hereby shall be one percent of the holder's gross revenues. 
(c)  Payment. The holder shall pay the PEG Access Support Fee to the village, provided that the village may direct the holder to pay the PEG Access Support Fee directly to an entity designated by the village to manage PEG access. The holder's liability for the PEG Access Support Fee shall commence on the date set forth in section 28-127(d). 
(d)  Payment due. The payment of the PEG Access Support Fee shall be due on a quarterly basis, 45 days after the close of the calendar quarter. If mailed, the fee is considered paid on the date it is postmarked. Each payment shall include a statement explaining the basis for the calculation of the fee. 
(e)  Credit for other payments. An incumbent cable operator that elects to terminate an existing franchise or other agreement pursuant to ILCS ch. 220, act 5, § 21-301(c) shall pay, at the time they would have been due, any monetary payments for PEG access support that would have been due during the remaining term of the agreement had it not been terminated pursuant to that section. Any payments made by an incumbent cable operator pursuant to the previous sentence may be credited against the PEG Access Support Fee that that operator owes under subsection (b) of this section. 
(Code 1993, § 17-5.1.3; Ord. No. 2007-O-73, 10-23-2007) 
Sec. 28-129. - Applicable principles. 
    All determinations and calculations under this article shall be made pursuant to generally accepted accounting principles. 
(Code 1993, § 17-5.1.4; Ord. No. 2007-O-73, 10-23-2007) 
Sec. 28-130. - No impact on other taxes, fees or surcharges due from holder. 
    Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to exempt a holder from any other applicable tax, or abate or offset the amount of such tax due, that is or may later be imposed by the village, including any tax that is or may later be required to be paid by or through the holder with respect to cable service or video service. A state-issued authorization shall not affect any requirement or obligation of the holder with respect to payment of the village's Simplified Municipal Telecommunications Tax, 911 Emergency Telephone System Surcharge, or any other tax, fee or surcharge as it applies to any telephone service provided by the holder. 
(Code 1993, § 17-5.1.5) 
Sec. 28-131. - Audits of cable/video service provider. 
(a)  Audit requirement. The village will notify the holder of the requirements it imposes on other cable service or video service providers to submit to an audit of its books and records. The holder shall comply with the same requirements the village imposes on other cable service or video service providers in its jurisdiction to audit the holder's books and records and to recompute any amounts determined to be due and payable to the village. If all local franchises between the village and cable operators terminate, the audit requirements shall be those adopted by the village pursuant to the Local Government Taxpayers' Bill of Rights Act, ILCS ch. 50, act 45, § 1 et seq., and set forth in chapter 12. No acceptance of amounts remitted to the village shall be construed as an accord that such amounts are correct. 
(b)  Additional payments. Any additional amount due after an audit shall be paid within 30 days after the village's submission of an invoice for the sum. 
(Code 1993, § 17-5.1.6; Ord. No. 2007-O-73, 10-23-2007) 
Sec. 28-132. - Late fees; payments. 
    All fees due and payments which are past due shall be governed by the provisions of chapter 12 adopted by this village pursuant to the Local Government Taxpayers' Bill of Rights Act, ILCS ch. 50, act 45, § 1 et seq. 
(Code 1993, § 17-5.1.7; Ord. No. 2007-O-73, 10-23-2007) 
Sec. 28-133. - Emergency alert system requirements applicable to holders. 
    A holder shall comply with all applicable requirements of the Federal Communications Commission involving the distribution and notification of federal, state, and local emergency messages over the emergency alert system applicable to cable service franchisees. The holder shall provide the village with sufficient information regarding how to submit, via telephone or web listing, a local emergency alert for distribution over its cable or video network. To the extent that the village requires an incumbent cable system franchisee under either this or an applicable franchisee agreement, to provide emergency alert system messages or services in excess of the requirements of this section, the holder shall comply with any such additional requirements within the village. The holder may provide a local emergency alert to an area larger than the boundaries of the local unit of government issuing the emergency alert. 
(Code 1993, § 17-5.1.8; Ord. No. 2007-O-73, 10-23-2007) 
Secs. 28-134-28-164. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - CABLE AND VIDEO CUSTOMER SERVICE AND PRIVACY PROTECTION 

Sec. 28-165. - Applicability. 
    The provisions of this article, including subsections thereof, shall be applicable to all holders providing cable service and video service in the village. Effective January 1, 2008, the provisions of this article shall also be applicable to all providers of cable service or video service in the village, including any cable providers operating under a franchise agreement or ordinance granted by the village prior to January 1, 2008, notwithstanding any provision of such franchise agreement or ordinance to the contrary. 
(Code 1993, § 17-5.3.1; Ord. No. 2007-O-73, 10-23-2007) 
Sec. 28-166. - Adoption of Illinois Cable and Video Customer Protection Law. 
(a)  The provisions of the Illinois Cable and Video Customer Protection Law (ILCS ch. 220, act 5, § 22-501 et seq.), and any regulations duly promulgated thereunder, are hereby adopted by reference and made applicable to the cable service or video service providers offering services within the village. 
(b)  Any amendment to the Illinois Cable and Video Customer Protection Law, or its applicable regulations, that becomes effective after October 1, 2008, shall also, and without further action by the corporate authorities of the village, be incorporated into this article and each of its subsections by reference, and shall be applicable to cable service or video service providers offering services within the village. However, any amendment that makes its provisions optional for adoption by municipalities shall not be deemed incorporated into this article by reference without formal action by the corporate authorities of the village. 
(Code 1993, § 17-5.3.2; Ord. No. 2007-O-73, 10-23-2007) 
Sec. 28-167. - Enforcement. 
    The village does hereby, pursuant to the Illinois Cable and Video Customer Protection Law, declare its intent to enforce, concurrently with the State and the Illinois Attorney General, the customer service and privacy protection standards of the Illinois Cable and Video Protection Law with respect to complaints received from residents within the village. 
(Code 1993, § 17-5.3.3; Ord. No. 2007-O-73, 10-23-2007) 
Sec. 28-168. - Penalties for material breach. 
(a)  The village, pursuant to ILCS ch. 220, act 5, § 22-501(r)(1), does hereby provide for a schedule of penalties for any material breach of the Illinois Cable and Video Protection Law by cable service or video service providers, in addition to the penalties provided in said Law. The monetary penalties shall apply on a competitively neutral basis, and shall not exceed $750.00 for each day of the material breach, and shall not exceed $25,000.00 for each occurrence of a material breach per customer. 
(b)  Material breach means any substantial failure of a cable or video provider to comply with service quality and other standards specified in any provision of the law. 
(c)  The village shall give the cable service or video service provider written notice of any alleged material breaches of the law and allow such provider at least 30 days from the receipt of said notice to remedy the specified material breach. 
(d)  A material breach, for the purposes of assessing penalties, shall be deemed to occur for each day that a material breach has not been remedied by the cable or video service provider after the notice in subsection (b) of this section. 
(Code 1993, § 17-5.3.4; Ord. No. 2007-O-73, 10-23-2007) 
Sec. 28-169. - Customer credits. 
    The village hereby adopts the schedule of customer credits for violations. Those credits shall be as provided for in ILCS ch. 220, act 5, § 22-501(s), and applied on the statement issued to the customer for the next billing cycle following the violation or following the discovery of the violation. The cable or video provider is responsible for providing the credits and the customer is under no obligation to request the credit. 
(Code 1993, § 17-5.3.5; Ord. No. 2007-O-73, 10-23-2007) 
APPENDIX A - ZONING ORDINANCE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein is the republication of the Zoning Ordinance, chapter 20 of the Wilmette Code of Ordinances, 1993, as amended through ordinance number 2017-O-82, adopted 12-12-2017. Amendments are indicated in parenthetical history notes at the end of each section. The absence of a history note indicates that the material remains unchanged. The original system of numbering and organization remain unchanged, save for the chapter number has been updated to chapter 30 by request of the Village Council to avoid confusion or conflict with the numbering of the new Code republished in 2018. For stylistic purposes, a system of formatting of catchlines, citations to state statutes, and history notes similar to that used in the main body of the Code has been applied. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. Textual additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

ARTICLE 30-1. - TITLE, PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY 

Sec. 30-1.1. - Title. 
    This Ordinance is known, referred to and cited as "Village of Wilmette Zoning Ordinance." 
(Code 1993, § 20-1.1) 
Sec. 30-1.2. - Intent. 
    The intent of this document is to establish land use regulations to serve the Village of Wilmette. The regulations enumerated are based upon the Village's Comprehensive Plan, and the Village's development policies and objectives. Any reference to this Ordinance includes all amendments to this Ordinance. 
(Code 1993, § 20-1.2) 
Sec. 30-1.3. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this Ordinance is to: 
(a)  Promote the public health, safety and welfare; 
(b)  Secure adequate natural light, pure air, privacy, and protection from fire, explosion, noxious fumes, flooding, and other dangers to persons and property; 
(c)  Encourage the most appropriate use of land throughout the Village; 
(d)  Conserve the value of land and improvements throughout the Village; 
(e)  Prevent the overcrowding of land and avoid concentrations of population out of character with existing overall densities; 
(f)  Maintain and enhance the Village's character as a predominantly single-family residential community; 
(g)  Maintain and promote a superior quality of life in residential neighborhoods; 
(h)  Encourage alternative housing opportunities in compatible locations which complement the traditional single-family character of the Village; 
(i)  Maintain and promote high-quality housing stock in the Village; 
(j)  Maintain and promote the development of shopping and recreational facilities which serve the needs of the Village's residents; 
(k)  Promote vital, well-maintained, and attractive commercial areas that provide a variety of goods and services to the markets which have been historically served by those areas; 
(l)  Promote the redevelopment of under-utilized commercial properties to increase the tax base in a manner consistent with community land use policies; 
(m)  Prohibit the development of undesirable or noxious commercial uses; 
(n)  Encourage the attractive design of private commercial structures and public property in commercial areas; 
(o)  Preserve and enhance aesthetic values throughout the Village; 
(p)  Minimize congestion in the public streets and ensure efficient traffic circulation; 
(q)  Ensure the provision of adequate and efficient off-street parking and loading facilities; and 
(r)  Regulate the use and development of land in a manner consistent with the goals and policies of the Village's Comprehensive Plan. 
(Code 1993, § 20-1.3) 
Sec. 30-1.4. - Applicability. 
(a)  Territorial application. This Ordinance applies to all land, uses and structures within the corporate limits of the Village, including those owned by other municipal corporations and government bodies. 
(b)  General application. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this Ordinance are held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion and protection of the public health, safety and welfare, and are construed to achieve the purposes for which this Ordinance was adopted. 
(c)  General prohibition. Except as otherwise provided by this Ordinance, no structure or land, in whole or in part, may be used or occupied, and no structure, in whole or in part, may be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved, enlarged or structurally altered unless it conforms with the provisions of this Ordinance. 
(d)  Private agreements. This Ordinance is not intended to nullify any private agreement or covenant. However, where this Ordinance is more restrictive than a private agreement or covenant, this Ordinance controls. 
(e)  Other laws and regulations. Unless otherwise specifically provided, the Ordinance controls over less restrictive statutes, ordinances or regulations, and more restrictive statutes, ordinances or regulations control over the provisions of this Ordinance. 
(Code 1993, § 20-1.4) 
Sec. 30-1.5. - Transition rules. 
    In determining the applicability of this Ordinance, with respect to the previously applicable zoning regulations, the following rules apply. 
(a)  Existing illegal structures and uses. A structure or use that is illegal at the time of the adoption of this Ordinance, but is made legal by the provisions of this Ordinance, is deemed lawful as of the effective date of this Ordinance. However, if that structure or use does not conform to each and every requirement of this Ordinance, then that structure or use remains illegal. 
(b)  Existing permitted and special uses. 
(1)  Where a structure or land is used lawfully on the effective date of this Ordinance as a permitted use and that use is classified as a permitted use by this Ordinance in the zoning district in which it is located, that use is deemed a lawful permitted use. 
(2)  When a structure or land is used lawfully on the effective date of this Ordinance as a special use and that use is classified as a special use by this Ordinance in the zoning district in which it is located, that use is hereby deemed a lawful special use. 
(3)  Where a structure or land is used lawfully on the effective date of this Ordinance as a permitted use and that use is classified as a special use by this Ordinance in the zoning district in which it is located, that use is deemed a lawful special use. Any subsequent addition, enlargement or expansion of that use is required to conform to the procedural and substantive requirements for special uses pursuant to this Ordinance. 
(4)  Where a structure or land is used lawfully on the effective date of this Ordinance as a special use and that use is classified as a permitted use by this Ordinance in the zoning district in which it is located, that use is deemed a lawful permitted use. Any subsequent addition, enlargement or expansion of that use is required to conform to the requirements of this Ordinance and any conditions set forth in the original special use approval. 
(c)  Uses rendered non-conforming. If a structure or land is used in a manner that was a lawful use before the effective date of this Ordinance, and this Ordinance no longer classifies that use as either a permitted or special use in the zoning district in which it is located, that use shall be deemed a legal non-conforming use and controlled by the provisions of Article 30-17 (Non-conformities). 
(d)  Structures rendered non-conforming. If a structure existing on the effective date of this Ordinance was a conforming structure before the effective date of this Ordinance, and such structure does not meet all standards set forth in this Ordinance, that structure shall be deemed a legal non-conforming structure and controlled by the provisions of Article 30-17 (Non-conformities). 
(e)  Previously issued building permits. If a building permit for a building or structure was lawfully issued prior to the effective date of this Ordinance, and if construction has begun within one-hundred eighty (180) days of the issuance of that permit and diligently pursued to completion, the structure may be completed in accordance with the plans on the basis of which the building permit was issued and may, upon completion, be occupied under an occupancy permit for the use originally intended. 
(f)  Previously granted special uses and variations. 
(1)  All special uses and variations granted prior to the effective date of this Ordinance shall remain in full force and effect. The recipient of the special use or variation may proceed to develop the property in accordance with the previously approved plans including any applicable conditions. However, if the recipient has failed to act on the special use or variation before the approval expires, including any periods of extension granted, the provisions of this Ordinance govern. 
(2)  Any addition to or expansion of a lawful special use requires new special use approval in accordance with the procedures and standards set forth for special uses. 
(3)  Any new owner or occupant of a lawful special use may continue operation of that use without needing a new special use approval pursuant to this Ordinance, provided that the operation of the lawful special use is continued in the same manner as it existed on the effective date of this Ordinance. 
(g)  Pending applications. Where an application is pending on the effective date of the Ordinance, and notice of the public hearing on such application has issued before the effective date of this Ordinance, the application is governed by the Ordinance in effect prior to adoption of this Ordinance. In all other cases where an application is pending on the effective date of this Ordinance and no notice of a public hearing has been issued, the provisions of this Ordinance govern. 
(Code 1993, § 20-1.5) 
Sec. 30-1.6. - Severability. 
    If any Article, paragraph, subdivision, clause, sentence or provision of this Ordinance is adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, that judgment will not affect, impair, invalidate or nullify the remainder of this Ordinance. The effect of the judgment is confined to the Article, paragraph, subdivision, clause, sentence or provision immediately involved in the controversy in which judgment or decree was rendered. 
(Code 1993, § 20-1.6) 
Sec. 30-1.7. - Effective date. 
    The effective date of this Ordinance is April 1, 2014. 
(Code 1993, § 20-1.7) 
Sec. 30-1.8. - Repeal of previous zoning ordinance. 
    Upon the effective date of this Ordinance, all provisions of the Zoning Ordinance of the Village, as adopted on March 5, 1990, as amended from time to time, are expressly repealed in their entirety. This repeal only applies to the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance. 
(Code 1993, § 20-1.8; Ord. No. 2014-O-45, 1-28-2014) 
ARTICLE 30-2. - DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 30-2.1. - Purpose. 
    This Article contains definitions for generic uses and general terms used throughout the Ordinance. 
(Code 1993, § 20-2.1) 
Sec. 30-2.2. - Interpretation. 
    The language set forth in the text of this Ordinance is interpreted in accordance with the following rules of construction: 
(a)  The singular number includes the plural, and the plural the singular. 
(b)  The present tense includes the past and future tenses, and the future tense includes the present. 
(c)  The words "must" and "shall" are mandatory, while the words "may" and "will" are permissive. 
(d)  The terms "must not," "shall not" and "may not" are prohibiting. 
(e)  The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter. 
(f)  Whenever a defined word or term appears in the text of this Ordinance, its meaning is construed as set forth in the definition. Any word appearing in parenthesis, between a word and its definition herein, is construed in the same sense as that word. Words not defined are interpreted in accordance with the definitions considered to be normal dictionary usage. 
(g)  If a definition contains a regulation and the use is inconsistent with that regulation, the use is prohibited. 
(Code 1993, § 20-2.2) 
Sec. 30-2.3. - Rules of definitions. 
(a)  Certain terms in this Article are defined to be inclusive of many uses in order to eliminate overly detailed lists of uses in the zoning districts established by this Ordinance. 
(b)  A use that is not specifically listed in a zoning district or does not fall within a use definition, or as interpreted pursuant to Section 30-5.8 (Zoning Interpretations), is prohibited. 
(Code 1993, § 20-2.3) 
Sec. 30-2.4. - Definitions. 
    Abut. To share a common lot line or zoning district boundary, without being separated by a street or alley. 
    Accessibility ramp. A ramp, exterior lift or similar structure that provides wheelchair or similar access to a building. 
    Accessory living unit. A subordinate dwelling unit created wholly within an existing detached single-family dwelling unit that provides basic requirements for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation, while the building maintains the appearance of a single-family home. 
    Accessory structure. A structure on the same lot as, and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, a principal building, and the use of which is clearly incidental and subordinate to that of the principal building. 
    Accessory use. A use that is customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use of a lot and located on the same lot as the principal use. 
    Acre. A parcel of land containing an area of forty-three thousand five hundred sixty (43,560) square feet. 
    Adaptive reuse senior housing/55+ development. A multi-family dwelling, occupancy of which is limited to persons fifty-five (55) years of age or older (or, if two persons occupy a unit, at least one (1) shall be fifty-five (55) years of age or older), using a structure previously occupied as a lawfully established or legal non-conforming institutional or adaptive reuse senior housing use. 
    Addition or expansion. Any of the following: 
(a)  Any increase in the floor area of a building. 
(b)  A modification to the roof line of a building, such as by the construction of dormer, so as to increase the amount of existing floor space devoted to human use or occupancy. 
(c)  For special uses, addition or expansion shall be determined by reference to the date the special use was approved by the Village or the date of the Ordinance or amendment thereto which first reclassified an existing use as a special use. 
    Addition in line. An addition that extends the exterior wall of a structure, vertically and/or horizontally. 
    Adjoining. Abutting or contiguous. 
    Alley. A public right-of-way, other than a street, which affords a secondary means of vehicular access to abutting properties. 
    Alteration. Any change in the size, shape, character, occupancy or use of a structure. 
    Amateur (HAM) radio equipment. An amateur (HAM) radio station licensed by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC), including equipment such as, but not limited to, a tower or alternative tower structure supporting a single, radiating antenna platform and other equipment. 
    Animal hospital. An establishment for the care and treatment of the diseases and injuries of animals, and where animals may be boarded during their convalescence. 
    Architectural feature. A part, portion or projection that contributes to the aesthetics of a structure, exclusive of signs, that is not necessary for the structural integrity of the structure or to make said structure habitable. 
    Arbor. A shelter of latticework intertwined with climbing vines and flowers. 
    Art gallery. A commercial establishment engaged in the sale, loan and/or display of paintings, sculpture, video art or other works. "Art Gallery" does not include "Cultural Facility," such as a library, museum or non-commercial gallery that may also display paintings, sculpture, video art or other works. 
    Art studio. A commercial establishment where an art or type of activity is taught, practiced or studied, such as dance, martial arts, photography, music, painting, gymnastics, yoga, or personal training (private sessions only). An "Art Studio" may have performance space related to the classes taught on-site. 
    Arterial street. A street designated as an arterial street in the Comprehensive Plan. 
    Artificial turf. A surface of synthetic fibers made to look like natural grass that is used for sports or similar activities that originally or normally take place on grass and for residential and commercial lawns. Artificial turf that maintains permeability equal to or better than the permeability of the natural ground surface of the property where it is installed shall not count against the impervious surface requirements of the Zoning Ordinance. 
    Attention getting device. Any pennants, flag, festoon, propeller, pole covers, spinner, streamer, searchlights, balloons, flashing lights, changing colors, rotating or moving displays and any similar device or ornamentation designated for the purposes of attracting attention, promoting or advertising. 
    Attic. A story or half-story directly below the roof of a building. 
    Awning. A roof-like cover projecting from the wall of a building and offering protection from sun or rain. For "Awnings" used as a sign, see "Sign, Awning." 
    Balcony. A platform which projects from the exterior wall of a building above the ground floor of the building, which is exposed to the open air, which has direct access to the interior of the building, and is not supported by posts or columns extending to the ground. 
    Banner. See "Sign, Banner." 
    Basement. That portion of a building located all or partly underground, but having at least one-half (1/2) or more of its clear floor-to-ceiling height below grade. 
    Bay window. A window which projects outward from a building, which does not rest on the building foundation or on the ground. 
    Beach house/cabana. A detached accessory structure designed for use with a swimming pool, spa or on a property that abuts Lake Michigan, which typically maintains facilities for changing clothes, storing swimming equipment and supplies, and minimal sanitary facilities. 
    Berm. An earthen mound designed to provide visual interest on a site, screen undesirable views, reduce noise or fulfill other such purposes. 
    Block. A tract of land bounded by streets, or by a combination of streets and public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights-of-way, or similar lines of demarcation. A block may be located in part beyond the corporate limits of the Village. 
    Blockface. That portion of a block or tract of land facing the same side of a single street and lying between the closest intersecting streets, or between an intersecting street and railroad right-of-way or waterway. 
    Boarder. A person who rents lodging within part of a dwelling occupied by the person to whom the payments are made, with a minimum rental period of one (1) month. 
    Boat. Any device used or intended to be used for navigation on water. 
    Boat house. A detached accessory structure designed to provide enclosed storage of boats and related equipment. 
    Bowling alley. Indoor facility for the sport of ten-pin or duck-pin bowling, with customary accessory uses such as snack bars. 
    Brew pub. An establishment where food is served and consumed and beer is manufactured and consumed. Food and beer shall be served by employees to the same table or counter where the items are consumed. The establishment shall not sell for off-premises consumption more than 50,000 gallons per year. 
    Broadcasting studio. A programming origination studio of a television station, radio station, or cable television franchisee of the Village. 
    Buffer yard. Land area with landscape plantings and other components used to visibly separate one (1) use from another or to shield or block noise, lights, or other nuisances. 
    Buildable lot. A lot on which a structure may be erected in conformity with zoning and building code requirements. 
    Building. Any structure with walls and roof securely affixed to the ground and entirely separated on all sides from any other structure by space or by walls in which there are no communicating doors, windows, or openings; and which is designed or intended for the shelter, enclosure, or protection of persons, animals, or chattels. This does not include any structure with interior areas not normally accessible for human use or occupancy, such as gas tanks, water tanks, and similar structures. 
    Building integrated photovoltaic solar energy system. An active solar energy system that is an integral part of a principal or accessory building, rather than a separate mechanical device, replacing or substituting for an architectural or structural component of a building. Building integrated systems include, but are not limited to, photovoltaic or hot water solar energy systems that are contained within roofing materials, windows, skylights and awnings. Thin film solar photovoltaic cells shall be considered building integrated when the thin film does not appreciably increase the width of the material it is being applied to. 
    Caliper. The American Association of Nurserymen standard for trunk measurement of nursery stock, as measured at six (6) inches above the ground for trees up to and including four (4) inch caliper size, and as measured at twelve (12) inches above the ground for larger sizes. 
    Canopy. A permanent roof-like structure, movable or stationary, which projects from the exterior wall of a building over a platform or walkway to offer protection from sun or rain. For a "Canopy" used as a sign see "Sign, Canopy." 
    Car-sharing Service. A membership organization that is open to the general public and provides access to car-sharing vehicles. 
    Car-sharing Space. A parking space that is designated for the parking of a car-sharing vehicle. 
    Car-sharing Vehicle. Any vehicle available to multiple users through a car-sharing service that is maintained and owned or leased by a car-sharing company. 
    Car wash. A commercial establishment engaged in the washing and cleaning of passenger vehicles, recreational vehicles or other light duty equipment, whether automatic or by hand, within an enclosed building. Self-service car washes are not allowed. 
    Carnival/circus. A traveling or transportable group or aggregation of rides, shows, games, or concessions or any combination thereof. 
    Cemetery. Land used or dedicated to the burial of the dead, including crematoriums, mausoleums, columbaria, and necessary maintenance facilities. Columbaria and memorial gardens accessory to a place of worship are allowed as accessory uses. Pet cemeteries are prohibited. 
    Certificate of occupancy. A certificate that permits the use and/or occupancy of a structure or portion of a structure after it is constructed, reconstructed, remodeled, or moved, indicating that the proposed occupancy or use complies with all provisions of the Zoning Ordinance. 
    Chimney. A vertical shaft of reinforced concrete, masonry or other approved material enclosing one (1) or more flues, for the purpose of removing products of combustion from solid, liquid or gaseous fuel. 
    Christmas tree sales lot. A retail sales operation, generally conducted wholly outdoors, that offers for sale on a temporary, limited basis Christmas trees and related holiday items such as wreaths and Christmas tree stands. 
    Collector street. A street designated as a collector street in the Comprehensive Plan. 
    Co-location. Placement of wireless telecommunications equipment from more than one (1) service or service provider on a single tower or site. 
    Columbaria. An accessory structure intended to be used for the internment of the cremated remains of a deceased person. "Columbaria" must be part of a "Place of Worship" and screened from a public street. 
    Commercial vehicle. Any vehicle operated for the transportation of persons or property in the furtherance of any commercial or industrial enterprise, for-hire or not-for-hire, but not including a commuter van, a vehicle used in a ridesharing arrangement when being used for that purpose, or a recreational vehicle not being used commercially. 
    Common ownership. Ownership by the same person, corporation, firm, entity, partnership, or unincorporated association; or ownership by different corporations, firms, partnerships, entities, or unincorporated associations, in which a stockholder, partner, or associate owns an interest in each corporation, firm, partnership, entity, or unincorporated association. 
    Contiguous. Adjoining or abutting. 
    Convenience food mart. A business, other than a restaurant, which sells food directly to the consumer and occupies a floor area of less than three thousand (3,000) square feet. "Convenience Food Mart" may be accessory to a gas station. 
    Craft brewery. An establishment where beer is manufactured. The establishment may include a tasting room where beer manufactured on-site is served. A craft brewery shall not sell for off-premises consumption more than 50,000 gallons per year. 
    Craft distillery. An establishment where spirits are distilled in limited quantities not to exceed 35,000 gallons per year. The establishment may include a tasting room where spirits manufactured on-site are served. 
    Cultural facility. A use that is open to the public and provides cultural services and facilities including, but not limited to, museums, cultural centers, historical societies and libraries operated by a public, private or non-profit organization. 
    Day. When used in this Ordinance, "Day" shall mean one (1) calendar day. 
    Day care center, adult. A facility, not located within a residential dwelling unit, providing care for elderly adults sixty-five (65) years of age and over and/or functionally impaired adults eighteen (18) years of age and older who require assistance to carry out mobility, personal hygiene, and/or interpersonal relations basic to everyday living in a protective setting for less than twenty-four (24) hours per day. An "Adult Day Care Center" does not include "Day Care Home" or a program operated by a "Place of Worship," that provides care for elderly and/or functionally impaired adults in a protective setting for less than twenty-four (24) hours per day. 
    Day care center, child. A facility, not located within a residential dwelling unit, providing care for children up to twelve (12) years of age and/or functionally impaired persons up to eighteen (18) years of age in a protective setting for less than twenty-four (24) hours per day. A "Child Day Care Center" does not include "Day Care Home" or a program operated by an "Educational Facility" (all types) or "Place of Worship," that provides care for children for less than twenty-four (24) hours per day. 
    Day care home, adult. A detached dwelling in which a permanent occupant of the dwelling provides care for up to eight (8) elderly adults sixty-five (65) years of age and over and/or functionally impaired adults eighteen (18) years of age and older who require assistance to carry out mobility, personal hygiene, and interpersonal relations basic to everyday living in a protective setting for less than twenty-four (24) hours per day. 
    Day care home, child. A detached dwelling in which a permanent occupant of the dwelling provides care for up to twelve (12) children up to twelve (12) years of age and/or functionally impaired persons up to eighteen (18) years of age from outside households. The number counted includes the family's natural or adopted children and all other persons under the age of twelve (12). 
    Deck. A structure which is open to the sky and provides a platform that is raised above the ground but no higher than the floor of the street level of the principal building. 
    Dog run. A designated area for the exercise and relief of dogs. The enclosure of all or a portion of a property paralleling a property line shall not constitute a dog run. 
    Donation box. A container used for the purpose of collecting donated items for resale or for use by a charitable organization or institution. 
    Dormer. An extension built out from a sloping roof to accommodate a vertical window. 
    Driveway. Any impervious or compacted gravel surface providing direct ingress to and egress from a parking space. 
    Drive-through facility. Premises used to provide or dispense products or services through an attendant, window or automated machine, to persons remaining in motor vehicles in a designated stacking space. A "Drive-Through Facility" may be used in combination with other uses, such as a "Financial Institution" or "Retail Goods Establishment." 
    Dwelling. Any structure, or portion thereof, designed or used exclusively for residential occupancy. 
    Dwelling, above the ground floor. Dwelling units within multi-story buildings located above non-residential uses on the ground floor. 

    Dwelling, multi-family. A building that contains three (3) or more dwelling units attached along and sharing one (1) or more common walls. 

    Dwelling, single-family. A building that contains one (1) dwelling unit and is developed with open yards on all sides and not attached to any other building or dwelling unit. 

    Dwelling, townhouse/stacked flat. A building that contains two (2) or more dwelling units which does not maintain the external appearance of a detached dwelling and is developed in accordance with Section 30-12.3.(i). 

    Dwelling, two-unit. A building that contains two (2) dwelling units located either side by side or stacked vertically, which maintains the external appearance of a detached dwelling with open yards on all sides and not being attached to any other building. 

    Dwelling unit. One (1) or more rooms constituting all or part of a dwelling, which are arranged, designed, used or intended for use exclusively as living quarters for one (1) household, which includes permanently installed bathroom and kitchen facilities. 
    Easement. Land designed by lawful agreement between the owner(s) of the land and another person(s) or entity(ies) for a specified use only by such person(s) or entity(ies). 
    Eave. The projecting lower edges of a roof overhanging the wall of a building. 
    Educational facility, college. A post-secondary institution for higher learning that grants associate or bachelor degrees. The institution may also have research facilities, and/or professional schools that grant master and doctoral degrees. Educational Facilities, College also includes post-secondary theological schools for training ministers, priests or rabbis. "Educational Facilities, College" do not include "Educational Facilities, Vocational." 
    Educational facility, primary. A public, private or parochial school offering instruction at the elementary and/or junior high school levels with a full range of curricular programs. 
    Educational facility, secondary. A public, private or parochial school offering instruction at the senior high school level with a full range of curricular programs. "Educational Facilities, Secondary" also includes secondary theological schools for training ministers, priests or rabbis. 
    Educational facility, vocational. A school established to provide for the teaching of industrial, clerical, managerial or artistic skills. This definition applies to schools that are owned and operated privately for-profit and do not offer a complete educational curriculum, but may offer certification in their particular field. "Educational Facilities, Vocational" does not include "Educational Facilities, College." 
    Encroachment. The extension or placement of any structure, or portion of such, into a required yard. 
    Entity or person. An association, corporation, partnership, limited liability company, organization, proprietorship, trust or individual. 
    Erect. To build, construct, attach, hang, place, suspend or affix. 
    Established front yard - residential. See "Yard, Established Front - Residential." 
    Expressway. A permanent public right-of-way designated as an expressway in the Comprehensive Plan. 
    Exterior stairwell. One (1) or more flights of stairs and the necessary landings and platforms connecting them to form a continuous passage from the entryway of one (1) floor or level to another in a building or structure located on the exterior of a principle building. 
    Fall-out or emergency shelter. An accessory structure which incorporates the fundamentals for fall-out protection (shielding mass, ventilation, and living space), which is constructed of such materials and in such a manner as to afford the occupants substantial protection from radioactive fall-out, and which has no element projecting more than one (1) foot above the natural ground level. 
    Farmer's market/French market. The seasonal selling or offering for sale of home-grown vegetables or produce, occurring in a pre-designated area where the vendors are generally individuals who have raised the vegetables or produce or have taken the same on consignment for retail sale. 
    Fence. A free standing structure, including gates as needed, made of metal, masonry, wood or synthetic fiber or material, or any combination thereof, including gates, resting on or partially buried in the ground, rising above ground level, and used to delineate a boundary or as a barrier or means of protection, confinement, or screening. A fence that is installed atop or resting on a foundation rather than posts is considered a wall for purposes of this Ordinance. 
    Fence, open. A fence which has, over its entirety, fifty percent (50%) or more of its surface area as open, defined as allowing a direct view through the fence from eye level at a position perpendicular to the fence. 
    Fence, solid. A fence which has, over its entirety, less than fifty percent (50%) of its surface area as open, defined as allowing a direct view through the fence from eye level at a position perpendicular to the fence. 
    Financial institution. A bank, savings and loan, credit union or mortgage office. 
    Floor area. The floor area within the enclosing walls and under any covered areas of any building. For the purpose of determining the floor area of the principal building and all accessory buildings and structures on the lot, floor area shall mean the sum of the gross horizontal area of the several floors of a building, measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls, or from the center line of party walls, as described in Section 30-2.5. 
    Floor area ratio. The numerical value obtained by dividing the aggregate floor area on a lot by the area of such lot. The floor area ratio designated for each zoning district, when multiplied by the lot area in square feet, shall determine the maximum permissible square footage of floor area for the building on such lot. 
    Foot-candle. A unit of illumination. It is equivalent to the illumination at all points that are one (1) foot distant from uniform source of one (1) candlepower. 
    Frequency. The term "frequency" signifies the number of oscillations per second in a sound wave and is an index of the pitch of the resulting sound. 
    Funeral home. A building used for the preparation of the deceased for burial display of the deceased and rituals before burial or cremation. A "Funeral Home" includes chapels located within the building used for the display of the deceased and the conducting of rituals before burial or cremation. 
    Garage. A structure, either attached to or detached from a principal building, used or designed to be used for storage of motor vehicles and accessory storage related to the use of the principal building. 
    Garage and yard sales. A temporary sale of goods from a residential premise, conducted on an infrequent and unscheduled basis, for the purpose of disposing of personal property. 
    Garden center. Retail business whose principal activity is the selling of plants, which may be grown on the site, and other gardening equipment and supplies, typically having outside storage, growing or display. 
    Gas station. A business where flammable or combustible liquids or gases used as fuel for motor vehicles are stored and dispersed from fixed equipment into the fuel tanks of motor vehicles. "Gas Station" may also include charging stations for electronic vehicles and a car wash as an accessory use. 
    Gazebo. A detached accessory structure that is roofed and open-sided in design for recreational use and not for habitation. 
    Glare. Illumination, or a contrast between illumination and its background, which results in reduced visual performance and visibility or which results in a sensation of visual discomfort caused by high or non-uniform distribution of brightness in the field of view. 
    Golf course. A tract of land laid out with at least nine (9) holes for playing a game of golf and improved with tees, greens, fairways, and hazards. A golf course may include a clubhouse, restrooms and shelters as accessory uses. A driving range may be included as part of a "Golf Course." 
    Government facility. A building owned, operated and/or occupied by a governmental agency to provide a governmental service to the public. "Government Facility" does not include "Public Safety Facilities," "Engineering and Public Works Facilities" and "Recreation Centers." 
    Grade, adjacent. The existing grade at the point of installation of a fence, sign or other referenced accessory structure. 
    Grade, average abutting. The computed average of the existing elevations of the surrounding ground abutting the structure as measured at every one (1) foot of the perimeter of the structure. 
    Grade, calculated. The computed average of the existing elevations as measured at the side property lines at the required front yard setback line. 
    Grade, existing. The pre-construction elevation of the ground contour or as determined by the Village Engineer. 
    Greenhouse. A structure constructed chiefly of glass, glasslike or translucent material, cloth or lath, which is devoted to the protection or cultivation of flowers or other tender plants. 
    Gross leasable area. The total floor area designed for occupancy and exclusive use by tenants, including areas used for storage. The area of tenant occupancy is measured from the centerlines of joint partitions to the outside of the tenant walls. 
    Ground floor. The first floor of a building generally located at grade or up to five (5) feet above or below grade and accessed directly from the street or parking lot. 
    Group home. A detached dwelling occupied by two (2) to five (5) persons, certified or accredited by the appropriate state or federal agencies, and: 
(1)  That function as a single housekeeping unit for the housing of persons with functional disabilities who share responsibilities, meals, recreation, social activities and other aspects of residential living; or 
(2)  That function as a single housekeeping unit for enrolled students of the same educational facility who share responsibilities, meals, recreation, social activities and other aspects of residential living. 
Group Home does not include a residence that services persons as an alternative to incarceration for a criminal offense or a nursing facility. 
    Group Home 6-8. A detached dwelling occupied by six (6) to eight (8) persons, certified or accredited by the appropriate state or federal agencies, and: 
(1)  That function as a single housekeeping unit for the housing of persons with functional disabilities who share responsibilities, meals, recreation, social activities and other aspects of residential living; or 
(2)  That function as a single housekeeping unit for enrolled students of the same educational facility who share responsibilities, meals, recreation, social activities and other aspects of residential living. 
Group Home does not include a residence that services persons as an alternative to incarceration for a criminal offense or a nursing facility. 
    Health club. A recreational facility containing athletic or physical conditioning equipment, racquet courts, and/or a swimming pool, which is operated on a private membership basis and restricted to use by members and their guests. 
    Heavy retail, rental and service. A business that provides for on-site use, storage, or sale of heavy equipment or construction materials, including building materials suppliers, lumberyards, construction yards, metal shops, and welding shops. "Heavy Retail, Rental and Service" does not include junkyards. 
    Hedge. A row of closely planted shrubs, bushes or any kind of plant forming a boundary or fence. 
    Height. The vertical distance from grade to the highest point of the roof of a building or the highest point of a structure as measured in Section 30-2.5. 
    Home occupation. An occupation or profession which involves the rendering of a service in exchange for monetary fees or other remuneration, is conducted wholly within a dwelling unit by a member of the family residing therein, and is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling unit for residential purposes. 
    Hotel/motel. An establishment providing, for a fee, sleeping accommodations and customary lodging services, including maid service, the furnishing and upkeep of furniture and bed linens, and telephone and desk service. Related ancillary uses may include, but shall not be limited to, conference and meeting rooms, restaurants, bars, and recreational facilities. 
    Household. Individuals living together on the premises as a single housekeeping unit. 
    Impervious surface. A measure of intensity of land use that represents the portion of a site that is occupied by buildings, structures, pavement, and other impervious surfaces that do not allow for the absorption of water. 
    Incombustible. A material that will not ignite during an exposure to a temperature of one thousand two hundred degrees Fahrenheit (1,200°F) for five (5) minutes. 
    Indoor amusement facilities. Spectator and participatory uses conducted within an enclosed building, such as movie theaters, bowling alleys, pool halls, arcades and indoor sporting exhibitions. Indoor amusement facilities may include accessory uses, such as snack bars or restaurants, for the use of patrons. 
    Intentional demolition. Any act or process that intentionally dismantles or removes a building or structure in part or in whole. 
    Kennel. An establishment where pet animals owned by another person are temporarily boarded for pay or remuneration of any sort. "Kennel" includes those facilities where pet animals are boarded for the day and/or overnight. "Kennel" does not apply to animal hospitals operated by veterinarians duly licensed under the law where the boarding of animals is accessory to medical treatment or convalescence after medical treatment of an animal. 
    Knee wall. That portion of the attic framing as measured from the top of the attic floor joist to the top of the joint where the wall framing meets the roof rafter. 
    Lighting, fully shielded. A fixture that is shielded in such a manner that light rays emitted by the fixture, either directly from the lamp or indirectly from the fixture, are projected below a horizontal plane running through the lowest point on the fixture where light is emitted. 
    Lighting, unshielded. A fixture that allows light, either directly from the lamp or indirectly from the fixture or a reflector, to be emitted above the horizontal plane running through the lowest point on the fixture where light is emitted. 
    Live performance venue. A facility that accommodates the live performance of musical, theatrical, dance, cabaret, or comedy acts performed live by one (1) or more persons. "Restaurants" that regularly host such performances shall be considered "Live Performance Venues." A "Live Performance Venue" may possess a liquor license and may provide food for consumption on the premises. Residences used to accommodate live performances for more than ten (10) persons (including performers) for any form of remuneration, including donations in kind or in money, are considered live performance venues subject to the provision of a temporary use permit. 
    Loading berth. A space exclusive of driveways, aisles, maneuvering areas, ramps, columns, landscaping areas, office, and work areas for the temporary parking of a commercial vehicle while loading or unloading goods or materials, and which abuts upon a street, alley, or other appropriate means of access. 
    Logo. A business trademark or symbol. 
    Lot. A parcel or tract of land located within a single block, occupied, or intended for occupancy, by one (1) principal building or principal use, and having frontage upon a street. 
    Lot area. The computed area of the zoning lot contained within the lot lines as described in Section 30-2.5. 
    Lot, corner. A lot situated at the junction of and abutting two (2) or more intersecting streets, and where the interior angle at the intersection of such two (2) sides is less than one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees. The point of intersection of the lot lines abutting the street is the corner of the lot in question. A lot that abuts a curved street or streets shall be considered a "Corner Lot" if the tangents to the curve at the curve's point of beginning between the side lot lines, or at the points of intersection of the side lot lines with the lot line abutting the street, intersect at an interior angle of less than one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees. In such cases, the corner of the lot in question is that point on the lot line abutting a street nearest to the point of intersection of the tangents above described. 

    Lot coverage. The area of a lot that is covered by any structure, including accessory structures, as described in Section 30-2.5. 
    Lot depth. The mean of the length of the two (2) side lot lines or, where the lot has more than two (2) side lot lines, the length of the longest line which is perpendicular to the front lot line and runs to the rear lot line as measured in Section 30-2.5. 
    Lot, double-frontage. A lot which has a pair of opposite lot lines along two (2) approximately parallel streets, and which is not a corner lot. 
    Lot, interior. A lot other than a corner lot or double-frontage lot. 
    Lot line. A property boundary line of any lot. Where any portion of the lot extends into an abutting street or alley, the lot line is the established or existing street or alley right-of-way line. 
    Lot line, front. The lot line which abuts the street line provided that: 
(a)  Except as provided in Paragraph (c), on a corner lot, the lot line having the shortest dimension adjoining a street. 
(b)  Except as provided in Paragraph (c), on a double-frontage lot, the lot line along the street which is designated as such by the Zoning Administrator, except that where an established front yard exists, a vacant double-frontage lot in the block must have its front lot line along the same street as the developed lots on the block. 
(c)  On either a double-frontage lot or a corner lot located in the GC-1, GC-2, NR, NR-1, OR, PCD-2, PCD-3 or VC Districts, the following apply: 
(1)  The lot line that adjoins an arterial or collector street. 
(2)  If the lot adjoins more than one (1) arterial or collector street, then the lot line opposite from and most nearly parallel to the lot line that adjoins an alley. Where the lot adjoins both an arterial and collector street, the higher level street controls. 
(3)  If no lot line adjoins an arterial or collector street, then the lot line opposite from and most nearly parallel to the lot line that adjoins an alley. 
(4)  If the above situations do not apply, then the front lot line will adjoin the same street that adjoins the front lot lines of the majority of other developed lots in that block, to be verified by the Zoning Administrator. 
    Lot line, interior side. The lot line that is not abutting a street and is not a rear lot line. 
    Lot line, rear. The lot line which is most distant from and most nearly parallel to the front lot line, or in the case of an irregular or triangular lot or a property with a rear lot is the ordinary high water mark of a body of water, the rear lot line is as shown in Section 30-2.5. 
    Lot line, side. A lot line that is not a front lot line or a rear lot line, which may be an "Interior Side Lot Line" or "Side Adjoining a Street Lot Line." 
    Lot line, side adjoining a street. The lot line that is perpendicular or approximately perpendicular to the front lot line, which separates the longest street frontage of a corner lot from the street. 
    Lot of record. A lot that is part of a subdivision, the map of which was recorded in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of Cook County prior to the effective date of this Ordinance, and which met all lot dimension requirements in effect at the time of recording. A lot described by metes and bounds, the description of which has been recorded in the office of the Recorder of Deeds or in the office of the Registrar of Titles of Cook County prior to the effective date of this Ordinance, and which met all lot dimension requirements in effect at the time of recording. 
    Lot width. Lot Width is determined as shown in Section 30-2.5. 
    Luminaire. A complete lighting unit extending from a support structure, parallel to the ground, consisting of a light source and all necessary mechanical, electrical and decorative parts. A "Luminaire" does not include a pole or other support. 
    Manufacturing, general. An establishment that produces items from previously prepared materials of finished products or parts, including processing, fabrication, assembly, treatment, and packaging of such products, and incidental storage, sales, and distribution of such products, provided all activities are contained entirely within a structure, and noise, odor, smoke, heat, glare, and vibration resulting from the manufacturing activity are confined entirely within a structure. 
    Marquee. A permanent roof-like structure that extends from the wall of a building and is constructed of durable material such as metal or glass, but not supported from the ground. 
    Medical cannabis cultivation center. A facility operated by an organization or business that is registered by the Department of Financial and Professional Regulation to cultivate medical cannabis in accordance with the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Pilot Program Act, or similar act of the General Assembly, provided that Medical Cannabis Cultivation Centers shall not be located within two thousand five hundred (2,500) feet of the property line of a pre-existing public or private preschool or elementary or secondary school or day care center, day care home, group day care home, part day child care facility, or an area zoned for residential use. 
    Medical cannabis dispensing organization. A facility operated by an organization or business that is registered by the Department of Financial and Professional Regulation to acquire medical cannabis from a registered cultivation center for the purpose of dispensing cannabis, paraphernalia or related supplies and educational materials to registered qualifying patients in accordance with the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Pilot Program Act, or similar act of the General Assembly, provided that a Medical Cannabis Dispensing Organization shall not be located within one thousand (1,000) feet of the property line of a pre-existing public or private preschool or elementary or secondary school or day care center, day care home, group day care home, or part day child care facility. 
    Medical/dental clinic - large. A facility, occupied by physicians, dentists, chiropractors or other licensed practitioners of the healing arts for the examination and treatment of persons solely on an outpatient basis, larger than 2,000 square feet in gross floor area. "Medical Clinics" also include alternative medicine clinics, such as acupuncture, and physical therapy offices. 
    Medical/dental clinic - small. A facility, occupied by physicians, dentists, chiropractors or other licensed practitioners of the healing arts for the examination and treatment of persons solely on an outpatient basis, not to exceed 2,000 square feet in gross floor area. "Medical Clinics" also include alternative medicine clinics, such as acupuncture, and physical therapy offices. 
    Memorial plaque. A sign, tablet, or plaque memorializing a person, event, structure, or site. 
    Motor vehicle dealership. Any business establishment that sells or leases new or used automobiles, trucks, vans, trailers, recreational vehicles, boats, motorcycles, or other similar motorized transportation vehicles. An automobile dealership may maintain an inventory of the vehicles for sale or lease either on-site or at a nearby location, and may provide on-site facilities for the repair and service of the vehicles sold or leased by the dealership. 
    Motor vehicle operations facility. A privately-owned facility for the dispatch, storage and maintenance of emergency medical care vehicles, taxicabs and other livery vehicles. "Motor Vehicle Operations Facility" does not include facilities where the vehicles of the fire, police or other municipal departments are dispatched, stored and/or maintained, which are considered "Public Safety Facilities." 
    Motor vehicle rental establishment. An establishment for the rental of automobiles, light trucks and vans, motorcycles and recreational vehicles, including incidental parking and servicing of rental vehicles. 
    Motor vehicle service and repair, major. Such use includes, but is not be limited to, establishments involved in engine rebuilding, major reconditioning of worn or damaged motor vehicles or trailers, towing and collision service, including body, frame or fender straightening or repair, and painting of motor vehicles. 
    Motor vehicle service and repair, minor. Such use includes, but is not limited to, minor repairs to motor vehicles, including repair or replacement of cooling, electrical, fuel and exhaust systems, brake adjustments, relining and repairs, wheel servicing, alignment and balancing, repair and replacement of shock absorbers, and replacement or adjustment of mufflers and tail pipes, hoses, belts, light bulbs, fuses, windshield wipers/wiper blades, grease retainers, wheel bearings, and the like. 
    Movie theater. A theater designed for showing movies or motion pictures. 
    Multi-tenant commercial structure. A structure or group of structures containing three (3) or more commercial uses constructed on a parcel of land under unified ownership or control, and/or planned and developed with unified building design and coordinated parking and service areas. 
    Nameplate. A sign indicating the name and address of the person or persons occupying the lot or a part of the building. 
    No-access strip. A strip of land which lies within and along the rear lot line of a double-frontage lot and which adjoins a street which is designated on a recorded subdivision plat or deed of conveyance as land over which motor vehicle travel is not permitted. 
    Non-conforming lot. A lot of record that does not meet the lot area or lot width requirements of this Ordinance for the zoning district in which it is located. 
    Non-conforming structure. A structure that was lawfully established prior to and existing on the effective date of this Ordinance, or any amendment hereto, that has been rendered non-conforming and does not conform to the requirements of this Ordinance for the zoning district in which it is located. 
    Non-conforming use. A use that was lawfully established prior to and being conducted on the effective date of this Ordinance, or any amendment hereto, that has been rendered non-conforming and does not conform to the requirements of this Ordinance for the zoning district in which it is located. This does not include a lawful permitted use or lawful special use. 
    Office. A use that engages in the processing, manipulation or application of business information or professional expertise. An "Office" may or may not offer services to the public. An "Office" is not materially involved in fabricating, assembling or warehousing physical products for the retail or wholesale market, nor is an office engaged in the repair of products or retail services. It is characteristic of an "Office" that retail or wholesale goods are not shown on the premises to a customer. Examples include, but are not limited to, professional offices for non-profit organizations, advertising, accounting, investment services, insurance, contracting, architecture, planning, engineering, legal services and real estate services. "Office" does not include "Financial Institution" or "Government Facility." 
    Off-premises sign. A sign that advertises a business, service or product but is not located on the premises where the business or service is located or the product is available for sale. 
    Outdoor dining. A seating area located outdoors of a contiguous restaurant, usually in addition to an indoor seating area. 
    Outdoor display and sales area. Part of a lot used for outdoor sales and/or display of goods accessory to the principal use. 
    Outdoor fireplace. An accessory structure designed to contain a fire for heating and/or cooking. 
    Outdoor kitchenette. A complete cooking facility located outdoors typically involving a sink, stove or similar cooking range appliance, and a food preparation counter. 
    Outdoor lighting. Any artificial light source that is installed or mounted outside of a building, but not including street lights installed or maintained by the Village along public streets. 
    Outdoor storage. The keeping of any goods, material, merchandise or equipment not within an enclosed building, including incidental maintenance and repair of the material that is being stored. 
    Owner. The titleholder of record or, if title is held in a land trust, the beneficiary of the trust. 
    Park/playground. A facility designed to serve the recreation needs of the residents of the community. "Parks" include, but are not limited to, ballfields, football fields, soccer fields, basketball courts, tennis courts, paddle tennis facilities, playgrounds and accessory park district structures that may have indoor recreation facilities whether owned and/or managed by local government, not for profit groups or privately. 
    Parking lot - principal use. An open, hard-surfaced area, other than street or public way, available to the public, to be used for the storage, for limited periods of time, of operable passenger automobiles and commercial vehicles. Such storage may be for compensation, free or as an off-site accommodation to residents of a multi-family dwelling, or clients and customers of a business. 
    Parking space. An area, enclosed or unenclosed, which is reserved or intended for the parking of one (1) motor vehicle, and which is accessible to and from a street or alley. 
    Parking structure - principal use. A structure composed of multiple levels or floors used for the parking or storage of motor vehicles. 
    Party wall. A wall starting from the foundation and extending continuously through all stories to or above the roof, that separates one (1) building from another, but is in joint use by each building. 
    Patio. An impervious surface at grade designed and intended for recreational use by people and not as a parking space. 
    Pawn shop. An establishment that lends money on the deposit or pledge of physically delivered personal property, and who may also purchase of such property on the condition of selling it back again at a stipulated price. "Pawn Shop" includes establishments that buy personal property, such as jewelry or artwork, made of gold or other valuable metals for refining. Consignment shops and antique shops are not considered "Pawn Shops." 
    Performance standards. Criteria to control noise, odor, smoke, toxic or noxious matter, vibration, fire, and explosive hazards, or glare of heat generated by or inherent in use of land or buildings. 
    Pergola. A structure of parallel columns supporting an open roof of beams and crossing rafters. 
    Permanently installed stand-by generator. A device for generating electrical energy that provides temporary power during incidental power outages and emergency power outages due to storms and other natural and/or man-made disasters. 
    Person or entity. An association, corporation, partnership, limited liability company, organization, proprietorship, trust or individual. 
    Personal services establishment. An establishment or place of business primarily engaged in the provision of frequent or recurrent needed services of a personal nature. Typical uses include, but are not limited to, beauty shops, barbershops, tanning salons, massage salons, shoe repair, Laundromats, dry cleaners and tailors. This does not include "Art Studios," "Financial Institutions" and "Medical/Dental Clinics." 
    Pet day care service. An establishment where pet animals owned by another person are boarded for the day, and services such as grooming and pet training are offered. "Pet Day Care Service" may include accessory retail sales on the site. 
    Place of worship. A building, together with its accessory buildings and uses, where persons regularly assemble for religious purposes and related social events and which, together with its accessory buildings and uses, is maintained and controlled by a religious body organized to sustain religious ceremonies and purposes. A "Place of Worship" may include accessory uses operated by the religious body such as group housing for persons under religious vows or orders, day care facilities and/or weekly religious instruction. 
    Play house. A detached accessory structure used for recreation and is not considered to be a habitable residence. 
    Pool hall. An establishment that provides, as a principal use, pool or billiard tables or a combination thereof for customer use. 
    Porch. A structure, which is open on two (2) or more sides, that projects from the exterior wall of a building, has direct access to the street level of the building, and is covered by a roof or eaves that may be supported by posts and has no roof-supporting walls. 
    Porch, front. A porch serving the primary entrance to the principal structure. 
    Principal building or principal structure. A non-accessory structure in which a principal use of the lot on which it is located is conducted. 
    Principal use. The main use of land or structure as distinguished from an accessory use. 
    Printing or photocopying establishment. A facility for the custom reproduction of written or graphic materials on a custom order basis for individuals or businesses. Typical processes include, but are not limited to, photocopying, lithography, screen printing, and other forms of offset printing. 
    Public safety facility. Facilities operated by public safety agencies including fire stations and other fire prevention and firefighting facilities, and police and sheriff substations and headquarters, including interim incarceration facilities. The vehicles of fire and police may be dispatched, stored and/or maintained within the "Public Safety Facility." 
    Public use area (for parking standard calculations). The area within a use where the public or a substantial number of the public has access to, including but not limited to, such areas as dining rooms, restrooms, bar seating, display areas, etc. 
    Public works facility. All production, storage, transmission and recovery facilities for water, sewer, telephone and other similar utilities owned or operated by any public agency or utility. This includes any municipal repair, storage or production facility or public works yard, as well as any accessory office or meeting rooms. Municipal vehicles may be dispatched, stored and/or maintained within the "Engineering and Public Works Facility." "Engineering and Public Works Facility" does not include "Public Safety Facility." 
    Recreation center. A building or enclosed structure, operated by a government agency for use by the public, which contains recreational facilities, including but not limited to racquet courts, swimming pools, auditoriums, ice rinks and/or gymnasiums. A recreation center shall include outdoor facilities which are immediately adjacent to or accessed through the building or enclosed structure, including but not limited to outdoor amphitheaters, racquet courts, ice rinks and swimming pools, and further shall include any accessory office, museum, restaurant, concession stand, picnic tables, pro shop, maintenance building, restroom facility, boating or boat storage facility, or similar accessory use or structure. 
    Recreational vehicle. A vehicular unit, which is designed as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreation and vacation use, and which is self-propelled, mounted on or pulled by another vehicle. Examples include, but are not limited to, a travel trailer, camping trailer, truck camper, motor home, fifth-wheel trailer, or van. 
    Related party. Person(s) related to each other by blood, marriage, adoption or civil union, or entities whose officers, trustees, shareholders, partners or members are either the same person or are related to each other by blood, marriage, adoption or civil union. 
    Research and development facility. An establishment where research and development is conducted in industries that include, but are not limited to, biotechnology, pharmaceuticals, medical instrumentation or supplies, communications and information technology, electronics and instrumentation, and computer hardware and software. "Research and Development Facility" does not involve the manufacture, fabrication, processing or sale of products, with the exception of prototype development. 
    Residential care facility. A group care facility, which may or may not be licensed by the state, for twenty-four (24) hour medical or non-medical care of persons in need of personal services, supervision or assistance essential for sustaining the activities of daily living, or for the protection of the individual. Residential care facility includes nursing care, assisted living, and continuum of care facilities. 
    Restaurant, carry-out/delivery. An establishment maintained, operated, or advertised or held out to the public as a place where food, beverage or desserts are served in disposable containers or wrappers from a serving counter for consumption off the premises, or are prepared and then delivered by messenger, via a vehicle, bicycle or by foot to the persons placing the food order. 
    Restaurant, full service. An establishment where food and/or beverages are prepared, served and consumed, and whose principal method of operation includes providing customers with an individual menu and serving food and beverages by a restaurant employee at the same table or counter where the items are consumed. 
    Restaurant, limited service. A establishment, which may be part of a chain of fast food outlets, whose design or principal method of operation includes three (3) or more of the following characteristics: 
(1)  A permanent menu board is provided from which to select and order food; 
(2)  Standardized floor plans, architecture and/or sign design are used over several locations; 
(3)  Customers pay for food before consuming it; 
(4)  A self-service condiment bar is provided; 
(5)  Trash receptacles are provided for self-service bussing; 
(6)  Furnishing plan indicates hard-finished, stationary seating arrangements; 
(7)  Drive-through service is offered; and 
(8)  Most main course food items are prepackaged rather than made to order. 
    Restaurant, specialty. An establishment whose primary business is the sale of a single specialty type of food or beverage that is not considered a complete meal (e.g., baked goods, candy, coffee, or ice cream). The sale of other food, beverages or merchandise is incidental to the sale of the specialty food or beverage. 
    Retail goods establishment. A building, property, or activity that provides physical goods, products or merchandise directly to the consumer, where such goods are typically available for immediate purchase and removal from the premises by the purchaser. 
    Roof, flat. A roof having a pitch of not more than 3 inches to 12 inches. 
    Satellite dish antenna. A dish antenna designed for transmitting signals to a receiver or receiving station or for receiving television, radio, data, communication or other signals from other antennas, satellites or other services. 
    Shed. A relatively small accessory building often purchased pre-built or as a kit in pre-fabricated sections. It is not designed to be served by heat, electricity, or plumbing and does not need to be placed on a permanent foundation. 
    Sign. A name, identification, description, display, illustration or attention-getting device which is affixed to or painted or represented directly or indirectly upon a building or other outdoor surface or lot, and which directs attention to a person, business, product, service, place, organization or entertainment. "Sign" does not include the flag of any nation, state or governmental entity. 
    Sign, awning. A sign displayed on the face or valance of an awning. 
    Sign, banner. Any sign printed or displayed upon cloth or other flexible material with or without frames. A banner, in compliance with the regulations of this Ordinance, is not considered an "Attention-Getting Device." 
    Sign, box. A sign, containing multiple letters, symbols, and/or logos in a single cabinet whose face is flat and parallel to the front facade of a building, whose sides are perpendicular to and attached to that facade, and which may or may not be internally illuminated. 
    Sign, construction. A temporary sign identifying an architect, contractor, subcontractor and/or material supplier participating in construction on the property on which the sign is located and which may identify the proposed use for the property. 
    Sign, directional. A sign that identifies parking lot entrances and exits, restrooms, public telephone, walkways, parking lot entrances and exits, and features of a similar nature. 
    Sign, directory. A sign that serves as common or collective classification for a group of persons or businesses operating on the same zoning lot (e.g., shopping center, office complex, etc.). Such sign may name the persons or businesses included, but carry no other advertising matter. 
    Sign, flashing. A sign which contains an intermittent or sequential flashing light source used primarily to attract attention. 
    Sign, ground. A sign that is supported by a pole or other form of ground support, which is independent of a building. A pole or other similar structure may itself be a ground sign. 
    Sign, menu board. A device that functions to list items for sale at an establishment with drive-through facilities. 
    Sign, municipal. A sign erected and maintained pursuant to, and in discharge of, any municipal functions or as required by law, including but not limited to, speed limit signs, stop signs, Village limit signs, street name signs, historical or government sites, and directional signs. 
    Sign, non-conforming. A sign lawfully erected and maintained prior to the adoption of this Ordinance that does not conform to the requirements of this Ordinance. 
    Sign, portable. A sign whose principal supporting structure is intended, by design and construction, to be used by resting upon the ground for support and may be easily moved or relocated for reuse. Portable signs include but are not limited to signs mounted upon a trailer, wheeled carrier or other non-motorized mobile structure, with wheels or with wheels removed. "Portable Sign" does not include "Sidewalk Signs." 
    Sign, projecting. Any sign that is attached to a building or other structure, and extends beyond the surface of the building or structure to which it is attached. 
    Sign, roof. Any sign wholly erected, constructed, or maintained above the roof structure or parapet of any structure with the principal support attached to the roof structure. 
    Sign, sidewalk. A sign placed either on a private sidewalk along the frontage of the building or establishment to which it relates, or on a public sidewalk and along the frontage and on the same side of the street of the building or establishment to which they relate. 
    Sign, wall. A sign mounted flat against and projecting less than twelve (12) inches from the wall of a building or structure with the exposed face of the sign in a plane parallel to the face of the wall. "Wall Sign" does not include "Window Sign" or "Box Sign." 
    Sign, window. A sign attached to, placed upon, or printed on the interior or exterior of a window or door of a building intended for viewing from the exterior of such a building. A "Window Sign" may be either permanent or temporary. 
    Social club or lodge. A private not-for-profit association, corporation or other entity that has a limited membership and elected officers pursuant to its bylaws that excludes the general public from its premises and holds all property for the common benefit of its members. "Social Club or Lodge" does not include an establishment that permits non-members to pay a temporary membership fee at the door in order to enter and use the premises. 
    Solar panel. A device that collects and converts direct sunlight as a source of energy for such purposes as heating or cooling a structure, heating or pumping water, or generating electricity. "Solar Panel" includes solar thermal panels. 
    Spa or hot tub. A man-made rigid or semi-rigid receptacle for water having a depth at any one (1) point greater than one (1) foot, but less than three (3) feet, or having a volume greater than eighty (80) gallons, but less than two thousand five hundred (2,500) gallons, used or intended to be used for bathing, wading, floating, or soaking, and constructed, installed or maintained in or above ground, and which is used exclusively by the owner or occupant of the property on which it is located, his family and his guests. 
    Sport court. An outdoor at-grade structure for recreational use, typically paved or consisting of a man-made surface. A "Sport Court" includes basketball courts, tennis courts and courts that are designed for multiple recreational activities. 
    Stacking space. A space specifically designated as a waiting area for vehicles patronizing a drive-through facility. 
    Stoop. An exterior floor typically, but not necessarily, constructed of concrete and/or masonry, with a finished floor elevation higher than the adjacent ground level, often with steps leading up to it, and utilized primarily as an access platform to a building. 
    Story. That portion of a structure included between the upper surface of any floor and the upper surface of the floor next above it, except that the topmost story is that portion of a structure included between the upper surface of the topmost floor and the ceiling or roof above it. The floor of a story may have split levels provided that there is not more than a four (4)-foot difference in elevation between the different levels of the floor. A mezzanine floor is counted as a story when it covers more than one-third (1/3) of the area of the floor next below it, or if the vertical distance from the floor next below it to the floor, ceiling or roof next above it is twenty-two (22) feet or more. "Story" does not include any such area having part of its ceiling height below grade. For the purposes of calculating floor area for single-family and two-unit dwellings, a maximum story height of eleven (11) feet must be used. 
    Story, half. A story under a gable, hip or gambrel roof, measured as described in Section 30-2.5. 
    Street level. The story of a building that has its floor at the closest level to the street, with direct pedestrian access to that story from the outside. 
    Street wall. The wall of a building nearest to and facing on a street. 
    Structural alteration. A change in the supporting members of a structure, such as bearing walls, columns, beams, or girders, or any substantial change in the roof line or in the exterior walls which does not increase any exterior dimension, excluding such repair or replacement as may be required for the safety of the structure. 
    Structure. Anything constructed or erected that requires location on the ground or attached to something having location on the ground. "Structure" does not include "Tree House." 
    Swimming pool. A man-made rigid or semi-rigid receptacle for water which has a depth at any point greater than eighteen (18) inches, which is used or intended to be used for swimming or bathing, which is constructed, installed or maintained in or above ground, and which is used exclusively by the owner or occupant of the property on which it is located, his family, and his guests. 
    Temporary contractor trailer. This use includes watchman's trailers, construction equipment sheds, contractor trailers and similar uses incidental to a construction project and sales of homes within a newly constructed development. 
    Tree house. A detached accessory structure that is supported by 1) one or more trees 2) a combination of trees and ground support elements or 3) ground supports and surrounding a tree, that is used for recreation and is not considered to be a habitable residence. 
    Trellis. A frame or panel of latticework used as a screen or as a support for climbing shrubs or plants. 
    Twenty-four-hour business. A business, other than one engaged in public transportation or livery service, that is open to the public, accepts deliveries from a vehicle with above D Illinois commercial vehicle license plates or equivalent out-of-state truck license plates, or engages in any outdoor operations or activities related to the business between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 5:30 a.m. Responding to an emergency request for service between 1:00 a.m. and 5:30 a.m. because of an imminent danger to person or property is not considered a commercial activity within the Village during those hours. 
    Unit of local government. The Village itself, a public school district, public library district, or public park district governed by a board or commission elected by the residents of the Village. 
    Unusual recreational equipment. A recreational structure or recreational equipment that is incidental to and associated with a residential use located on the same lot, but is of such a scale or operated in such a way that it has visual impact or noise impact that is not typically or customarily found on a residential lot. 
    Use. The purpose or activity for which the land or structure is designed, arranged or intended, or for which it is occupied or maintained. 
    Use, intensity. A measure of the amount of development contained on a lot, measured in terms of square feet of active business use for commercial activities or density of dwelling units for residential activities. 
    Use, permitted. A use permitted in a zoning district without the need for special administrative review and approval, upon satisfaction of the standards and requirements of this Ordinance. 
    Use, special. A use that owing to some special characteristics attendant to its operation or installation is permitted in a zoning district only after review, and is subject to approval by the Village Board. 
    Utility. Utilities that are not subject to Village acceptance for operation or maintenance. For purposes of this Ordinance, private utilities include natural gas lines, power lines, telephone lines, cable television lines, fiber optic lines and other communication lines, their appurtenances and components and the utility companies' operation, maintenance, repair and replacement of same. Aboveground private utility structures, such as pedestals for cable wire access or other access points for underground infrastructure (communications wiring, fiber optic, etc.) are considered a "Utility." 
    Valance. The unsecured edge of an awning or canopy that projects below the bottom of the frame supporting the awning or canopy. 
    Vibration. The periodic displacement, measured in inches, of earth at designated frequency of cycles per second. 
    Wall. Any un-roofed man-made structure of concrete, stone, brick, tile, wood or similar type of material which has a foundation. 
    Wall, retaining. A wall or terraced combination of walls used to retain soil or similar material, that is not used to support, provide a foundation for, or provide a wall for a building or structure. 
    Warehouse/distribution. The storage, wholesale and distribution of manufactured products, supplies and equipment. 
    Water garden. Any ornamental tub, pool, or other natural or artificial water container planted with aquatic plants. "Water Garden" shall not include "Swimming Pools," or "Spas or Hot Tubs." 
    Wind turbine. A building-mounted or tower-mounted wind energy production system that is accessory to the principal use and intended to primarily reduce on-site consumption of utility power by the uses on the site. However, energy produced in excess of on-site consumption may be sold back to the utility power service provider. 
    Window well. An enclosure installed below grade that retains the earth around a window that is either entirely or partially below grade and is constructed for the purpose of egress from a below-grade space during an emergency and/or to provide light and ventilation to a basement. 
    Wireless telecommunications equipment. A specific device, the surface of which is used to transmit and/or receive radio-frequency signals, microwave signals, or other signals transmitted to or from other antennas. "Wireless Telecommunications Equipment" does not include "Satellite Dish Antenna." "Wireless Telecommunications Equipment" includes un-staffed structures used to house and protect the equipment necessary for processing telecommunications signals, which may include air conditioning equipment and emergency generators, and towers designed and constructed to support one (1) or more antennas and including all appurtenant devices attached to it. 
    Yard. A required open, unoccupied space on a lot, unobstructed from the ground to the sky, except for those encroachments allowed by this Ordinance. 
    Yard, established front - residential. The computed front yard setback as described in Section 30-2.5. 
    Yard, front. A yard extending along the full length of a front lot line and back to a line drawn parallel to the front lot line at a distance equal to the depth of the required front yard. 
    Yard, interior side. A yard extending between the required front yard line to the required rear yard line along the interior side lot line at a width equal to the depth of the required interior side yard. 
    Yard, rear. A yard extending along the full length of the rear lot line and back to a line drawn parallel to the rear lot line at a distance equal to the depth of the required rear yard. 
    Yard, side adjoining a street. A yard extending between the required front yard line to the rear lot line parallel to a lot line abutting a street at a width equal to the depth of the required side yard adjoining a street. 
    Yard, side combined. The combined width of the two (2) side yards, which are bounded by the rear yard setback line, the front yard setback line, both side yard setback lines, (which when added together meets the combined side yard setbacks requirements for the property), and both side property lines. For the purpose of meeting the minimum combined side yard setback requirements, this is measured from the closest point of each side of the principal structure to both side lot lines. 

    Zoning lot. A single tract of land located within a single block which, at the time of filing for a building permit, is designated by its owner or developer as a tract to be used, developed, or built upon as a unit, under single ownership or control. A "Zoning Lot" may or may not coincide with a "Lot of Record." 
(Code 1993, § 20-2.4; Ord. No. 2014-O-65, 11-11-2014; Ord. No. 2015-O-13, 4-14-2015; Ord. No. 2017-O- 59, 10-10-2017; Ord. No. 2018-O-57, § 2, 10-25-2018) 
Sec. 30-2.5. - Rules of measurement. 
(a)  Lot Dimensions. 
(1)  Lot area. The computed area of the zoning lot contained within the lot lines. 
For purposes of calculating maximum lot coverage and floor area for detached dwellings, group homes, day care homes and limited day care homes on property bounded on at least one side by the ordinary high water mark of a body of water, as defined in chapter 8, article XXIX, Appendix 9A of the Village Code, the area of the lot shall be determined using the mean lake elevation of 579' above sea-level in place of the lot line which is the ordinary high water mark. 
(2)  Lot depth. "Lot Depth" is determined as follows: 
(A)  The mean of the length of the two side lot lines or, where the lot has more than two side lot lines, the length of the longest line which is perpendicular to the front lot line and runs to the rear lot line (Figure 2-9). 
(B)  For property with a rear lot line that is the ordinary high water mark of a body of water, as defined in chapter 8, article XXIX, Appendix 9A of the Village Code, the minimum rear yard setback along that rear lot line shall be measured from the mean lake elevation of 579' above sea level, but in no case shall the minimum rear yard setback be less than the base floodplain elevation as provided in chapter 8, article XXIX, Appendix 9A of the Village Code. 
(3)  Lot width. "Lot Width" is determined as follows: 
(A)  If the side property lines are parallel, the shortest distance between these parallel side lot lines at any point within the lot. 
(B)  If the side property lines are not parallel, the length of a line at right angles to the axis of the lot at a distance equal to the front yard line required for the district in which the lot is located or thirty (30) feet to the rear of the front yard line, whichever results in the lesser width. The axis of a lot is a line joining the midpoints of the front and rear property lines. 
FIGURE 2-8: LOT DIMENSIONS 

FIGURE 2-9: REAR LOT LINE AND LOT DEPTH FOR IRREGULAR SHAPED LOTS 

FIGURE 2-10: LOT WIDTH 

(b)  Established Front Yard Setback - Residential. The established front yard shall be calculated as the average of the existing front yard setbacks as measured from the front lot line to the principal structure along the same side of the street and on the same block. Where there are five (5) or more principal structures on said block, the shortest and longest setbacks shall be eliminated in the making of the computation. The established front yard setback shall be permanently set using the principal structure locations of said block as of July 1, 2003. 
(c)  Height. The vertical distance from grade to the highest point of the roof of a building or the highest point of a structure. 
    The height of the principal structure shall be measured from calculated grade. 
    The height of any accessory structure, except a fence, shall be measured from the average abutting grade. 
    The height of a fence, at any point along the fence, shall be measured from adjacent grade. 
FIGURE 2-11: HEIGHT FOR PITCHED ROOF 

(d)  Flat Roof. For the purpose of determining the maximum height of a single-family or two-unit dwelling, the dwelling shall be determined to have a flat roof if the area of the roof that is flat is greater than twenty-five percent (25%) of the area of the second floor. 
If a dormer with a roof pitch of not more than 3 inches to 12 inches is contiguous to an area under a flat roof, the dormer shall be considered an extension of the flat roof if the dormer extends from a point 12" inches or less from the roof peak. 
(e)  Half Story. For the purpose of determining the maximum height of a single-family or two-unit dwelling, the dwelling shall be determined to have a half story when no more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the floor area is located under dormers or other outward projections from the basic planes of the roof and has knee walls not exceeding two (2) feet in height to the bottom of the roof rafters. 
(f)  Floor Area. For the purpose of determining the floor area of the principal building and all accessory buildings and structures on the lot, floor area shall mean the sum of the gross horizontal area of the several floors of a building, measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls, or from the center line of party walls. This shall be measured to the exterior of building cladding greater than three (3) feet above grade and/or building cladding greater than three (3) feet above the floor level for any floor above the first floor. 
(1)  For single-family, two-unit, townhouse/stacked flat and multi-family dwellings, this shall include the following: 
(A)  One hundred percent (100%) of the area of a basement, if four (4) feet or more of the height of the basement projects above grade as measured from grade to the top of the first finished floor on structures built after July 1, 2003 in all districts except R and R1; and 
(B)  One hundred percent (100%) of the area of a basement, if five (5) feet or more of the height of the basement projects above grade as measured from grade to the top of the first finished floor on structures built on or before July 1, 2003 in all districts except R and R1; and 
(C)  One hundred percent (100%) of the area of a basement, if the height of the first floor exceeds that shown on Table 8-3: R1 Sub-District Residential Zoning Districts Bulk and Yard Regulations for the R and R1 zoning districts; and 
(D)  One hundred percent (100%) of the area of any portion of a basement that projects seven (7) feet or more above the existing adjacent grade on a downward sloping lot; and 
(E)  One hundred percent (100%) of the area of a garage or carport; and 
(F)  One hundred percent (100%) of the floor area of any part of an attic, if that part has a height from floor or upper limits of the story below to bottom of rafters of six feet, nine inches (6' 9"), or more; and 
(G)  One hundred percent (100%) of the area of any part of a story above the first story, if that part has a height from floor or upper limits of the story below to bottom of the story or half-story above of six feet, nine inches (6' 9"), or more; and 
(H)  One hundred percent (100%) of the area below a habitable overhang; and 
(I)  One hundred percent (100%) of the area of a covered porch, covered balcony or similar roofed exterior space where the element exceeds three (3) feet from the wall of the principal structure; and 
(J)  One hundred percent (100%) of the area of a roofed accessory building or structure, such as a shed, gazebo, beach house/cabana, boat house, tree house or play house, or similar structure, when the total area of the accessory building or structure is in excess of sixty-four (64) square feet; and 
(K)  One hundred percent (100%) of the area of a pergola, arbor or similar roofed structure if the roof beams and rafters combined comprise a roof structure that is less than eighty-five percent (85%) open or seventy-five percent (75%) of a pergola, arbor or similar roofed structure if the roof beams and rafters taken together comprise a roof structure that is at least eighty-five percent (85%) open. However, arbors meeting the standards combined in Section 30-13.4.(c) shall not be counted towards total floor area; and 
(L)  Seventy-five percent (75%) of the area of an awning, canopy or similar element without ground supports, that exceeds three (3) feet in depth from the wall of the principal structure; and 
(M)  One hundred percent (100%) of the area under eaves erected after July 1, 2003 that exceed three (3) feet in depth from the wall of the principal structure; and 
(N)  Seventy-five percent (75%) of the area of an open balcony; and 
(O)  Fifty percent (50%) of the area of a deck, if the deck and/or its railing project more than six feet, six inches (6' 6") above the existing adjacent grade; and 
(P)  Fifty percent (50%) of the area of a deck when any portion of the deck and/or its railing project more than six feet, six inches (6' 6") above the existing adjacent grade on a downward sloping lot; and 
(Q)  Any open two (2) story element (an interior space which has a clear height of one (1) story plus six feet, nine inches (6' 9") or more) shall be counted twice in calculating the floor area of the building, and any open three (3) story element (an interior space which has a clear height of two (2) stories plus six feet, nine inches (6' 9") or more) shall be counted three (3) times in calculating the floor area of the building. For this purpose, a maximum story height of eleven (11) feet shall be used; and 
(R)  The floor area of a story directly below an attic (or a partial story), with a height from floor or upper limits of the story below to bottom of the attic (or partial story) rafters of seventeen feet, nine inches (17' 9") or greater shall be counted twice. 
(2)  For mixed use and non-residential structures, this shall include the following: 
(A)  One hundred percent (100%) of the first floor with a clear ceiling height of twenty-one (21) feet or less; and 
(B)  Any open two (2) story element (an interior space which has a clear height of twenty-one (21) feet plus eleven (11) feet or more shall be counted twice in calculating the floor area of the building, and any open three (3) story element (an interior space which has a clear height of forty-two (42) feet plus eleven (11) feet or more) shall be counted three (3) times in calculating the floor area of the building; and 
(C)  One hundred percent (100%) of the area of a basement, if four (4) feet or more of the height of the basement projects above grade as measured from grade to the top of the first finished floor on structures built after July 1, 2003; and 
(D)  One hundred percent (100%) of the area of a basement, if five (5) feet or more of the height of the basement projects above grade as measured from grade to the top of the first finished floor on structures built on or before July 1, 2003; and 
(E)  One hundred percent (100%) of the area of any portion of a basement that projects seven (7) feet or more above the existing adjacent grade on a downward sloping lot; and 
(F)  One hundred percent (100%) of the area of a garage or carport; and 
(G)  One hundred percent (100%) of the area of a roofed accessory building or structure, such as a shed, gazebo, detached pergola, beach house/cabana, boat house, tree house or play house, or similar structure; and 
(H)  One hundred percent (100%) of the floor area of any part of an attic, if that part has a height from floor or upper limits of the story below to bottom of rafters of six feet, nine inches (6' 9"), or more; and 
(I)  One hundred percent (100%) of the floor area of any part of a story above the first story, if that part has a height from floor or upper limits of the story below to bottom of the story or half-story above of six feet, nine inches (6' 9"), or more; and 
(J)  One hundred percent (100%) of the area of a covered porch, covered balcony, or similar roofed exterior space; and 
(K)  One hundred percent (100%) of any area below a habitable overhang; and 
(L)  Fifty percent (50%) of the area of a deck, if the deck and/or its railing project more than six feet, six inches (6' 6") above the existing adjacent grade; and 
(M)  For property that slopes downward towards a rear lot line the portion of a deck and/or its railing that projects more than six feet, six inches (6' 6") above the existing adjacent grade shall be counted at fifty percent (50%); and 
(N)  One hundred percent (100%) of eaves erected after July 1, 2003 which exceed three (3) feet in depth from the wall of the principal structure; and 
(O)  Seventy-five percent (75%) of the area of an open balcony; and 
(P)  Seventy-five percent (75%) of the area of an awning, canopy or similar element without ground supports; and 
(Q)  One hundred percent (100%) of the area of a pergola, arbor or similar roofed structure if the roof beams and rafters combined comprise a roof structure that is less than eighty-five percent (85%) open or seventy-five percent (75%) of a pergola, arbor or similar roofed structure if the roof beams and rafters taken together comprise a roof structure that is at least eighty-five percent (85%) open. However, arbors meeting the standards combined in Section 30-13.4.(c) shall not be counted towards total floor area. 
(g)  Garage Floor Area Bonus. The garage floor area bonus shall be calculated in accordance with Table 8-2: R, R2, R3 and R4 Residential Zoning Districts Bulk and Yard Regulations, Table 8-3: R1 Sub-District Residential Zoning Districts Bulk and Yard Regulations and Table 8-4: Contextual Bulk Regulations. 
(1)  Up to an additional four hundred and forty (440) square feet in excess of the floor area limit established in Table 8-2, Table 8-3 and Table 8-4 may be occupied by a detached or attached garage. 
(2)  Up to an additional two hundred (200) square feet in excess of the floor area limit established in Table 8-2, Table 8-3 and Table 8-4 may be occupied by a detached shed. 
(3)  The total additional area for a detached or attached garage in combination with a detached shed shall not exceed a total of four hundred and forty (440) square feet. 
(4)  A roofed, open sided parking space (carport) shall be eligible for the garage floor area bonus. 
(h)  Front Porch Floor Area Bonus. 
(1)  The front porch floor area bonus shall be in accordance with Table 8-2, Table 8-3, and Table 8-4. 
(2)  The front porch floor area bonus shall be provided for a front porch provided that the porch is no more than one (1) story in height, is covered by a roof or eave, and has no space above the porch which would be included in the calculation of the floor area. 
(3)  In the event that there is more than one porch eligible for the front porch floor area bonus, the bonus shall apply to the porch that serves the primary entrance. 
(i)  Attic Floor Area Bonus. 
(1)  The attic floor bonus shall be calculated in accordance with Table 8-2, Table 8-3, and Table 8-4. 
(2)  In order to receive the attic floor area bonus, the attic space must be above the second floor and below the roof rafters. 
(j)  Lot Coverage. The portion of a lot that is occupied by buildings or structures. This shall be measured to the exterior of the building cladding greater than three (3) feet above grade and shall include the following: 
(1)  One hundred percent (100%) of the footprint of a principal structure; and 
(2)  One hundred percent (100%) of a below-grade structure (i.e., a basement) located less than ten (10) feet below grade when there is no structure that otherwise qualifies as lot coverage or floor area above it; and 
(3)  One hundred percent (100%) of the footprint of a garage or carport; and 
(4)  One hundred percent (100%) of the footprint of a roofed accessory building or structure, such as a shed, gazebo, beach house/cabana, boat house, tree house or play house, or similar structure, when the total area of the accessory building or structure is in excess of sixty-four (64) square feet; and 
(5)  One hundred percent (100%) of the footprint of a pergola, arbor or similar roofed structure if the roof beams and rafters combined comprise a roof structure that is less than eighty-five percent (85%) open or seventy-five percent (75%) of a pergola, arbor or similar roofed structure if the roof beams and rafters taken together comprise a roof structure that is at least eighty-five percent (85%) open. However, arbors meeting the standards combined in Section 30-13.4.(c) shall not be counted towards total floor area; 
(6)  One hundred percent (100%) of the footprint of a fireplace or chimney, whether attached to or detached from, a principal structure; and 
(7)  One hundred percent (100%) of the footprint of architectural features attached to a structure, including but not limited to wing walls. 
(k)  Fence Openness. For the purpose of Section 30-13.4.(h), fence openness is measured as follows: 
(1)  An open fence is a fence that has over its entirety at least fifty percent (50%) of its surface area in open space which affords a direct view through the fence from eye level at a position perpendicular to the fence. 
(2)  A solid fence is a fence that has over its entirety less than fifty percent (50%) of its surface area in open space which affords a direct view through the fence from eye level at a position perpendicular to the fence. 
(Code 1993, § 20-2.5; Ord. No. 2014-O-65, 11-11-2014; Ord. No. 2015-O-13, 4-14-2015; Ord. No. 2017-O-59, 10-10-2017) 
ARTICLE 30-3. - ORDINANCE ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 30-3.1. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this Article is to outline the specific powers of the different boards, commissions and officials as they relate to this Zoning Ordinance. 
(Code 1993, § 20-3.1) 
Sec. 30-3.2. - Village board. 
    The Village Board has the following powers, pursuant to this Zoning Ordinance: 
(a)  To make final decisions on applications for text amendments and map amendments. 
(b)  To make final decisions on applications for special uses. 
(c)  To make final decisions on applications for zoning variations. 
(d)  To make final decisions on applications for planned unit developments. 
(e)  To make final decisions on applications for sign variations. 
(f)  Such additional powers as may be set forth in this Ordinance. 
(Code 1993, § 20-3.2) 
Sec. 30-3.3. - Zoning board of appeals. 
    The Zoning Board of Appeals has the following powers, pursuant to this Zoning Ordinance: 
(a)  To hear and issue recommendations on applications for text amendments and map amendments when referred to by the Village Board. The Village Board may also assign responsibility for conducting a public hearing on a proposed amendment to a reviewing committee or commission. 
(b)  To hear and issue recommendations on applications for variations. 
(c)  To hear and issue recommendations on applications for special uses. 
(d)  To hear and make final decisions on appeals of any zoning interpretation or determination made by the Zoning Administrator in regard to this Zoning Ordinance. 
(e)  To hear and report to the Village Board on such other matters as may be referred to it by the Village Board. 
(Code 1993, § 20-3.3) 
Sec. 30-3.4. - Plan commission. 
    The Plan Commission has the following powers, pursuant to this Zoning Ordinance: 
(a)  To hear and issue recommendations on applications for text amendments and map amendments when referred to by the Village Board. 
(b)  To hear and issue recommendations on applications for planned unit developments. 
(c)  To initiate, direct and review, from time to time, studies of the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance and to make reports of its recommendations to the Village Board. 
(Code 1993, § 20-3.4) 
Sec. 30-3.5. - Appearance review commission. 
    The Appearance Review Commission has the following powers, pursuant to this Zoning Ordinance: 
(a)  To review and approve applications for appearance review certificates. 
(b)  To review and issue recommendations on applications for sign variations. 
(c)  To review and act on appeals of regulations contained in Sections 30-10.7 and 30-10.9. 
(d)  To review and issue recommendations on applications for variations to Article 30-15 (Landscaping and Screening). 
(e)  Such additional powers as may be set forth in this Ordinance. 
(Code 1993, § 20-3.5) 
Sec. 30-3.6. - Zoning administrator. 
    The Director of Community Development, or his/her designee, is considered the Zoning Administrator, and has the following powers, pursuant to this Zoning Ordinance: 
(a)  To review and make decisions on applications for administrative zoning reviews. 
(b)  To review and make decisions on applications for zoning interpretations. 
(c)  To review and make decisions on applications for building permits. 
(d)  To review and make decisions on applications for certificates of occupancy. 
(e)  To review and make decisions on applications for sign permits. 
(f)  To receive, review and forward applications for zoning amendments, variations, special uses, planned unit developments, appearance review certificates, zoning appeals and other zoning approvals required by this Ordinance to the appropriate board, commission or official. 
(g)  To maintain permanent and current records as required by this Ordinance including, but not limited to, all relevant information and official action on zoning amendments, variations, special uses, planned unit developments, appearance review certificates, zoning appeals and other zoning approvals. 
(h)  To maintain and make available the Village's Official Zoning Ordinance Text and Map, and all permanent and current records required by this Ordinance. 
(i)  To conduct inspections of structures and uses of land and structures to determine compliance with this Ordinance and other applicable ordinances. 
(Code 1993, § 20-3.6) 
ARTICLE 30-4. - ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES 

Sec. 30-4.1. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this Article is to outline the general application, notice, and public hearing procedures for the zoning applications and approvals of this Zoning Ordinance. 
(Code 1993, § 20-4.1) 
Sec. 30-4.2. - Application. 
(a)  Filing. 
(1)  All applications are to be filed with the Zoning Administrator. Prior to filing an application, applicants are encouraged to schedule a pre-application meeting with the Zoning Administrator to review the application. 
(2)  The application must be on forms provided by the Village and filed in such number as the instructions provide. All plans must be at a scale sufficient to permit a clear and precise understanding of the proposal. 
(3)  The application must include information, plans and data as specified by the Village in the application and sufficient to determine whether the application conforms with all requirements set forth in this Ordinance. 
(b)  Completeness. The Zoning Administrator will determine whether the application is complete. The Zoning Administrator must notify the applicant that the application is complete or inform the applicant of any deficiencies within a reasonable time. The Zoning Administrator will take no steps to process the application until all deficiencies are remedied. Once the Zoning Administrator determines that the application is complete, the application will be scheduled for consideration by the appropriate board, commission, committee or official. 
(c)  Fees. Every application must be accompanied by the required filing fee as established and modified, from time to time, in the Village Code. The failure to pay such fee when due constitutes grounds for refusing to process the application and for denying or revoking any permit or approval for the subject property. 
(d)  Withdrawal of Application. An applicant has the right to withdraw an application at any time prior to the decision on the application by a board, committee, commission or official, including the ability to withdraw the application if it has been tabled by a board or commission. There will be no refund of fees. Requests for withdrawal must be in writing by the applicant. 
(e)  Successive Applications. 
(1)  Within one (1) year of the date of denial, a subsequent application will not be reviewed or heard unless there is a substantial change to the application or the relief sought, or if a significant mistake of law or of fact affected the prior denial. 
(2)  If the application is resubmitted earlier than one (1) year from the date of denial, such subsequent application must include a detailed statement of the grounds justifying its consideration. 
(3)  The Zoning Administrator will make a determination as to whether the subsequent application is appropriate for resubmittal prior to the expiration of the one (1) year wait requirement. If the Zoning Administrator finds that there are no new grounds for consideration of the subsequent application, he/she shall summarily, and without hearing, deny the request. 
(f)  Affordable Housing Consultation on Applications. 
(1)  Applicability. 
(A)  The following types of developments that require a variation, special use, appearance review certificate or other zoning authorization are required to participate in an affordable housing consultation: 
(i)  Multi-family dwellings that are: 
a.  New construction; or 
b.  Rehabilitation or remodeling of an existing multi-family building where the valuation for building permit fee exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the building's value prior to the rehabilitation or remodeling. 
(ii)  Mixed-use commercial buildings with two (2) or more residential occupancies that are: 
a.  New construction located in the VC, NR, NR-1, GC-1 or GC-2 Districts; or 
b.  Rehabilitation or remodeling of an existing commercial building where the valuation for building permit fee exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the building's value prior to the rehabilitation or remodeling located in the VC, NR, NR-1, GC-1 or GC-2 Districts. 
(B)  The provisions of this section do not apply to a construction project where fifteen percent (15%) or more of the dwelling units are affordable housing units. 
(2)  Procedure. 
(A)  Prior to submittal of any application for any variation, special use, appearance review certificate or other zoning authorization, the applicant will meet with the Zoning Administrator. At such meeting, the Zoning Administrator will provide the prospective permit applicant with a copy of the "Village of Wilmette Affordable Housing Plan" and discuss with the applicant whether there are reasonable options for including affordable housing units in the project. 
(B)  The consultation must be held at least sixty (60) days prior to the date the application is filed with the Village, provided that after the required meeting, the Village Board, by resolution, may waive any remaining portion of the sixty (60) day period in cases where it determines that requiring an exhaustion of the waiting period would not serve the purposes of the "Village of Wilmette Affordable Housing Plan." 
(Code 1993, § 20-5.2) 
Sec. 30-4.3. - Notice. 
    The body conducting a public hearing or meeting will hear no application unless the applicant complies in all respects to all notice requirements, as described in Table 4-1: Notice Requirements. The applicant may give additional notice, above that required by this section, as he/she may deem appropriate. 
VILLAGE OF WILMETTE

TABLE 4-1: NOTICE REQUIREMENTS ALLOWABLE 
NOTICE DELIVERY REQUEST TYPE HAND
DELIVERY FIRST CLASS MAIL DISTANCE TIMING PUBLISHED POS-
TED Administrative Appeals (1) Owner and parties Owner and parties 5 days or less after filing Administrative Zoning Review (2) Owners and occupants Owners and occupants Adjoining/ abutting 15-30 days Appearance Review Certificate - new/addition (3) Owners and occupants Owners and occupants Adjoining/abutting 15-30 days X Appearance Review Certificate - modifications (3) 15-30 days X Appearance Review Certificate - sign and awning Alley Vacation (Chapter 18 of the Village Code) Owners and occupants Owners and occupants 250' 15-30 days X X Consolidation (Chapter 18 of the Village Code) Owners and occupants Owners and occupants 250' 15-30 days X X Map Amendment (Rezoning) - Village Initiated (4) (4) (4) (4) 15-30 days X X Map Amendment (Rezoning) - Other Owners and occupants Owners and occupants 250' 15-30 days X X Sign Variation Owners and occupants Owners and occupants Adjoining/abutting 15-30 days X X Special Use Owners and occupants Owners and occupants 250' 15-30 days X X Subdivision 
(Chapter 18 of the Village Code) Owners and occupants Owners and occupants 250' 15-30 days X X Temporary Uses Owners and occupants Owners and occupants 250' 10-45 days Text Amendment - Village Initiated (4) (4) (4) (4) 15-30 days X X Text Amendment - Other 15-30 days X Variation Owners and occupants Owners and occupants 250' 15-30 days X X  
NOTES: 
(1)  See Section 30-5.15. 
(2)  Notice mailed by village staff. 
(3)  See Section 30-4.3.(b)(2). 
(4)  See Section 30-4.3.(b)(5). 
(a)  Published Notice. For all applications that require a public hearing and for public meetings for appearance review certificate applications that require mailed notice the Village must publish notice in a newspaper of general circulation within the Village. The notice must include the date, time, place and purpose of such hearing or meeting, the name of the applicant, the address of the subject property, and the zoning action. Such notice must be published no less than fifteen (15) days, nor more than thirty (30) days, in advance of the scheduled hearing date. 
(b)  Mailed Notice. 
(1)  Mailed Notice for Public Hearings. Public hearings require written notice, on forms provided by the Zoning Administrator, to be mailed no less than fifteen (15), but not more than thirty (30), days prior to the public hearing to owners and occupants of all properties located within two hundred fifty (250) feet from the property line of the subject property, including streets and alleys, as well as all occupants of such lots. The notice must include the application number (if any), date, time, place and purpose of such hearing, the name of the applicant, and the address of the subject property. The notice must be mailed in a plain white envelope or the words "Village of Wilmette Public Notice Enclosed" must be on the front of the envelope to indicate that the contents are an official notice and not a commercial solicitation. For those mailings where the applicant is a Unit of Local Government, envelopes pre-printed with the name of the Unit of Local Government may be used without being labeled as a public notice. 
(2)  Mailed Notice for Appearance Review Hearings. Public meetings for appearance review certificates require written notice, on forms provided by the Zoning Administrator, to be mailed no less than fifteen (15), but not more than thirty (30), days prior to the public meeting. The notice must include the application number (if any), date, time, place and purpose of such meeting, the name of the applicant, and the address of the subject property. 
(A)  For a public meeting to consider granting an application for a sign variation or an appearance review certificate for construction of a new building or addition, written notice of the meeting is required to all owners and occupants for all lots which abut or lie directly across a street or alley from the subject property. 
(B)  No notice is required in cases involving an appearance review certificate for only an exterior modification of an existing building, or the construction or expansion of a fence, parking lot, awning or other accessory structure, or for a sign. 
(3)  Mailed Notice for Administrative Zoning Review. For administrative zoning review applications that include relief for an addition, dormer or detached garage, the Zoning Administrator must send a notification letter by first class mail to the applicant and to all properties that adjoin and abut the subject property or are across the street or alley from the subject property. The letter must describe the pending review, the location of the property, and inform the recipients that any comments regarding the variation request must be made in writing and received by the Zoning Administrator no later than fifteen (15) days from the date of the notice. 
(4)  Mailed Notice for Temporary Uses. Temporary uses or structures to continue for more than five (5) days or other uses or structures as determined by the Zoning Administrator require written notice, on forms provided by the Zoning Administrator, to be mailed no less than ten (10), but not more than forty-five (45), days prior to the public hearing to owners and occupants of all properties located within two hundred fifty (250) feet from the property line of the subject property, including streets and alleys, as well as all occupants of such lots. The notice must include the application number (if any), date, time, place and purpose of such hearing, the name of the applicant, and the address of the subject property. 
(5)  Mailed Notice for Applications Initiated by the Village. 
(A)  Where the Village of Wilmette seeks a variation, special use, or zoning map amendment which is limited to a single, specific village-owned lot or contiguous group of village-owned lots, the Village shall follow the notice requirements in Sections 30-4.3.(a), 30-4.3.(b)(1), and 30-4.3.(c). 
(B)  For zoning map amendments and text amendments initiated by the Village of Wilmette, the Zoning Administrator shall provide written notice by First Class Mail or hand delivery to owners and occupants of all lots which will be rendered non-conforming as to the uses allowed thereon or for whom the permitted uses shall be substantially changed by such proposed map amendment or text amendment. 
(C)  For those amendments to the zoning map or text of this Ordinance which are initiated by the Village of Wilmette and are technical in nature, which add to or increase the permitted or special uses allowed on an affected lot, or which do not substantially affect the existing or permitted uses on properties affect by such proposed amendments, notice by publication shall be sufficient. 
(6)  Mailed Notice Recipients. Owners are defined as persons who receive current real estate tax bills as shown on the records of the County Assessor. Occupants are defined as occupants of all residential, business and institutional properties. 
(7)  Mailed Notice Delivery. Mailed notices may be delivered by U.S. Mail or by hand. 
(A)  U.S. Mail Delivery. 
(i)  Any notice that is delivered by mail must be sent to the person's last known address by first-class mail. Notices delivered by mail are deemed to have been given when deposited in the U.S. Mail. 
(ii)  Any notice that is mailed to an occupant may be addressed simply to "Occupant" at the appropriate address, without the actual name of the occupant being specified. 
(B)  Delivery by Hand. Any notice that is delivered by hand must be given as follows: 
(i)  In the case of a natural person, to the person entitled to the notice or a member of that person's household over the age of thirteen (13). 
(ii)  In the case of a corporation, to any officer or registered agent. 
(iii)  In the case of a partnership, to any general partner. 
(iv)  Where the recipients of such notice occupy a multi-tenant building, hand delivery may also be completed as follows: by personally delivering the notices to the owner of the building or president of the condominium association for the building (in the manner set forth above), requesting the building owner or association president to distribute the notices to each tenant and unit owner, and having the building owner or association president sign a sworn affidavit stating that he/she has in fact distributed the notices to each tenant and unit owner. 
(8)  Affidavit of Mailed Notice. With the exception of administrative zoning reviews notice, the applicant is responsible for mailing proper notice. The applicant must provide a sworn affidavit to the Village, on a form provided by the Village, containing a complete list of the names and last known addresses of the persons entitled to notice and the method by which notice was delivered to each of them. The applicant must also provide the Village with a list of names, addresses and property identification numbers (PIN) of all notice recipients. This affidavit must be filed with the Zoning Administrator no less than ten (10) days in advance of the scheduled hearing or meeting, exclusive of the date of the hearing or meeting itself. Where notice has been given to the owner or condominium association president of a multi-tenant building, then the affidavit must be accompanied by the affidavit of the building owner or association president as required by this section. 
(c)  Posted Notice. The Village is required to post a sign on the subject property for all public hearings for any zoning map amendment, other than a comprehensive rezoning of the entire Village, variation and special use, and for any public meeting on an appearance review certificate application in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(1)  Location and Timeframe. The required posting period is no less than fifteen (15) days, but no more than thirty (30) days, prior to the public hearing or meeting, excluding the day of the hearing or meeting from this period. The sign must be posted at a prominent location on the property, near the sidewalk or public right-of-way so that it is visible to passing pedestrians and motorists. 
(2)  Information Included. The posted notice must include the application number (if any), the date, time, and place of the public hearing or meeting, and the nature of the application being considered at the hearing or meeting. 
(3)  Responsibility for Posting Signs. The Village will provide the sign for posting on the property. The applicant must maintain the sign during the required period. 
(d)  Public Examination and Copying of Applications and Other Documents. During normal business hours, any person may examine the application and material submitted in support of, or in opposition to, the application, subject to the exceptions set forth in the Freedom of Information Act. Upon reasonable request, any person is entitled to copies of the application and related documents. 
(Code 1993, § 20-4.3; Ord. No. 2014-O-65, 11-11-2014; Ord. No. 2015-O-13, 4-14-2015; Ord. No. 2017-O-59, 10-10-2017) 
Sec. 30-4.4. - Public hearing. 
(a)  Conduct of Public Hearings. 
(1)  All public hearings are subject to the Illinois Open Meetings Act. 
(2)  The procedure for public hearings is as follows: 
(A)  Call to order and roll call. 
(B)  The Chair opens the public hearing for the application(s) and presents a brief explanation of the public hearing procedure. 
(C)  The Chair swears in those wishing to give testimony. All persons offering testimony at a public hearing shall testify under oath. An attorney shall be sworn if he/she offers testimony, but not if he/she is questioning a witness, summarizing witness testimony, or addressing the body conducting the hearing on procedural issues. All persons wishing to testify at the public hearing shall state for the record his/her name and address. 
(D)  All interested parties may appear for themselves or be represented by a person of their choosing. Written statements will be accepted prior to the hearing to be entered into the public hearing record. 
(E)  Any person may appear at a hearing and submit evidence, upon receiving recognition from the Chair of the body conducting the hearing. Any person may ask relevant questions of other witnesses, but only through the Chair and at the discretion of the Chair. All persons shall state his/her name for the record before submitting evidence or questioning a witness at the public hearing. 
(F)  The application and any accompanying exhibits will be identified and made part of the record. 
(G)  The applicant presents testimony regarding the petition and associated applications. 
(H)  Questions are directed to the applicant by the body conducting the hearing. 
(I)  Rebuttals. 
(J)  The Chair may use reasonable discretion in determining when testimony has become redundant or is not relevant to the proceedings. 
(K)  Follow-up questions from the body conducting the hearing. 
(L)  Discussion of evidence gathered by the body conducting the hearing. 
(M)  The body conducting the hearing will close the evidentiary portion of the public hearing. The hearing will be continued for the purposes of deliberating and voting on findings and recommendations. The hearing will remain open until such time as a decision is reached. 
(b)  Continuances. The Chair, with approval of the body conducting the hearing, may continue the public hearing. In order to reopen the hearing, no new notice shall be required if a hearing is continued to a date specified, provided that a public announcement of the future date, time, and place of the continued hearing is made at the hearing and placed in the minutes. If the hearing is adjourned, rather than continued to a date specified, in order to reopen the hearing all notices must be given that would have been required for the initial public hearing. 
(Code 1993, § 20-4.4) 
ARTICLE 30-5. - APPLICATIONS AND APPROVAL PROCESSES 

Sec. 30-5.1. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this Article is to delineate the scope of applicability, specific procedures and requirements, and approval standards that are applicable to each zoning application and approval. 
(Code 1993, § 20-5.1) 
Sec. 30-5.2. - Text amendment and map amendment. 
(a)  Purpose. The regulations imposed and the districts created by this Ordinance may be amended from time to time in accordance with this Article. The process for amending the Zoning Ordinance text or the Zoning Map is intended to permit modifications in response to changed conditions or changes in Village policy. Amendments are not intended to relieve particular hardships or confer special privileges or rights upon any person or party. 
(b)  Initiation. 
(1)  A text amendment may be initiated by an owner of any property in the Village, or other person expressly authorized by the owner in writing, or the Village. 
(2)  A map amendment may be initiated only by the owner of any property in the Village affected by the proposed amendment, or other person expressly authorized in writing by the owner, the Village, or any other unit of government that is not the owner of the lot but proposes to acquire the lot by purchase, gift, or condemnation. 
(c)  Authority. The Village Board, after receiving a recommendation from the reviewing committee or commission, will take formal action on requests for text or map amendments. 
(d)  Procedure. 
(1)  Application. 
(A)  All applications are filed with the Zoning Administrator in accordance with the requirements of Section 30-4.2 (Application). Amendments initiated by the Village also require an application, but are exempt from fees. 
(B)  The application must be accompanied by a written statement from the applicant stating the basis for the request. In the case of a map amendment, a site plan must be included illustrating the overall plan for development or redevelopment of the property, and how such new development relates to adjacent land uses and maintains the character of the surrounding neighborhood. 
(2)  Assignment of Public Hearing and Review by the Village Board. 
(A)  Within a reasonable time after submission of the application, the Village Board will assign responsibility for conducting the public hearing on the proposed amendment to a reviewing committee or commission, which may be the Plan Commission, the Zoning Board of Appeals, the Village Board itself or a committee thereof, or any other group of persons designated by the Village Board. The Zoning Administrator then shall schedule the application for consideration at a public hearing. 
(B)  Upon receiving an application requesting an amendment, or upon an instruction from the Village Board to consider a proposed amendment, the Zoning Administrator will review the proposed amendment and deliver copies of the proposed amendment to other appropriate government agencies for review and comment, as appropriate. Prior to the scheduled public hearing, the Zoning Administrator will forward to the reviewing committee or commission copies of the application and a written report summarizing the facts of the case, including all relevant documents and incorporating or summarizing the comments of the Zoning Administrator and other agencies. The Zoning Administrator will forward a copy of the written report to the applicant prior to the scheduled public hearing. 
(3)  Action by the Reviewing Committee or Commission. 
(A)  The reviewing committee or commission will conduct a public hearing on a proposed zoning amendment in accordance with Section 30-4.4 (Public Hearing) within a reasonable time after receipt of a complete application. Notice for the public hearing must be in accordance with Section 30-4.3 (Notice). If, in the reviewing committee or commission's judgment, the application does not contain sufficient information to enable the reviewing committee or commission to properly discharge its responsibilities, the committee or commission may request additional information from the applicant. 
(B)  Within a reasonable time after the close of the public hearing, the reviewing committee or commission must forward to the Village Board its recommendation, together with the minutes of the hearing. 
(C)  The reviewing committee or commission will evaluate the application, based upon the evidence presented at the public hearing, pursuant to each of the applicable standards in Paragraph (e) below. For zoning text amendments, the reviewing committee or commission must recommend approval, approval with conditions, or denial of the application. For zoning map amendments, the reviewing committee or commission must recommend approval or denial of the application. 
(4)  Action by the Village Board. The Village Board will consider the application within a reasonable time of receiving the findings of fact and recommendation from the reviewing committee or commission, pursuant to each of the applicable standards in Paragraph (e) below. The Village Board may take action in the form of approval, approval with conditions, or denial on applications for zoning text amendments, and approval or denial on applications for zoning map amendments. The Village Board may also refer the application back to the reviewing committee or commission for further consideration. 
(e)  Approval Standards for Zoning Amendments. The reviewing committee or commission's recommendation and Village Board decision on any zoning amendment, whether text or map amendment, must consider the following standards, as set forth in Table 5-1: Approval Standards for Zoning Amendments below. However this is a matter of legislative discretion that is not controlled by any particular standard. 
VILLAGE OF WILMETTE, ILLINOIS

TABLE 5-1: APPROVAL STANDARDS FOR ZONING AMENDMENTS STANDARDS MAP
AMENDMENTS TEXT
AMENDMENTS 1. The existing development pattern, use and zoning of nearby property. X 2. The extent to which property values of the subject property are diminished by the existing zoning. X 3. The extent to which the proposed amendment promotes the public health, safety and welfare of the Village. X X 4. The relative gain to the public, as compared to the hardship imposed upon the applicant. X X 5. The suitability of the property for the purposes for which it is presently zoned, i.e., the feasibility of developing the property in question for one (1) or more of the uses permitted under the existing zoning classification. X 6. The length of time that the property in question has been vacant, as presently zoned, considered in the context of development in the area where the property is located. X 7. The evidence of community need for the use proposed by the applicant. X 8. The consistency of the proposed amendment with the Comprehensive Plan. X X 9. The consistency of the proposed amendment with the intent and general regulations of this Ordinance. X 10. Whether the proposed amendment corrects an error or omission, adds clarification to existing requirements, or reflects a change in policy. X 11. That the proposed amendment will benefit the residents of the Village as a whole, and not just the applicant, property owner(s), neighbors of any property under consideration, or other special interest groups, and the extent to which the proposed use would be in the public interest and would not serve solely the interest of the applicant. X X 12. Whether the proposed amendment provides a more workable way to achieve the intent and purposes of this Ordinance, the Comprehensive Plan, or planned public improvements. X 13. The extent to which the proposed amendment creates non-conformities. X X 14. The trend of development, if any, in the general area of the property in question. X 15. Whether adequate public facilities are available including, but not limited to, schools, parks, police and fire protection, roads, sanitary sewers, storm sewers, and water lines, or are reasonably capable of being provided prior to the development of the uses, which would be permitted on the subject property if the amendment were adopted. X  
  
(f)  Written Protest of Zoning Amendment. Written protest of a zoning amendment must be filed in accordance with Illinois state law. 
(Code 1993, § 20-5.2) 
Sec. 30-5.3. - Special use. 
(a)  Purpose. The development and execution of a Zoning Ordinance is based upon the division of the Village into districts. Within each district the use of land and buildings, and the bulk and location of structures in relation to the land, are substantially uniform. It is recognized, however, that there are certain uses which, because of their unique characteristics, cannot be properly classified in any particular district or districts without consideration, in each case, of the impact of those uses upon neighboring land and the need for the particular use at the particular location. Such uses may be either public or private, and the imposition of individualized conditions may be necessary to ensure that the use is appropriate at a particular location. 
(b)  Initiation. A special use may be initiated by the owner of any property in the Village affected by the proposed special use or other person expressly authorized in writing by the owner, or any unit of government that is not the property owner of a lot but proposes to acquire the lot by purchase, gift or condemnation. 
(c)  Authority and Execution. The Village Board, after receiving a recommendation from the Zoning Board of Appeals, will take formal action on special use requests. 
(d)  Procedure. 
(1)  Application. 
(A)  All applications are filed with the Zoning Administrator in accordance with the requirements of Section 30-4.2 (Application). Once it is determined that the application is complete, the Zoning Administrator will schedule the application for consideration by the Zoning Board of Appeals. 
(B)  The application must include a written statement by the applicant and adequate evidence showing that the proposed special use will conform to the standards set forth in this Ordinance for special uses. The application must be accompanied by such plans or data, or both, as specified by the rules of the Zoning Board of Appeals. If the proposed special use involves the construction, demolition or external modification of any structure, then the application must be accompanied by a site plan showing the proposed work and other site features relevant to review of the proposed use. 
(C)  Where deemed necessary by the Zoning Board of Appeals, the applicant may also be required to submit a traffic generation and traffic impact analysis of the proposed special use. 
(D)  The applicant for special use approval must include a request for all needed variations in the special use. Such request will be processed by the Zoning Board of Appeals in the same manner set forth in this Article for variation applications. The notice required for a variation will be incorporated into the notices required for the special use. The public hearing required for a variation application will be combined with the special use application public hearing, and the recommendations of the Zoning Board of Appeals regarding such a variation application made a part of that report to the Village Board regarding the special use. 
(2)  Review by the Zoning Administrator. After determining that the application is complete, the Zoning Administrator will review the application. Prior to the scheduled public hearing, the Zoning Administrator will forward to the Zoning Board of Appeals copies of the complete application and a written report summarizing the facts of the case, including all relevant documents and incorporating or summarizing any oral and written comments received by the Zoning Board of Appeals before the public hearing. The Zoning Administrator will also forward a copy of the written report to the applicant prior to the scheduled public hearing. 
(3)  Action by the Zoning Board of Appeals. 
(A)  The Zoning Board of Appeals shall conduct a public hearing on a proposed special use in accordance with Section 30-4.4 (Public Hearing) within a reasonable time from receipt of a complete application. Notice for the public hearing must be in accordance with Section 30-4.3 (Notice). If, in the Zoning Board of Appeals' judgment, the application does not contain sufficient information to enable the Board to properly discharge its responsibilities, the Board may request additional information from the applicant. 
(B)  The Zoning Board of Appeals will evaluate the application and make findings, based upon the evidence presented at the public hearing, pursuant to each of the applicable standards in Section 30-5.3.(e) below. 
(C)  The Zoning Board of Appeals must vote to recommend either approval, approval with conditions or denial of the special use, and forward such recommendation to the Village Board. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall not recommend approval of any special use unless there is a concurring vote of a majority of all members present, with a minimum of four (4) concurring votes required. The recommendation of the Zoning Board of Appeals may specify such conditions and restrictions upon the proposed special use as may be necessary to satisfy the approval standards and to reduce or minimize any injurious effect of such use upon other property in the neighborhood. 
(4)  Action by the Village Board. The Village Board must consider the special use within a reasonable time of receipt of the Zoning Board of Appeals recommendation. The Village Board may take action in the form of approval, approval with conditions, or denial on special use applications. The Village Board may approve or deny positive recommendations of the Zoning Board of Appeals by majority vote of those members present and voting. However, if the application fails to receive the positive recommendation of the Zoning Board of Appeals, then the favorable vote of five (5) members of the Village Board shall be required to approve the special use. Where an application is filed by a Unit of Local Government, the Village Board may approve the special use by only a majority vote if the application fails to receive the positive recommendation of the Zoning Board of Appeals. In granting any special use, the Village Board may require such evidence and guarantees, as it may deem necessary, to assure compliance with the stipulated conditions. The Village Board may also refer the application back to the Zoning Board of Appeals for further consideration. 
(5)  Conditions on Special Uses. The Zoning Board of Appeals may recommend, and the Village Board may impose, such conditions and restrictions upon the establishment, location, construction, maintenance and operation of the special use as may be deemed necessary for the protection of the public interest. 
(e)  Approval Standards for Special Uses. 
(1)  No special use may be recommended for approval by the Zoning Board of Appeals and approved by the Village Board unless findings have been made, based upon the evidence presented at the public hearing, to support each of the following conclusions: 
(A)  The proposed use in the specific location will be consistent with the goals and policies of the Comprehensive Plan. 
(B)  The establishment, maintenance, or operation of the proposed use in the specific location will not be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety and welfare. 
(C)  The proposed use in the specific location will not be injurious to the use or enjoyment of other property in the neighborhood for the purposes permitted in the district. 
(D)  The establishment of the special use in the specific location will not impede the normal and orderly development and improvement of surrounding properties for uses permitted in the zoning district. 
(E)  The proposed use in the specific location will not substantially diminish property values in the neighborhood. 
(F)  Adequate utilities, road access, drainage, and other necessary facilities already exist or will be provided to serve the proposed use. 
(G)  Adequate measures already exist or will be taken to provide ingress and egress to the proposed use in a manner that minimizes traffic congestion in the public streets. 
(H)  The proposed use in the specific location will be consistent with the community character of the neighborhood of the parcel proposed for the special use. 
(I)  Development of the proposed use will not substantially adversely affect a known archaeological, historical, or cultural resource located on or off the proposed site. 
(J)  The applicant has made adequate legal provision to guarantee the provision and development of any buffers, landscaping, public open space and other improvements associated with the proposed use. 
(K)  The proposed use will meet any and all additional use standards specified in Article 30-12 of the Zoning Ordinance for such a use. 
(2)  Section 30-5.16 (Special Rules Applicable to Units of Local Government) contains special rules and standards that apply to uses owned or operated by Units of Local Government. 
(f)  No Presumption of Approval. The listing of a use as a special use within a zoning district does not constitute an assurance or presumption that such special use will be approved. Rather, each proposed special use must be evaluated on an individual basis, in relation to all applicable standards of this Ordinance. Such evaluation will determine whether approval of the special use is appropriate at the particular location and in the particular manner proposed. 
(g)  Revocation of Special Use. 
(1)  Any discontinuation of an approved special use for a period of one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days constitutes abandonment and results in the approval of the special use being rescinded. This does not apply to a special use that is seasonal in nature, such as an outdoor tennis court or swimming pool, so long as the use continues to operate each season. 
(2)  If the recipient does not file an application for a building permit or certificate of occupancy for the proposed use within six (6) months after the date of the ordinance approving the special use, the approval of the special use is rescinded. 
(h)  Extension of Special Use. An applicant who has obtained special use approval may request an extension of this time period by filing a letter with the Zoning Administrator stating the reasons for the request. The Zoning Administrator may approve an extension of up to one (1) year when shown good cause by the applicant. Any subsequent extension requests or requests for an extension of more than one (1) year from the date of approval require Village Board approval. 
(i)  Expansion and Ownership. 
(1)  Additions and expansion of an existing special use are permitted only in accordance with the same procedures and standards established under this section for new special uses. However, minor changes in the site plan or design details of an approved special use that are consistent with the standards and conditions applying to the special use, such as a small shift in the location of a structure, the realignment of parking spaces and aisles, the relocation of a driveway or a change in the selection of building materials, may be approved by the Zoning Administrator without obtaining separate approval by the Village Board. Minor changes may be approved by the issuance of a letter of interpretation where the Zoning Administrator states that the proposed changes comply with all standards set forth in this Ordinance and all conditions attached to approval of the special use by the Village Board. The Zoning Administrator, at his/her discretion, may forward any request for such changes to the Zoning Board of Appeals and the Village Board for full review and approval in accordance with the requirements of this section, as if the request were for approval of a new special use. No minor change approved by the Zoning Administrator may violate any condition imposed by the Village Board. 
(2)  Unless the Village Board expressly provides in the ordinance granting a special use that the special use attaches to the property itself and runs with the land, then each approved special use or a permitted use made a special use on the effective date of this Ordinance, shall run only so long as the use exists and is operated on the subject property and is not abandoned. 
(3)  Provided the special use is not abandoned or discontinued, any new owner or occupant may continue the operation of the special use, but only in accordance with the plans and conditions previously approved by the Village Board and set forth in the ordinance creating the special use, or in the case of a special use created on the effective date of this Ordinance, only in the manner in which such use existed on that effective date. Any failure to conform to such plans and conditions rescinds the approval of the special use. 
(Code 1993, § 20-5.3) 
Sec. 30-5.4. - Variation. 
(a)  Purpose. The variation process is to provide a narrowly circumscribed means by which relief may be granted from unforeseen applications of this Ordinance that create practical difficulties or particular hardships. Zoning approval of a variation is required before submission of a subdivision plat. 
(b)  Initiation. A variation may be initiated by the owner of any property in the Village affected by the proposed variation or other person expressly authorized in writing by the owner, or any unit of government that is not the property owner of a lot but proposes to acquire the lot by purchase, gift or condemnation. 
(c)  Authority. Variations are reviewed by the Zoning Board of Appeals except for variations from Sections 30-10.7 and 30-10.9 and Articles 30-15 and 30-16 of this Ordinance, which are reviewed by the Appearance Review Commission. The procedures outlined below for review of variations by the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be followed by the Appearance Review Commission when reviewing request for relief from Sections 30-10.7 and 30-10.9 and Articles 30-15 and 30-16. Certain types of variations are considered administrative zoning review approvals and are reviewed according to Section 30-5.6 (Administrative Zoning Review). 
(d)  Execution. The Village Board, after a public hearing and recommendation from the board or commission, will take formal action on requests for variations. 
(e)  Procedure. 
(1)  Application. 
(A)  All applications are filed with the Zoning Administrator in accordance with the requirements of Section 30-4.2 (Application). Once it is determined that the application is complete, the Zoning Administrator will schedule the application for consideration by the board or commission. 
(B)  The application must include a written statement by the applicant and adequate evidence showing that the proposed variation will conform to the standards set forth in this Ordinance for variations. The application must be accompanied by such plans or data, or both, as specified by the rules of the board or commission. If the proposed variation includes the construction, demolition or external modification of any structure, then the application must be accompanied by a site plan showing the proposed work and other site features relevant to review of the proposed work. 
(2)  Review by the Zoning Administrator. After determining that the application is complete, the Zoning Administrator will review the application. Prior to the scheduled public hearing, the Zoning Administrator will forward to the board or commission copies of the complete application and a written report summarizing the facts of the case, including all relevant documents and incorporating or summarizing any oral and written comments received by the board or commission before the public hearing. The Zoning Administrator will also forward a copy of the written report to the applicant prior to the scheduled public hearing. 
(3)  Action by the Zoning Board of Appeals or Appearance Review Commission. 
(A)  The board or commission shall conduct a public hearing on the variation application in accordance with Section 30-4.4 (Public Hearing) within a reasonable time from receipt of a complete application. Notice for the public hearing must be in accordance with Section 30-4.3 (Notice). If, in the board or commission's judgment, the application does not contain sufficient information to enable the board or commission to properly discharge its responsibilities, the board or commission may request additional information from the applicant. 
(B)  The board or commission will evaluate the application and make findings, based upon the evidence presented at the public hearing, pursuant to each of the applicable standards in Section 30-5.4.(e) below. 
(C)  The board or commission must vote to recommend either approval, approval with conditions or denial of the application, and forward such recommendation to the Village Board. The board or commission shall not recommend the granting of any variation unless there is a concurring vote of a majority of all members present, with a minimum of four (4) concurring votes required. The recommendation of the board or commission may specify such conditions and restrictions upon the premises benefited by a variation as may be necessary to satisfy the approval standards and to reduce or minimize any injurious effect of such use upon other property in the neighborhood. 
(4)  Action by the Village Board. The Village Board must consider the variation within a reasonable time of receipt of the board or commission recommendation. The Village Board may take action in the form of approval, approval with conditions, or denial on variation applications. The Village Board may approve or deny positive recommendations of the board or commission by majority vote of those members present and voting. However, if the application fails to receive the positive recommendation of the board or commission, then the favorable vote of five (5) members of the Village Board shall be required to approve the variation. Where an application is filed by a Unit of Local Government, the Village Board may approve the variation by only a majority vote if the application fails to receive the positive recommendation of the board or commission. In granting any variation, the Village Board may require such evidence and guarantees, as it may deem necessary, to assure compliance with the stipulated conditions. The Village Board may also refer the application back to the board or commission for further consideration. 
(5)  Conditions and Restrictions on Variations. The board or commission may recommend, and the Village Board may impose, such conditions and restrictions upon the location, construction, design and use of the property benefited by a variation as may be necessary or appropriate to protect the public interest, adjacent property and property values. Failure to maintain such conditions or restrictions as may be imposed constitute grounds for revocation of the variation. The terms of relief granted, including any conditions or restrictions, must be specifically set forth in the recommendation and approval. In addition, a variation less than that requested may be granted by the Village Board when the record supports the applicant's right to some relief, but not to the entire relief requested. 
(f)  Approval Standards for Variations. 
(1)  No variation may be recommended for approval by the board or commission and approved by the Village Board unless findings have been made, based upon the evidence presented at the public hearing, to support each of the following conclusions: 
(A)  The particular physical conditions, shape or surroundings of the property would impose upon the owner a practical difficulty or particular hardship, as opposed to a mere inconvenience, if the requirements of this Ordinance were strictly enforced. 
(B)  The plight of the property owner was not created by the owner and is due to unique circumstances. 
(C)  The difficulty or hardship is peculiar to the property in question and is not generally shared by other properties classified in the same zoning district and/or used for the same purposes. This includes the need to accommodate desirable existing site landscape or reflect unique conditions created by the age and character of the property. 
(D)  The difficulty or hardship resulting from the application of this Ordinance would prevent the owner from making a reasonable use of the property. However, the fact the property could be utilized more profitably with the variation than without the variation is not considered as grounds for granting the variation. 
(E)  The proposed variation will not impair an adequate supply of light and air to adjacent property or otherwise injure other property or its use, will not substantially increase the danger of fire or otherwise endanger the public health, safety and welfare, and will not substantially diminish or impair property values within the neighborhood. 
(F)  The variation, if granted, will not alter the essential character of the neighborhood and will be consistent with the goals, objectives and policies set forth in the Comprehensive Plan. 
(G)  With respect to building materials, unforeseen advances in technology, appearance or quality render a prohibited material to be suitable and in keeping with the appearance goals of this code when used in the form presented by the applicant. 
(H)  When a variation is requested for a fence, the following approval standards apply, in addition to those of the variation. However, no one (1) of these factors shall be conclusive in determining whether a practical difficulty or particular hardship exists. 
(i)  The type of street to which the fence will be oriented (e.g., arterial, collector, or residential), and the volume and speed of traffic regularly using such street. 
(ii)  The extent to which fences of the same type sought by the applicant already exist in the immediate area and have been granted variations. 
(iii)  The orientation and proximity of neighboring dwelling units and other structures to the proposed fence. 
(iv)  The extent to which the proposed fence will utilize landscaping to minimize the visual impact of the fence. 
(v)  The size of the zoning lots in the neighborhood, such that the larger the lots and the more open space, the less impact the fence can be expected to have on neighboring properties. 
(vi)  The extent to which a fence of the same type sought by the applicant is for the replacement or repair of a previously or presently existing fence or portion thereof. 
(vii)  The length of time that a non-conforming fence has existed on the property prior to the application. 
(viii)  Whether a fence permit was issued at the time the fence was constructed and if the fence being replaced was required to obtain such a permit. 
(2)  Section 30-5.16 (Special Rules Applicable to Units of Local Government) contains special rules and standards that apply to uses owned or operated by Units of Local Government. 
(g)  Revocation of Variation. The approval of a variation by the Village Board is void if the recipient does not file an application for a building permit, certificate of occupancy or fence permit within six (6) months after the date of the ordinance granting the variation. 
(h)  Extension of Variation. An applicant who has obtained approval of a variation may request an extension of this time period by filing a letter with the Zoning Administrator stating the reasons for the request. The Zoning Administrator may approve an extension of up to one (1) year when shown good cause by the applicant. Any subsequent extension requests or requests for an extension of more than one (1) year from the date of approval require Village Board approval. 
(Code 1993, § 20-5.4; Ord. No. 2014-O-65, 11-11-2014) 
Sec. 30-5.5. - Sign variation. 
(a)  Purpose. The sign variation process is to provide a narrowly circumscribed means by which relief may be granted from applications of this Ordinance that create practical difficulties or particular hardships. 
(b)  Authority and Execution. The Village Board, after a public hearing and recommendation from the Appearance Review Commission, will take formal action on requests for sign variations. 
(c)  Procedure. 
(1)  Application and Review by the Zoning Administrator. All applications are filed with the Zoning Administrator in accordance with the requirements of Section 30-4.2 (Application). Once it is determined that the application is complete, the Zoning Administrator will schedule the application for consideration by the Appearance Review Commission. 
(2)  Action by the Appearance Review Commission. 
(A)  The Appearance Review Commission must consider the sign variation application within a reasonable time of receipt of a complete application. The Appearance Review Commission must then conduct a public hearing on a variation application in accordance with Section 30-4.4 (Public Hearing). If, in the Appearance Review Commission's judgment, the sign variation application does not contain sufficient information to enable the Commission to properly discharge its responsibilities, the Appearance Review Commission may request additional information from the applicant. 
(B)  The Appearance Review Commission will evaluate the application, based upon the evidence presented at the public hearing, pursuant to each of the applicable standards in Section 30-5.5.(d) below. 
(C)  The Appearance Review Commission shall not recommend the granting of any sign variation unless there is a concurring vote of a majority of all members, with a minimum of four (4) concurring votes required. 
The Appearance Review Commission must forward its recommendation to the Village Board within a reasonable time. The recommendation of the Appearance Review Commission may specify such conditions to satisfy the approval standards and to reduce or minimize any injurious effect of such sign variation upon other property in the neighborhood. 
(3)  Action by the Village Board. The Village Board must consider the sign variation within a reasonable time of receipt of the Appearance Review Commission's recommendation. The Village Board may take action in the form of approval, approval with conditions or denial. 
(d)  Approval Standards for Variations. No sign variation may be recommended for approval by the Appearance Review Commission and approved by the Village Board unless findings have been made, where the evidence presented in the particular case shows that: 
(1)  Unusual Circumstances. A variation will serve to relieve the petitioner from an unusual difficulty due to the location, topography, or circumstances on the petitioner's property, or a peculiar attribute existing on the neighboring property which directly affects the petitioner's property. 
(2)  Character and Appearance. A variation will be consistent in design and scale with other signs nearby, and will not alter the essential character of the commercial streetscape in the vicinity of the subject property. 
(3)  Not Self-Created. The plight of the property owner was not created by the owner and denial of the variation will impose undue hardship or difficulty on the owner's ability to conduct business on the subject property. 
(4)  Health, Safety, and Welfare. A variation will not create a traffic or safety hazard and will not impair the utility of neighboring properties' signage. 
(5)  Purpose of Ordinance. A variation is in harmony with the purpose and intent of the Sign Ordinance. 
(Code 1993, § 20-5.5) 
Sec. 30-5.6. - Administrative zoning review. 
(a)  Purpose. The administrative zoning review process is intended to provide more expedient relief for a narrow group of variations listed in Paragraph (d) below. 
(b)  Initiation. An administrative zoning review may be initiated by the owner of any property in the Village affected by the proposed variation or other person expressly authorized in writing by the owner. 
(c)  Authority and Execution. The Zoning Administrator or his designee, is authorized to take formal action on requests for administrative zoning review approvals. 
(d)  Qualifying Administrative Zoning Review Variations. The administrative zoning review process applies only to single-family detached dwellings and single-family detached dwelling accessory structures and only in the following instances, listed below. Any project that requires more than one (1) request for a variation where any one (1) of those variations is not listed below or requires a special use do not qualify for the administrative zoning review process. In such case, the project is subject to the variation or special use process, as described in this section. 
(1)  For an addition into a required front yard or side yard adjoining a street that is in line with an existing non-conforming wall of a detached dwelling, or provides a greater setback that still requires relief, where the existing setback is within twenty percent (20%) of the minimum setback required. 
(2)  For an addition into a required side yard or rear yard that is in line with an existing non-conforming wall of a detached dwelling, or provides a greater setback that still requires relief, where the existing setback is within forty percent (40%) of the minimum setback required. 
(3)  For an addition into a required side yard or combined side yard that is directly above and in line with an existing first floor load-bearing wall of a detached dwelling on a lot less than fifty (50) feet in width, where the addition meets the required side yard percentages when applied to the actual lot width. 
(4)  For a dormer addition into a required front yard, side yard adjoining a street, interior side yard or rear yard that is one and one-half (1.5) feet or less into the required setback. 
(5)  For a replacement detached garage of the same square footage and location, where the detached garage does not exceed six hundred (600) square feet in area. 
(6)  For a detached garage that does not conform to the side yard requirements because location within a utility easement has been denied in whole or in part. 
(7)  For a structural modification to a non-conforming detached garage, where the modification is to facilitate the removal of a curb cut by altering the garage from a street-loading entrance to an alley-loading entrance. 
(8)  For new or expanded windows and/or doors on a legal non-conforming wall of a detached dwelling. 
(9)  For a modification to roof pitch on a legal non-conforming wall of a detached dwelling. 
(10)  For an increase in front yard impervious surface coverage up to twenty percent (20%) in excess of the maximum permitted, where the proposed additional coverage is equal to or less than the area in the required front yard that is covered by the principal structure. 
(11)  For front yard impervious surface coverage on an irregularly-shaped lot to permit a driveway eight (8) feet in width. 
(12)  For new permitted encroachments on a legal non-conforming wall of a detached dwelling, where the projection is less than or equal to the size of the allowable encroachment. 
(13)  For new or replacement front porches and front decks up to six (6) feet in depth and new or replacement front porch and front deck steps up to three (3) feet in depth on a legal non-conforming wall of a detached dwelling. 
(14)  For the location of an accessibility ramp, where the ramp encroaches more than three (3) feet into a required side yard or five (5) feet into a required front yard, side yard adjoining a street or rear yard. 
(15)  For the location of heating and air conditioning equipment. In order to qualify for administrative zoning review of heating and air conditioning equipment, the unit(s) must be a minimum of five (5) feet from the side and rear lot lines. A proposed setback of less than five (5) feet requires that a variation must be sought in accordance with this Zoning Ordinance. 
(16)  For the location of permanently installed stand-by generators that meet the decibel requirements and are located within a front yard, side yard adjoining a street or rear yard of a double-frontage lot or are a minimum of five (5) feet from the side and rear lot lines. In order to qualify for administrative zoning review of a generator setback, the unit may not exceed seventy (70) decibels at the receiving lot line under normal load when located at the proposed setback. If the unit does exceed this decibel limit at the proposed setback, a variation must be sought in accordance with this Zoning Ordinance. 
(17)  For the installation of a swimming pool, spa or hot tub that is not within an enclosed building. 
(e)  Procedure. 
(1)  Application. 
(A)  All applications are filed with the Zoning Administrator in accordance with the requirements of Section 30-4.2 (Application) and any notice requirements of Section 30-4.3 (Notice). Once it is determined that the application is complete, the Zoning Administrator or his designee will consider the application. 
(B)  The application must include a written statement by the applicant and adequate evidence showing that the proposed variation will conform to the standards set forth in this Section. The application must be accompanied by such plans or data, or both, required by the Zoning Administrator to make a decision. 
(2)  Review by the Zoning Administrator. 
(A)  The Zoning Administrator will review and evaluate the complete application, pursuant to the standards in Paragraph (f) (Approval Standards) below. The Zoning Administrator must render a written decision within a reasonable time to approve, approve with conditions or deny the application. 
(B)  If the request is approved by the Zoning Administrator, he/she will send a letter by first class mail to the applicant and to all properties that adjoin and abut the subject property or are across the street or alley from the subject property notifying them of the Zoning Administrator's decision. Recipients of the notice have fifteen (15) days from the date of that notice to file an objection in writing with the Zoning Administrator. 
(C)  If no objection is received after fifteen (15) days, the applicant may file for a building permit. If an objection is received, the Zoning Administrator will notify the applicant that due to the objection, the request is automatically denied, and, that in order to seek approval of the request, the applicant must submit a new application and proceed with the variation process of this Ordinance. 
(D)  If the Zoning Administrator denies the request, in whole or in part, he/she will issue written notice of its decision by first class mail to the applicant advising that in order to seek approval of the request, the applicant must submit a new application and proceed with the variation process of this Ordinance. 
(E)  In the case of a swimming pool, spa or hot tub request, where the request is denied by objection or denied by the Zoning Administrator, in order to seek approval of the request, the applicant must submit a new application and proceed with the special use process of this Ordinance. 
(f)  Approval Standards. The following approval standards apply to administrative zoning reviews. Administrative zoning review approvals may only be granted when the applicable standards have been met. 
(1)  Additions, Detached Garages, New or Expanded Openings, Roof Pitch, Impervious Coverage, Permitted Encroachments, Front Porches and Decks. 
(A)  The particular physical conditions, shape or surroundings of the property would impose upon the owner a practical difficulty or particular hardship, as opposed to a mere inconvenience, if the requirements of the Ordinance were strictly enforced. 
(B)  The plight of the property owner was not created by the owner. 
(C)  The difficulty or hardship resulting from the application of this Ordinance would prevent the owner from making a reasonable use of the property. However, the fact the property could be utilized more profitably with the variation than without the variation is not considered as grounds for granting the variation. 
(D)  The proposed variation will not impair an adequate supply of light and air to adjacent property or otherwise injure other property or its use, will not substantially increase the danger of fire or otherwise endanger the public health, safety and welfare, and will not substantially diminish or impair property values within the neighborhood. 
(E)  The variation, if granted, will not alter the essential character of the neighborhood and will be consistent with the goals, objectives and policies set forth in the Comprehensive Plan. 
(2)  Accessibility Ramp. 
(A)  Through certification by a licensed physician that the ramp is medically necessary due to the occupant's disability. 
(B)  The ramp will not impair access to or use of adjacent property, or otherwise injure other property or its use, will not substantially increase the danger of fire or otherwise endanger the public health, safety or welfare. 
(C)  There is no other practical and conforming location for the ramp. 
(D)  Any ramp installed pursuant to this section must be removed by the owner at such time as the ramp is no longer needed to serve an occupant of the dwelling, and any permit issued to allow the installation of such a ramp pursuant to this section shall inform the recipient of this obligation to remove the ramp. 
(3)  Heating and Air Conditioning Equipment and Permanently Installed Stand-by Generators. 
(A)  The plight of the property owner was not created by the owner. 
(B)  The alternative locations for the equipment would impose upon the owner a practical difficulty as opposed to a mere inconvenience, if the requirements of this Ordinance were strictly enforced. 
(C)  The proposed variation shall have a minimum impact on adjoining private properties and land uses. This standard is deemed to be met when the conditions of the adjoining private property are such that the noise and visual impacts will not impose unreasonable impact on said property. 
(D)  The variation, if granted, will not alter the essential character of the neighborhood and will be consistent with the goals, objectives and policies set forth in the Comprehensive Plan. 
(E)  The equipment will be screened to its full height from the view of the street and abutting properties by a solid fence and/or evergreen shrubbery. 
(4)  Swimming Pools, Spas and Hot Tubs. See Section 30-13.4.(u). 
(Code 1993, § 20-5.6; Ord. No. 2017-O-59, 10-10-2017) 
Sec. 30-5.7. - Appearance review certificate. 
(a)  Purpose. The appearance review process is intended to: 
(1)  Preserve the stability and taxable value of land and improvements in the Village; 
(2)  Encourage harmony and quality workmanship in the design of buildings, awnings, signs, fences, parking lots, and other structures; 
(3)  Encourage design which respects the attributes of the site, its buildings and structures, and surrounding sites, building and structures; 
(4)  Maintain and enhance the character of the Village; 
(5)  Encourage the maintenance of property and improvements; and 
(6)  Protect the public health, safety, and welfare. 
(b)  Applicability. 
(1)  An appearance review certificate is required prior to the issuance of any permit or certificate of occupancy for a structure, fence, parking lot or sign or general landscaping, which involves any of the following: 
(A)  New construction. 
(B)  Exterior remodeling. 
(C)  The construction or renovation of off street parking areas. 
(D)  The installation of or modifications to lighting and landscaping. 
(E)  The erection or alteration of any sign requiring a permit. 
(F)  The erection or alteration of any fence. 
(G)  The construction or remodeling of wireless telecommunications equipment. 
(2)  An appearance review certificate is not required for the following: 
(A)  Single-family dwellings. 
(B)  Existing two-unit dwellings. 
(C)  Individual townhouse units proposing to install or replace fences, patios, walkways or skylights. 
(D)  Places of worship. 
(E)  Properties owned by Units of Local Government. 
(F)  Utilities. 
(c)  Procedure. 
(1)  Action by the Zoning Administrator. All applications are filed with the Zoning Administrator in accordance with the requirements of Section 30-4.2 (Application). Once it is determined that the application is complete, the Zoning Administrator will schedule the application for consideration by the Appearance Review Commission. 
(2)  Action by the Appearance Review Commission. The Appearance Review Commission must hold a public meeting on the application within a reasonable time of receipt of a complete application. Notice for the public meeting must be in accordance with Section 30-4.3 (Notice). The Appearance Review Commission will evaluate the application pursuant to each of the applicable standards in Paragraph (d) below. 
(d)  Approval Standards. No appearance review certificate will be granted unless the Appearance Review Commissions makes specific written findings based on the standards imposed by this section. These standards are: 
(1)  All sides of a structure receive design consideration. 
(2)  If the side or rear of the structure faces a street, a residential use, or a property located in a residential zoning district, the exterior materials used on the side or rear are comparable in character and quality to the exterior materials used on the facade of the structure. 
(3)  Materials used in the construction and design of the structure are of durable quality. 
(4)  Mechanical equipment is located or screened so as not to be visible from surrounding streets and properties. 
(5)  The scale and placement of the structure on the site is appropriate to the proportion of the site covered by the structure and the location of the structure in relation to its lot lines. 
(6)  Building design and placement must take into consideration natural grade conditions, existing vegetation, and other natural features. 
(7)  Excessive similarity or dissimilarity in design in relation to surrounding or adjoining structures is discouraged, including but not limited to building height, exterior materials, building mass, roof line, and architectural features. 
(8)  Design takes into consideration the relationship to the street and the pedestrian environment. 
(9)  Parking, storage, and refuse areas are located and screened so as not to negatively affect neighboring properties. 
(10)  Landscape is designed to maintain existing mature trees and shrubs to the maximum extent possible. 
(11)  Landscape provides an aesthetically pleasing design and, where applicable, provides for the screening of parking, storage, refuse, and utility areas from the street and adjacent residential properties. 
(12)  Selected plant materials shall be suitable to Wilmette's climate and to their location on the site. The use of invasive species is prohibited. Invasive species shall be those included in the "Chicago Botanic Garden" list of "Invasive Plants in the Chicago Region." 
(13)  Parking areas are designed to achieve efficient traffic flow and minimize dangerous traffic movements. 
(14)  Signs are of the appropriate design, color and placement to the structure, site and adjoining properties, in terms of materials, height, setback from the street, and proportion. 
(15)  Accessory structures, exterior lighting and fences, complement the overall structure and site design, in terms of materials, size, and architectural character. 
(16)  For new two-unit dwellings, review is limited to whether or not the proposed structure maintains the external appearance of a single-family dwelling. 
(e)  Appeals. An applicant may appeal the Appearance Review Commission's decision to the Village Board within thirty (30) days of the Commission's decision. Appeals shall be considered by the Village Board at a regular meeting. A decision of the Appearance Review Commission may be upheld or overturned by a simple majority vote of those members of the Village Board present and voting. 
(f)  Continuing Maintenance. 
(1)  At no time shall modifications be made to a design for which an Appearance Review Certificate has been approved without the approval of the Appearance Review Commission. 
(2)  The owner and any lessee of the property that has received an Appearance Review Certificate are jointly and severally responsible for the maintenance of all buildings, signs, fences, parking lots, structures and fixtures, and landscape areas in accordance with the terms of the certificate. 
(Code 1993, § 20-5.7) 
Sec. 30-5.8. - Zoning interpretation. 
(a)  Purpose. The interpretation authority is intended to recognize that the provisions of this Ordinance, though detailed and extensive, cannot, as a practical matter, address every specific zoning issue. This interpretation authority is not intended to add or change the essential content of the Ordinance. A letter of interpretation is intended to serve as a clarification or interpretation of one (1) or more standards or requirements of this Ordinance as it relates to a particular type of development on a particular property. 
(b)  Application. All applications for interpretations are filed with the Zoning Administrator in accordance with the requirements in Section 30-4.2 (Application). All interpretation requests must be for the purpose of furthering some actual development within the Village. No request for a letter of interpretation will be accepted when it does not concern an actual proposal for development. The person requesting a letter of interpretation must, at the request of the Zoning Administrator, discuss the request with the Zoning Administrator before he/she is required to issue a letter of interpretation. The request must set forth the facts and circumstances that are the basis for the request for an interpretation, including a description of the proposed development, and the precise interpretation claimed by the requestor to be correct. 
(c)  Initiation. A letter of interpretation may be requested in the following circumstances: 
(1)  At the written request of a developer proposing to take any action that would require the issuance of a permit, certificate or variation under this Ordinance. 
(2)  At the written request of any person opposing an action by a developer when the Zoning Administrator is not requiring the developer to obtain a permit, certificate or variation that the opponent believes is necessary. 
(3)  At the written request of any person opposing the issuance of a permit, certificate or variation that has been requested under this Ordinance. 
Such a request shall set forth the facts and circumstances that are the basis for the request for an interpretation, including a description of the proposed development, and the precise interpretation claimed by the requestor to be correct. No request for a letter of interpretation shall be entertained when it does not concern an actual proposal for development. The person requesting a letter of interpretation shall, at the request of the Zoning Administrator, discuss the request with him/her before the Zoning Administrator is required to issue a letter of interpretation. 
(d)  Authority and Execution. 
(1)  The Zoning Administrator will review and make final decisions on requests for interpretations specify the facts, reasons, analysis and standards upon which the interpretation is based. 
(2)  No letter of interpretation issued prior to the issuance of a permit, certificate or variation under this Ordinance authorizes the establishment of a use or the carrying out of any development, but only provides guidance in the preparation, filing or processing of applications for any permits or approvals required by this Ordinance for that use or development. 
(e)  Procedure. 
(1)  The Zoning Administrator must review a request for an interpretation and render the interpretation within a reasonable time. The Zoning Administrator has the ability to request additional information prior to rendering an interpretation. 
(2)  When the Zoning Administrator determines that the public interest requires notice of the matter subject to interpretation, the Zoning Administrator will provide notice of the issuance of the interpretation to the owners and occupants of all lots that are within two hundred fifty (250) feet of the boundaries of the subject property, including streets and alleys, within seven (7) days of issuing a letter of interpretation. The notice must be delivered by first-class mail, contain the address or location of the subject property and a copy of the letter of interpretation, and state that the interpretation may be appealed to the Zoning Board of Appeals. 
(f)  Appeals. An applicant may appeal the Zoning Administrator's decision to the Zoning Board of Appeals within thirty (30) days of the issuance of the letter of interpretation or, if notice was mailed, within thirty (30) days of the date the notice was mailed. 
(Code 1993, § 20-5.8) 
Sec. 30-5.9. - Planned unit development. 
    Where permitted within district regulations, planned unit developments are considered special uses, and subject to the process and requirements of both special uses (Section 30-5.3 (Special Uses)) and planned unit developments. See Article 30-6 (Planned Unit Developments) of this Ordinance for planned unit development process and requirements. 
(Code 1993, § 20-5.9) 
Sec. 30-5.10. - Site plan review. 
(a)  With the exception of single-family detached dwellings and structures accessory to single-family dwellings, every application for a construction permit, including building, electrical, and plumbing, for any new construction, exterior modification, building addition or parking lot construction or modification is subject to site plan review and approval in accordance with Section 8-325of the Village Code. 
(b)  In the VC District, site plan review is required for all development. Findings of the required site plan review may be appealed to the Appearance Review Commission in accordance with Section 30-5.14. 
(Code 1993, § 20-5.10) 
Sec. 30-5.11. - Building permit. 
(a)  Where Chapter 8 of the Village Code requires a building permit, no development is permitted until and unless the Zoning Administrator has issued a building permit for that development in accordance and compliance with the terms of this Zoning Ordinance and Chapter 8 of the Village Code. 
(b)  Upon receiving a building permit which is subject to appeal under Section 30-5.15 of this code, the applicant must immediately post a notice on the subject property, provided by the Zoning Administrator, indicating that a permit has been issued by the Village. The notice must be posted in a prominent place on the subject property, in a manner clearly visible from the public way, for thirty (30) days from the date of issuance. The notice shall include the following statement: "ISSUANCE OF THIS PERMIT IS SUBJECT TO APPEAL BY ANY AGGRIEVED PARTY TO THE ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS FOR A PERIOD OF 30 DAYS AFTER THE DATE OF ISSUANCE. ANY WORK PERFORMED PURSUANT TO THIS PERMIT DURING THIS 30 DAYS IS ENTIRELY AT THE RISK OF THE APPLICANT." 
(Code 1993, § 20-5.11; Ord. No. 2015-O-13, 4-14-2015) 
Sec. 30-5.12. - Certificate of occupancy. 
(a)  Applicability. A certificate of occupancy issued by the Zoning Administrator is required: 
(1)  For occupancy of a new structure. 
(2)  For the occupancy or use of an addition or structural alteration to an existing structure, other than a single-family detached dwelling. 
(3)  For a new non-residential use or a change in the occupancy of an existing non-residential use. 
(b)  Authority and Execution. The Zoning Administrator is responsible for determining compliance with this Ordinance and all other applicable ordinances, prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy. The certificate of occupancy must be approved or denied within fourteen (14) days of application for the certificate. A record of all certificates of occupancy are kept on file in the Village. 
(c)  Procedure. 
(1)  A certificate of occupancy may be issued only after the Zoning Administrator has inspected the premises and finds that the premises comply with all standards of this Ordinance and conforms to the plans and specifications approved as part of the building permit. 
(2)  The Zoning Administrator may issue a temporary or conditional certificate of occupancy to allow the structure or lot to be occupied for the proposed use, provided that such certificate becomes final and effective only upon full compliance with the requirements of this Ordinance. 
(d)  Posting. Every certificate of occupancy must include the date, the use or occupancy of the land or structure involved, that the use or occupancy complies with this Ordinance, and must be signed by the Zoning Administrator. Every certificate of occupancy required by a change in use or occupancy for a non-residential use must be permanently posted in a prominent place on the premises at all times. 
(Code 1993, § 20-5.12) 
Sec. 30-5.13. - Sign permit. 
(a)  Applicability. No sign, except those identified as exempt in Article 30-16 (Signs), may be erected, constructed, altered or relocated without first obtaining a sign permit. 
(b)  Authority. The Zoning Administrator is responsible for determining compliance with this Ordinance and is responsible for issuing a sign permit. Appearance Review Commission approval is required prior to issuance of a sign permit. 
(c)  Approval of Electrified Signs. All signs that have electrical wiring and connections are subject to the Electrical Code of the Village Code. No permit for an electrified sign may be issued by the Zoning Administrator until the proposed electrical wiring and connections have been approved under the procedures of the Electrical Code. 
(d)  Procedure. 
(1)  Applications for a sign permit must be submitted to the Zoning Administrator in accordance with the requirements in Section 30-4.2 (Application). Once it is determined that the application is complete, the Zoning Administrator will forward the application to the Appearance Review Committee and the Electrical Inspector, as necessary. Following approvals from the Appearance Review Committee and the Electrical Inspector, as applicable, the Zoning Administrator may issue a sign permit. 
(2)  A sign permit application must be accompanied by the applicable fees and the following items: 
(A)  The sign proposal drawn to scale showing: 
(i)  Dimensions in inches. 
(ii)  Lettering style and size in inches. 
(iii)  Colors, identified by using the Pantone system. 
(iv)  Construction details. 
(B)  An elevation of the proposed sign drawn to scale. 
(C)  Color samples and material samples, where appropriate. 
(D)  Sidewalk signs require a detailed site plan, drawn to scale, indicating the existing facade, the points of ingress and egress, the proposed location of the sidewalk sign, and all other site features. 
(e)  Inspection. The Zoning Administrator may inspect, at such times as deemed appropriate, each sign or other advertising structure regulated by this Ordinance. The purpose of the inspection is to ascertain whether the structure is secure or insecure, whether in need of repair or removal, or not in conformance with the permit application or otherwise in violation of the provisions of this Ordinance. 
(f)  Termination or Revocation of Permit. 
(1)  All rights and privileges acquired under the provisions of this Ordinance are mere licenses, revocable at any time by the Village Board. 
(2)  Upon the termination or revocation of the sign permit, the licensee must remove the sign without cost or expense of any kind to the Village. In the event of the failure, neglect or refusal on the part of the licensee to do so, the Village may proceed to remove the same and charge the expense to the licensee. 
(g)  Expiration of Permit. 
(1)  If the work authorized under a sign permit is not completed within six (6) months after the date of issuance, the sign permit is void. 
(2)  Sign permits for sidewalk signs are valid for a maximum of one (1) year and expire on December 31 of each year. 
(Code 1993, § 20-5.13) 
Sec. 30-5.14. - Fence permit. 
(1)  No fence may be erected unless a fence permit has been obtained from the Zoning Administrator in accordance with the Village Code. 
(2)  Upon receipt of a fence permit, the applicant must immediately post a notice on the subject property that a fence permit has been issued by the Village. The notice will be provided to the applicant by the Zoning Administrator, and shall be posted by the applicant in a prominent place on the subject property so that it is clearly visible from the public way. The notice must remain posted for such period of time as an appeal may be filed. 
(3)  Every fence permit must be accompanied by the following statement: "ISSUANCE OF THIS PERMIT IS SUBJECT TO APPEAL BY ANY AGGRIEVED PARTY TO THE ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS FOR A PERIOD OF 30 DAYS AFTER THE DATE OF ISSUANCE. ANY WORK PERFORMED PURSUANT TO THIS PERMIT DURING THIS 30 DAYS IS ENTIRELY AT THE RISK OF THE APPLICANT. 
(Code 1993, § 20-5.14) 
Sec. 30-5.15. - Administrative appeals. 
(a)  Purpose. The administrative appeals process is intended to review decisions of the Zoning Administrator to provide appropriate checks and balances on administrative authority. Administrative appeals also apply to appeals of the site plan review process within the VC District, which are heard by the Appearance Review Commission. 
(b)  Initiation. 
(1)  Appeals of Zoning Administrator Decisions. 
(A)  An appeal of a Zoning Administrator decision may be initiated by one (1) or more persons or entities, including a unit of local government, aggrieved by an administrative order, requirement, decision or determination made under this Ordinance by the Zoning Administrator. These persons or entities are considered the appellant. 
(B)  The Zoning Administrator is considered the appellee in each appeal filed. The Zoning Administrator has the right, but not the duty, to appear, participate in and defend as the appellee in each proceeding. 
(C)  When the appellant is not the owner of the subject property concerned in the appeal, the owner of the subject property is considered an additional appellee when such an appeal is filed. Such appellee has the right, but not the duty, to appear, participate in, and defend as an additional appellee in each proceeding filed. 
(2)  Appeals of Site Plan Review Decisions in the VC District. If an applicant wishes to contest the findings of the required site plan review, the applicant may request a review by the Appearance Review Commission. 
(c)  Authority and Execution. 
(1)  Any administrative order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the Zoning Administrator, including the issuance of a building permit, fence permit, certificate of occupancy, and letter of interpretation, may be appealed to the Zoning Board of Appeals. 
(2)  In the VC District, if an applicant wishes to contest the findings of the required site plan review, the applicant may request a review by the Appearance Review Commission. The findings of the Appearance Review Commission, in this instance, shall be considered final, subject only to modifications resulting from recommendations of any special hearing board. 
(d)  Procedure for Appeals of Zoning Administrator Decisions. 
(1)  Application. An appeal must be filed in writing with the Zoning Administrator no later than thirty (30) days after the contested action, except in the case of a letter of interpretation where the appeal shall be filed no later than thirty (30) days after the Zoning Administration mailed such letter. The appeal must state the following: 
(A)  The name of the appellant and the interest in the appeal. 
(B)  The common address of the subject property. 
(C)  The administrative decision of the Zoning Administrator from which the appeal is taken. 
(D)  The specific provisions of the Ordinance claimed by the appellant to be erroneously applied or interpreted by the Zoning Administrator. 
(E)  The specific reasons why the appellant asserts that the Zoning Administrator's application or interpretation of the Ordinance is erroneous. 
(F)  The specific relief being sought by the appellant. 
(2)  Scheduling. 
(A)  The administrative appeal will be placed on the agenda of the Zoning Board of Appeals for consideration at the earliest available meeting. Should appeals be filed by multiple parties concerning the same subject property and administrative action, the Zoning Administrator may, to the extent practicable, schedule all such appeals for consideration at the same meeting. 
(B)  The Zoning Administrator must assign a consecutive number for identification of all matters in the order in which they are received and, insofar as it is practicable, place them on the agenda of the Zoning Board of Appeals in numerical order. 
(C)  If the administrative appeal to be filed by a person other than the owner of the subject property, then the Zoning Administrator will notify the owner of the appeal and provide the owner with a copy of the appeal filed, by personal service, overnight delivery or certified mail, no later than five (5) days after the filing of the appeal. 
(D)  The Zoning Administrator must provide the owner of the subject property and any other party to the appeal with written notice of the date, time and place of the meeting in advance of the scheduled meeting date. 
(3)  Action by the Zoning Board of Appeals. 
(A)  The Zoning Board of Appeals will consider the appeal at a regular or special meeting. If multiple appeals have been filed concerning the same subject property, then the appeals may be consolidated by the Zoning Board of Appeals in a single hearing. 
(B)  The hearing by the Zoning Board of Appeals of an administrative appeal is a proceeding of record, and an official court reporter must take a verbatim transcript of the proceeding. 
(C)  The Zoning Board of Appeals will, by resolution, reverse, affirm, or modify the contested administrative action or decision. In reversing, affirming, or modifying the contested action, the Zoning Board of Appeals has all related powers of the Zoning Administrator. 
(D)  The contested action or decision may not be modified unless the Zoning Board of Appeals finds by clear and convincing evidence that the Zoning Administrator has made an error in the application of interpretation of the terms of this Ordinance or other related policies adopted by the Village, and the burden of proof for demonstrating same is on the appellant(s). 
(E)  In the event that the contested action is reversed or modified by the Zoning Board of Appeals, all subsequent administrative actions with regard to the subject matter must be in accordance with the reversal or modification granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals. 
(e)  Procedure for Appeals of Site Plan Review Findings in the Village Center District. 
(1)  Application. The site plan review application and all required findings must be forwarded to the Appearance Review Commission. 
(2)  Scheduling. The appeal will be placed on the agenda of the Appearance Review Commission for consideration at the earliest available meeting. 
(3)  Action by the Appearance Review Commission. 
(A)  The Appearance Review Commission will consider the appeal at a regular or special meeting. If multiple appeals have been filed concerning the same subject property, then the appeals may be consolidated by the Zoning Board of Appeals in a single hearing. 
(B)  The Appearance Review Commission shall determine if the site location and design aspects of the application are in conformance with the requirements of the VC District. The Appearance Review Commission shall consider both the standards of the VC District and the standards of review of Section 30-5.6.(d). 
(C)  The findings of the Appearance Review Commission shall be considered final, subject only to modifications resulting from recommendations of any special hearing board. 
(f)  Stay of Proceedings. 
(1)  Until a final decision regarding the contested action has been rendered, the filing of the administrative appeal will stay any proceedings in furtherance of the contested action and any development permitted by the contested action. 
(2)  The Zoning Board of Appeals, at a public meeting, may lift this stay when the Zoning Administrator certifies to the Zoning Board of Appeals that the stay would cause imminent peril to life or property. Nothing precludes the Zoning Administrator from permitting a person or entity engaged in the development that is being appealed to take reasonable action to stabilize an excavation or partially completed structure or other action to protect against imminent peril to life and property during the time between the filing of the appeal and the Zoning Board of Appeals determination. 
(g)  Time Limitations on Appeals. An appeal must be filed no later than thirty (30) days after the date of the contested action, except in the case of a letter of interpretation, in which case the administrative appeal must be filed no later than thirty (30) days after the date when the Zoning Administrator mailed notice. 
(Code 1993, § 20-5.15) 
Sec. 30-5.16. - Special rules applicable to units of local government. 
(a)  Purpose and Applicability. 
(1)  This section contains special rules and standards that apply to uses owned or operated by Units of Local Government. Because these units of local government, as publicly elected bodies, represent the Village as a whole, it can be presumed that their activities by and large operate to promote the public health, safety, and welfare. This unique characteristic of units of local government, as well as the nature of the uses they own and operate, merits the application of special rules and standards to govern their land use activities. The terms of this section apply only to Units of Local Government. The terms of this section shall not apply, however, to a use or structure that is occupied or operated by a tenant of a unit of local government, unless the tenant itself is a unit of local government or is performing a governmental function. 
(2)  Any land use or structure owned, operated, or occupied by a Unit of Local Government shall be fully subject to all applicable requirements and limitations in this Ordinance, except as modified in this section. Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as an exemption from any requirements or limitations set forth elsewhere in this Ordinance. However, where the terms of this section directly conflict with the terms of any other applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the terms of this section shall prevail. 
(b)  Additions or Expansions Requiring New Special Use Approval. For uses owned or operated by Units of Local Government, an addition or expansion of a special use requiring new special use approval shall be deemed to occur where: 
(1)  The unit of local government proposes: 
(A)  To expand an existing facility or establish a new facility at a location; or 
(B)  To increase the number or sizes of the buildings at a location; or 
(C)  To make any other expansion in the physical facilities at the location. 
(2)  The expansion, on a long-term basis, will substantially increase traffic to the location, or the hours during which the location is used by the public, or the amount of noise or artificial light in the neighborhood of the location; and 
(3)  The proposal presents a substantial question in relation to any one or more of the special use approval standards of this Ordinance. 
(A)  A "substantial question" shall not exist where the proposal is limited to any or all of the following: 
(i)  Interior remodeling of an existing building; or 
(ii)  The resurfacing of existing tennis courts, parking lots, or similar permanent surfaces; or 
(iii)  The installation of new, or rearrangement of existing, playground or recreational equipment or landscaping in an existing park; or 
(iv)  The installation, modification, or repair of drainage systems; or 
(v)  Other maintenance or repair of existing buildings, structures, or equipment; or 
(vi)  Other additions or changes of comparable or less significance that are not likely to result in an increase in the use of the location. 
(c)  Standards of Review for Special Uses. 
(1)  Where an application for approval of a special use is filed by a Unit of Local Government, the special use approval standards of this Ordinance shall be modified as follows, provided that such modifications shall not apply unless the unit of local government, prior to reaching its decision to proceed with the project covered by the proposed variation or special use, sends (by first class mail) written notice of the date, time, place, and purpose of a public meeting at which the project will be considered to all owners and occupants of property located within two hundred fifty (250) feet of the subject property. 
(2)  It shall be presumed, unless the contrary is demonstrated by the preponderance of the evidence: 
(A)  That the establishment, maintenance, or operation of the proposed use in the specific location will not be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety and welfare; and 
(B)  That the applicant has made adequate legal provision to guarantee the provision and development of any buffers, landscaping, public open space and other improvements associated with the proposed use. 
(d)  Standards of Review for Variations. 
(1)  Where an application for a variation is filed by a Unit of Local Government, the variation approval standards of this Ordinance shall be modified as follows, provided that such modifications shall not apply unless the unit of local government, prior to reaching its decision to proceed with the project covered by the proposed variation or special use, sends (by first class mail) written notice of the date, time, place, and purpose of a public meeting at which the project will be considered to all owners and occupants of property located within two hundred fifty (250) feet of the subject property. 
(2)  It shall be presumed, unless the contrary is demonstrated by the preponderance of the evidence: 
(A)  That the particular physical conditions, shape, or surroundings of the property would impose upon the owner a practical difficulty or particular hardship, as opposed to a mere inconvenience, if the requirements of this Ordinance were strictly enforced; and 
(B)  That the plight of the property owner was not created by the owner and is due to unique circumstances; and 
(C)  That the difficulty or hardship resulting from the application of this Ordinance would prevent the owner from making a reasonable use of the property. 
(e)  Votes by Village Board to Approve Special Uses or Variations. Where an application for a special use or variation is filed by a Unit of Local Government, and fails to receive a recommendation of approval from the Zoning Board of Appeals, the Village Board may approve the special use or variation by a majority vote of those members present and voting, rather than by the favorable vote of five (5) members of the Village Board. 
(f)  Enlargement or Alteration of Existing Non-conforming Structures. Any structure which is owned, operated, or occupied by a Units of Local Government, and which is non-conforming due to the minimum yard requirements or height limits of this Ordinance for the district in which it is located, may be enlarged or altered without obtaining a variation provided that: 
(1)  The enlargement or alteration itself conforms to the district requirements of this Ordinance. 
(2)  The total structure as enlarged or altered does not encroach further into the required yard area or exceed the maximum floor area ratio limit for the applicable district. 
(3)  The property owner or developer secures a building permit for the enlargement or alteration. 
(Code 1993, § 20-5.16) 
ARTICLE 30-6. - PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS 

Sec. 30-6.1. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of these planned unit development regulations is to: 
(a)  Encourage flexibility in the development of land and in the design of structures. 
(b)  Encourage planned diversification in the location of structures. 
(c)  Encourage a creative approach to the use of land that results in better development and design than might otherwise be accomplished under the strict application of other Articles of this Ordinance. 
(d)  Provide for the efficient use of land to facilitate a more effective arrangement of land uses, buildings, circulation systems and utilities. 
(e)  Provide for more usable and suitably located open space and recreation areas than might otherwise be provided under the application of other Articles of this Ordinance. 
(f)  Encourage the construction of appropriate amenities which will enhance the character of the site. 
(g)  Guarantee quality construction commensurate with other developments within the community, and compatible with the character of the surrounding area and adjoining properties. 
(h)  Provide an efficient application procedure that is sensitive to the need for expeditious development review. 
(Code 1993, § 20-6.1) 
Sec. 30-6.2. - Initiation. 
    Applications for planned unit developments may be filed by an owner of any property in the Village for that property, in accordance with the provisions of Section 30-6.3 (Authorization). 
(Code 1993, § 20-6.2) 
Sec. 30-6.3. - Authorization. 
(a)  A planned unit development is authorized as a special use in VC, NR, NR-1, GC-1, GC-2, OR, PCD-1, PCD-2, PCD-3, R2, R3 and R4 Districts. Planned unit developments in the R2 are permitted for townhouse/stacked flats and in the R3 and R4 Districts are permitted for townhouse, stacked flats and multi-family developments only. 
(b)  Notwithstanding Paragraph (a) above, planned unit developments for the Adaptive Reuse Senior Housing/55+ Development of an existing institutional structure, such as an educational facility or place of worship, are permitted in all zoning districts. 
(c)  Unless specifically approved by the ordinance granting or amending the planned unit development as a special use, the requirements of the underlying district apply. The ordinance granting or amending the planned unit development as a special use may depart from the normal procedures, standards and other requirements of this Ordinance to the extent permissible under this Article. 
(Code 1993, § 20-6.3) 
Sec. 30-6.4. - General standards for planned unit developments. 
(a)  The site of the planned unit development must be under common ownership and/or unified control. If there are two (2) or more owners, the application for the planned unit development must be jointly filed by all such owners. 
(b)  The ordinance authorizing the special use for a planned unit development may grant exceptions to the regulations contained in this Ordinance including, but not limited to, use, density, area, bulk, design, setbacks, off-street parking and loading, and signs, as may be desirable to achieve the objectives of the proposed planned unit development, provided that such exceptions are fully consistent with and authorized by this Article. 
(c)  Planned unit developments must be compatible with the purpose and intent of this Ordinance and the Village's Comprehensive Plan. A planned unit development must not substantially diminish the market value of surrounding properties, and it must cause no substantial impairment of the use of those properties. 
(d)  Planned unit developments must not adversely affect the natural environment of the community as a whole. Natural assets and features, such as existing trees and native vegetation, must be protected and preserved to the greatest extent practical. 
(e)  The site must be accessible to public streets that are adequate to carry the traffic that will be generated by the proposed development. The streets and driveways within the proposed development must be adequate to serve the uses within the development. The applicant is responsible for the cost and installation of additional traffic controls and regulating devices that are required. 
(f)  All proposed streets, alleys and driveways must be adequate to serve the residents, occupants, visitors or other anticipated traffic. Access points to public streets and the location of private streets, alleys and driveways are subject to the approval of the Village Board when granting the special use. 
(g)  The pedestrian circulation system and its related walkways must be located to provide for separation of pedestrian and vehicular movement and for maximum pedestrian safety. 
(h)  All planned unit developments must provide for underground installation of utilities, including electricity, cable and telephone. Provisions must be made for acceptable design and construction of storm sewer facilities and appropriate storm retention and/or detention devices. The construction and maintenance of all utilities, roadways, parking facilities and other site improvements must be in accordance with the requirements of this Ordinance and other regulations of the Village. 
(Code 1993, § 20-6.4; Ord. No. 2014-O-59, 11-11-2014) 
Sec. 30-6.5. - Exceptions from district regulations. 
(a)  The Plan Commission may recommend and the Village Board may grant exceptions to the district regulations where a planned unit development is located. The planned unit development is subject to the underlying district regulations unless an exception is specifically granted. Exceptions from district regulations may be granted for planned unit developments, if the Village Board finds that such exceptions meet all of the following standards: 
(1)  The planned unit development, including all proposed exceptions, is in conformance with the Comprehensive Plan, and the character and nature of existing and future development in the vicinity of the proposed planned unit development. 
(2)  For use exceptions, the uses allowed are aligned with the intent of the planned unit development, are compatible with uses existing or anticipated to occur upon the adjacent sites, and will be properly screened or buffered from adjacent properties as needed to minimize potential negative impacts. 
(3)  The exceptions allow the planned unit development to preserve unusual topographic or natural features of the land. In addition, the exceptions provide more usable and suitably located open space and natural amenities than would otherwise be provided under the strict application of district standards. 
(4)  The exceptions allow the planned unit development to implement innovative design features that would not be possible by application of the basic district regulations. This includes sustainable development techniques, green building and adaptive reuse of existing structures. 
(5)  The physical characteristics of the planned unit development, including all proposed exceptions, will not adversely affect the future development of adjacent areas. 
(6)  The planned unit development, including all proposed exceptions, will continue to provide the same protection as the underlying district regulations in regard to fire, health hazards and other dangers. 
(7)  The planned unit development provides a public benefit to the Village, as described in Paragraph (e) below. 
(b)  The underlying zoning district use regulations apply, unless an exception is granted by ordinance as part of the approved special use. Other specified uses, not permitted by the use regulations of the district in which the planned unit development is located may be allowed provided that the Village Board finds that the uses being requested by such exceptions are necessary or desirable, and are appropriate with respect to the primary purpose of the development. 
(c)  The underlying zoning district requirements apply, unless an exception is granted by ordinance as part of the approved special use. Exceptions to district regulations may be granted by the Village Board where it is determined that such modifications do not negatively affect the value and enjoyment of surrounding property, the provision of municipal services, or the flow of traffic. 
(d)  However, in no case are the following exceptions permitted: 
(1)  Exceptions that modify the requirements of chapter 18 of the Village Code concerning the minimum design, quality and construction standards for public improvements and infrastructure. 
(2)  Exceptions to the environmental performance standards of this Ordinance. 
(3)  Exceptions that modify the building, electrical, plumbing, fire prevention, or any other code or requirement of Chapter 8 of the Village Code. 
(4)  Exceptions that modify the requirements of Section 30-96 of the Village Code concerning fences which obstruct views and create safety hazards. 
(e)  No exception to district regulations within a planned unit development may be granted unless the applicant demonstrates a substantial benefit to the Village. The benefits provided are to be balanced with the relief sought. The following items are a guide and not an exclusive list of permissible benefits. Additional design characteristics and amenities not listed may be considered as part of the approval process. 
(1)  Community amenities including plazas, malls, formal gardens, outdoor seating, public art, and car sharing facilities. 
(2)  Preservation of historically significant structures. 
(3)  Adaptive reuse. 
(4)  Preservation of environmental features. 
(5)  Public open space and recreational amenities such as: 
(A)  Swimming pools; 
(B)  Tennis courts; 
(C)  Recreational open space accessory buildings; 
(D)  Athletic fields; 
(E)  Jogging trails and fitness courses; 
(F)  Dog parks; 
(G)  Playgrounds; 
(H)  Natural water features and conservation areas. 
(6)  Innovative storm water management including a reduction of impervious surface, use of semi-pervious materials, such as pervious pavers, bio-swales, rain gardens and similar techniques. 
(7)  Additional public infrastructure improvements in addition to the minimum required by the planned unit development, such as new or repaved streets, installation of gutters and sewers, repaved streets, bicycle paths and traffic control devices to improve traffic flow. 
(8)  Affordable or senior housing set-asides. 
(9)  Provision of accessible dwelling units with accessible features beyond what is required by the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) or any other applicable codes. 
(10)  The use of sustainable design and architecture, such as the use and/or incorporation of green or white roofs, solar panels, wind turbines and other energy efficient design concepts, new building technologies, and Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED) or LEED-equivalent structures. 
(Code 1993, § 20-6.5; Ord. No. 2014-O-59, 11-11-2014) 
Sec. 30-6.6. - Procedure. 
    In its establishment and authorization as a special use, in addition to the special use standards of Section 30-5.3 (Special Use), the following procedures, requirements, restrictions, and conditions shall be observed. In addition to the special use procedures, approval of a planned unit development is a four-step process, which includes a pre-application meeting, optional concept plan, Preliminary Plan, and Final Plan. No plats shall be recorded and no building permit shall be issued until a Final Plan has been approved. 
    All requirements for public hearings before the Plan Commission, Appearance Review Commission, or the Zoning Board of Appeals which, in the absence of a Planned Unit Development, would have been required to be held under the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance or the Village Code, shall be considered superseded by this Part 30-6 for applications for Planned Unit Development special uses. This Part 30-6 shall be deemed to consolidate all requirements for public hearings, recommendations and approvals for Planned Unit Developments before the Plan Commission and the Village Board, in the manner provided herein. 
(a)  Pre-Application Meeting. 
(1)  Prior to filing a formal application for a planned unit development, the applicant must confer with the Zoning Administrator, as well as other Village staff the Zoning Administrator deems appropriate, regarding the proposed development. The purpose of the pre-application presentation and conference is to make advice and assistance available to the applicant before preparation of the optional concept plan or formal application. A minimum of two (2) weeks prior to the pre-application meeting, the applicant must provide nine (9) copies of the following items to the Zoning Administrator: 
(A)  A plat of survey of the subject property. 
(B)  A written description of the proposed planned unit development. 
(C)  A minimum of one (1) development concept plan and up to a maximum of three (3) development concept plans. Each development concept must include a site plan, floor plan(s) indicating the type and square footage of each space and building elevations. The development concept(s) shall be drawn to scale on eleven (11) by seventeen (17) inch paper. 
(D)  A list of all proposed modifications sought pursuant to Section 30-6.5 (Exceptions from District Regulations). 
(E)  Applicant information including the name, address, contact information, years of experience, and other similar projects in which applicant has participated for each team member. 
(F)  A list of similar projects by the applicant, including: 
(i)  Project name and location. 
(ii)  Brief description of overall size. 
(iii)  Square footage of each use. 
(iv)  Number of residential units. 
(v)  Financing. 
(vi)  Project costs. 
(vii)  Project construction duration. 
(viii)  Project completion dates. 
(ix)  Contact information. 
(x)  Photographs or renderings. 
(xi)  Marketing materials. 
(G)  Such additional information, documents or materials the Zoning Administrator may deem necessary in order to prepare for the pre-application meeting. 
(2)  Prior to the pre-application meeting, the Zoning Administrator may consult with the Village President, Village Manager, Land Use Chair and Plan Commission Chair, or their designees. The Zoning Administrator may also consult with such other officials, Village Staff, or consultants as he/she may deem appropriate. The purpose of the consultation is to conduct a preliminary review of the concepts proposed and assess the proposals' compatibility with the Comprehensive Plan, the Zoning Ordinance, the Village Code, and the general planning policies of the Village in anticipation of the pre-application meeting. At the discretion of the Zoning Administrator, the applicant may be invited to meet with the Zoning Administrator and the consulted parties regarding the pre-application. 
(3)  The Zoning Administrator will schedule a pre-application meeting with the applicant and Village staff members the Zoning Administrator deems appropriate. At the pre-application meeting, the Zoning Administrator will explain the Village's review procedures, review the applicant's proposal and provide the applicant with the Village's impression of the concept proposals' compatibility with the Comprehensive Plan, the Zoning Ordinance, the Village Code, and the general planning policies of the Village, and identify the issues which the applicant should be prepared to address in the planned unit development application. The Zoning Administrator will provide such information and guidance as he/she deems appropriate. Any opinions or advice provided by the Zoning Administrator is in no way binding with respect to any official action the Plan Commission or Village Board may take on the subsequent formal application. 
(b)  Optional Concept Plan. 
(1)  Before submitting a formal application for a planned unit development, the applicant may present the development concept plan submitted as part of the pre-application meeting to the Plan Commission to obtain information and guidance prior to entering into binding commitments or incurring substantial expense. 
(2)  The Plan Commission will review the concept plan, and provide such information and guidance as it deems appropriate. Any opinions or advice provided by the Plan Commission is in no way binding with respect to any official action the Plan Commission or Village Board may take on the subsequent formal application. The review of the concept plan is not a public hearing, and any failure to observe formal procedures does not affect the ultimate validity of any enabling legislation. 
(c)  Preliminary Plan. All applications for planned unit developments must contain a Preliminary Plan, which is filed with the Zoning Administrator, who will forward a copy of the same to the Plan Commission. The Preliminary Plan must be a detailed and relatively complete development plan. The Zoning Administrator will schedule a public hearing before the Plan Commission for the purpose of reviewing the Preliminary Plan with notice for the public hearing in accordance with Section 30-4.3 (Notice), and submit a report to the Plan Commission and the applicant analyzing the plan's compliance with the standards of review of this Article and raising any concerns arising from the Zoning Administrator's consideration of the plan materials and/or the pre-application meeting. 
(1)  Minimum Requirements. Following the initial pre-application meeting and any concept plan meeting, the applicant may file a planned unit development application with the Zoning Administrator. A minimum of ten (10) copies of each of the items identified below are required, unless otherwise instructed by the Zoning Administrator. The following constitutes the minimum required contents for a planned unit development application, provided that the applicant may supplement these materials with any other materials as he/she may deem appropriate, and further provided that the Zoning Administrator may, upon the request of the applicant, waive the submission of any of the following items. 
(A)  A legal description of the subject property. 
(B)  A letter that states how the development meets the standards of review in this Article. 
(C)  Certification of ownership of the subject property and applicant's interest in the subject property, including an application properly certified by either the owner or an entity with authority to act on behalf of the owner, and further provided that, for property held in trust, disclosure of ownership of beneficial interest in the subject property, as may be required by state law. 
(D)  Current applicant information including the name, address, contact information, years of experience, and other similar projects in which the applicant has participated for each team member. 
(E)  A statement by the applicant with regard to the future selling or leasing of all or a portion of the subject property, and planning objectives to be achieved. This statement must include a description of the character of the proposed planned unit development and the reasons for the future selling or leasing of all or a portion of the subject property. 
(F)  An analysis of the relationship between the proposed planned unit development and the Village Comprehensive Plan. 
(G)  Market feasibility study performed by a qualified market research firm within the twelve (12) months prior to the application date, indicating the target market and quantifying the demand for all uses proposed in the development and the suitability of the proposed uses. 
(H)  Most recent preliminary financial feasibility analysis and projected operating statement together with a statement of sources and uses for funding the project. 
(I)  Copies of all covenants, grants of easements and other limitations or restrictions existing, or to be imposed upon, the use of the subject property's land, buildings or other structures. 
(J)  Copy of the preliminary title insurance commitment. 
(K)  A plat of survey of the subject property. 
(L)  A preliminary development schedule for the project. 
(M)  Traffic analysis performed by a qualified traffic engineer within the twelve (12) months prior to the application date. 
(N)  The following project information: 
(i)  List of all uses by square footage and, in the case of residential uses, the number of dwelling units. 
(ii)  Calculation of lot coverage of buildings and structures. 
(iii)  Floor area of buildings and structures. 
(iv)  Total amount of usable open space. 
(v)  Total number of parking spaces, separating surface, below grade and above grade parking spaces. 
(O)  A brief description of what could be constructed under existing zoning. 
(P)  Disclosure as to whether any part of the subject property or structure thereon has been designated as a landmark or historic place under federal, state or local law, or is within a local or national historic district. 
(Q)  Any information that may be required by Village officials to assist in determining the potential impact of the proposed development on existing emergency response services. 
(R)  A detailed survey prepared by a licensed surveyor, which shall include: 
(i)  Topographical contours shown at one (1)-foot intervals. 
(ii)  Trees of six (6) inches or more in diameter measured at one (1) foot above ground level. 
(iii)  Unique natural features or existing groundcover. 
(S)  Soil test results and environmental report prepared by a licensed engineer, unless waived by the Village. 
(T)  The site plan and floor area size of all existing and proposed structures and other improvements, including maximum heights and types of dwelling units. 
(U)  A map showing the surrounding footprints of adjacent buildings and their height. 
(V)  The location and size in square feet of all areas to be conveyed, dedicated or reserved as common or public open spaces. 
(W)  Preliminary elevations that demonstrate building character, materials and colors. 
(X)  A current report written twelve (12) months prior to the application date detailing the existing and proposed pedestrian and vehicular circulation system of streets, alleys, driveways, sidewalks, off-street parking areas, loading areas, service areas, and points of access to the public right-of-way. 
(Y)  Recent preliminary engineering drawings, including the location, size and slope of all water, sanitary sewer, and storm sewer lines; the capacity of any existing water, sanitary sewer or storm sewer mains that will be used; and the location of any on-site storm water/runoff detention. The applicant shall also provide a preliminary estimate of impact upon the Village infrastructure and utilities. 
(Z)  A proposed landscape plan. 
(AA)  A proposed lighting plan. 
(2)  Preliminary Plan Procedure. The procedure for approval of the Preliminary Plan is as follows: 
(A)  Application. All applications are filed with the Zoning Administrator in accordance with the requirements of Section 30-4.2 (Application). Once it is determined that the application is complete, the Zoning Administrator will schedule the application for consideration by the Plan Commission. 
(B)  Review by the Zoning Administrator. Upon receiving a planned unit development application, the Zoning Administrator will review the application and deliver copies of the application to other appropriate government agencies for review and comment, as appropriate. Prior to the scheduled public hearing, the Zoning Administrator will forward to the Plan Commission copies of the application and a written report summarizing the facts of the case, including all relevant documents and incorporating or summarizing the comments of the Zoning Administrator and other agencies. The Zoning Administrator will forward a copy of the written report to the applicant prior to the scheduled public hearing. 
(C)  Action by the Plan Commission. The Plan Commission must review the Preliminary Plan, special use and report by the Zoning Administrator at a public hearing within a reasonable time after receipt of a complete application. If, in the Plan Commissions' judgment, the application does not contain sufficient information to enable the Plan Commission to properly discharge its responsibilities, the Plan Commission may request additional information from the applicant. The Plan Commission shall evaluate the application, based upon the evidence presented at the public hearing, pursuant to each of the applicable standards in Paragraph (E) below. Within a reasonable time after the close of the public hearing, the Plan Commission will either: 
(i)  Recommend approval or denial of the Preliminary Plan and special use, and submit its written recommendation to the Village Board. 
(ii)  Advise the applicant in writing of any recommended changes, additions or corrections to the Preliminary Plan. The applicant may, within thirty (30) days, submit the revised Preliminary Plan for Plan Commission consideration at a continuation of, or at a new, public hearing. The applicant may do so without paying an additional filing fee. The Plan Commission will then recommend approval or denial of the Preliminary Plan and special use, and submit its written recommendation to the Village Board. 
(D)  Action by the Village Board. 
(i)  The Village Board, after receipt of the recommendations from the Plan Commission, shall approve, approve with conditions or deny the Preliminary Plan and special use within a reasonable time upon receipt of the recommendations of the Plan Commission. The Village Board will evaluate the application, based upon the evidence presented at the public hearing, pursuant to each of the applicable standards in Paragraph (E) below. 
(ii)  If the Preliminary Plan and special use is approved by the Village Board, the applicant may then submit a Final Plan for the planned unit development, approval of which is required prior to allowing development to proceed. 
(E)  Preliminary Plan Approval Standards. The Plan Commission recommendation and Village Board decision must set forth in what respects the planned unit development is or is not in the public interest including, but not limited to, evaluation of the approval standards for a special use and the following preliminary plan approval standards: 
(i)  Is the site or zoning lot upon which the planned unit development is to be located adaptable to the unified development proposed? 
(ii)  Will the proposed planned unit development be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety and welfare of any portion of the community? 
(iii)  Will the proposed planned unit development be injurious to the use and enjoyment of other property in the vicinity for the purposes already permitted? 
(iv)  Will the proposed planned unit development diminish or impair property values within the neighborhood? 
(v)  Will the proposed planned unit development impede the normal and orderly development and improvement of surrounding property for uses permitted in the zoning district? 
(vi)  Is there provision for adequate utilities, drainage, off-street parking and loading, pedestrian access and all other necessary facilities? 
(vii)  Is there provision for adequate vehicular ingress and egress designed to minimize traffic congestion upon public streets? 
(viii)  Are the location and arrangement of structures, parking areas, walks, lighting and appurtenant facilities, compatible with the surrounding neighborhood and adjacent land uses? 
(ix)  Is any part of the proposed planned unit development which is not to be used for structures, parking and loading areas, or access ways, suitably landscaped? 
(x)  Is the planned unit development in the specific location proposed consistent with the spirit and intent of this Ordinance and the adopted Comprehensive Plan? 
(xi)  Does any part of the proposed planned unit development substantially adversely affect a known archaeological, historical, or cultural? 
(xii)  Has the applicant successfully completed one (1) or more recent projects of comparable value and complexity to provide the Village with reasonable assurance that the proposed planned unit development can be completed according to schedule and as designed? 
(xiii)  Will the proposed planned unit development meet the standards of appearance review? 
(d)  Final Plan. 
(1)  Final Plan Procedure. Within one (1) year following the approval of the Preliminary Plan the applicant must file with the Zoning Administrator a Final Plan containing, in final form, the information required for the Preliminary Plan. If the planned unit development is to be developed in phases, the applicant need only file a Final Plan for the first phase of development, as indicated in the development and construction schedule prescribed below. The Final Plan for the remaining phases must be filed in accordance with the development and construction schedule. Every Final Plan must contain the information required as part of the Preliminary Plan submittal updated and in final form as well as the following information and documentation: 
(A)  A final site plan drawn to an appropriate scale on material suitable for recording with the Cook County Recorder of Deeds. 
(B)  An accurate legal description of the entire zoning lot upon which the planned unit development is to be located, and a legal description of each separate subdivided parcel, including any areas to be conveyed, dedicated or reserved for public or quasi public uses. 
(C)  All covenants, easements, agreements and other provisions required to govern the use, maintenance and continued protection of the planned unit development, along with an agreement assuring that the applicant, any subsequent owner or, where applicable, a homeowners association shall be responsible for all street, utility and common open space maintenance within said development and for snow plowing and refuse disposal. 
(D)  All plats, certificates, seals and signatures required for the dedication or vacation of land and/or the recording of the final site plan. 
(E)  If subdivision of the development site is included in the planned unit development, a plat of subdivision must be prepared suitable for recording with the Cook County Recorder of Deeds. In like manner, if a vacation or dedication of a public street or alley is included, a plat of vacation or dedication must be prepared. 
(F)  A detailed landscape plan based on final architectural decisions indicating the specific location and character of all landscape, including the size and species of all trees, shrubs, hedges and other groundcover, the location, size and type of all screening and fencing and the location, height, design and illumination characteristics of all external lighting fixtures within the development. 
(G)  A detailed utilities and drainage plan based on final architectural decisions indicating the size and location of all water distribution lines, sanitary sewers and storm drainage facilities required to serve the planned unit development and the manner in which surface drainage will be controlled and managed consistent with all applicable Village regulations. 
(H)  A development and construction schedule indicating the following: 
(i)  The date when construction of the planned unit development will begin or, if developed in phases, the date when construction of the initial phase will begin. 
(ii)  If the planned unit development is to be developed in phases, a map indicating the phases in which the planned unit development will be built, the dates when the Final Plans for all phases will be filed, and the approximate dates when construction of each subsequent phase will begin. 
(iii)  The date when construction of the planned unit development will be completed, and the date when a specific use or uses will be established, or if developed in phases, the date when construction of each phase will be completed, and the date when a specific use or uses will be established for each phase. 
(I)  Building elevations and schematic design presentations indicating the architectural character of all proposed buildings and structures based on final architectural decisions and prepared in detail, noting materials, color and finish. All building services and parking entrances must be clearly identified, including, but not be limited to loading, trash and recycling service areas. Drawings must indicate all proposed fence sizes, materials and locations, all ventilation grills, and any mechanical equipment extending above the building parapet. Samples of all exterior materials must be submitted. 
(J)  Detailed drawings and design presentations of all signs to be erected within the planned unit development. 
(2)  Action. The Zoning Administrator will review the Final Plan within a reasonable time after the receipt of the complete Final Plan and take the following actions: 
(A)  Conformance with Preliminary Plan. The Zoning Administrator must recommend approval of the Final Plan to the Village Board if it is in substantial compliance with the Preliminary Plan and all Village regulations. The Zoning Administrator will certify to the Village Board that the Final Plan is in substantial conformance with the previously filed Preliminary Plan. Within a reasonable time after receipt of the Zoning Administrator's recommendation, the Village Board must review the Final Plan. 
(B)  Non-conformance with Preliminary Plan. 
(i)  If the Zoning Administrator finds that the Final Plan is substantially changed from the approved Preliminary Plan, or is otherwise not in accordance with Village regulations, the Zoning Administrator must inform the applicant with regard to specific areas found not to be in compliance, and the applicant may resubmit the Final Plan to the Zoning Administrator with changes to those areas found not to be in compliance. At the applicant's request, the Zoning Administrator shall forward the Final Plan to the Village Board for consideration (notwithstanding the substantial change) with a recommendation from the Zoning Administrator that the Final Plan be denied. If the applicant fails to submit a revised Final Plan which does not contain substantial changes from the approved Preliminary Plan, then the Zoning Administrator shall recommend to the Village Board that the Final Plan be denied. 
(ii)  Once resubmitted and after the Zoning Administrator has determined the Final Plan to be in substantial compliance with the Preliminary Plan, the Zoning Administrator shall certify to the Village Board that the Final Plan is in substantial conformance with the previously filed Preliminary Plan. Within a reasonable time after receipt of the Zoning Administrator's recommendation, the Village Board shall review the Final Plan. 
(C)  Review by the Village Board. After the Final Plan has been found to be in substantial compliance with the Preliminary Plan or the applicant has requested that the Village Board review a Final Plan denied by the Zoning Administrator, and the Village Board has reviewed the Final Plan, the Village Board must approve, approve with conditions, or deny the Final Plan. After the approval of the Final Plan, the use of the land and the construction, modification or alteration of any buildings or structures within the planned unit development will be governed by the approved Final Plan rather than by other provisions of this Ordinance. 
(D)  Simultaneous Preliminary and Final Plan review may be conducted by the Village Board if the Zoning Administrator finds all necessary Final Plan procedures and requirements have been met prior to the Village Board hearing Preliminary Plan approval. 
(Code 1993, § 20-6.6; Ord. No. 2014-O-59, 11-11-2014) 
Sec. 30-6.7. - Changes to approved final plans. 
    No changes may be made in the approved Final Plan, except upon application to the Village, according to the following provisions. 
(a)  During Construction. During the construction of the planned unit development, the procedure is as follows: 
(1)  Minor Changes. Minor changes, as required by engineering or other physical site circumstances not foreseen at that time that the Final Plan was approved and verified by the Village Engineer, may be authorized by the Zoning Administrator, who reserves the right to forward any requests for changes to the Village Board. Any item listed in Paragraph (2)(C) below is not considered a minor change. Any changes to the Final Plan must be recorded as amendments to the planned unit development ordinance. If changes are allowed in a final site plan, then a new site plan reflecting such changes must be filed with the Village noting the date of the changes. 
(2)  Major Changes. 
(A)  Major changes are those changes that substantially affect the basic design, density or bulk of the development. All changes in land use, building height or density of the development are considered a major change, and must be approved by the Village Board, after a public hearing by the Plan Commission, as an amendment to the planned unit development ordinance. 
(B)  The Plan Commission must review the request for a major change at a public hearing within a reasonable time after receipt of a request. Within a reasonable time after the close of the public hearing, the Plan Commission must recommend either approval or denial of the request for a major change, and submit its written recommendation to the Village Board. The Village Board, after receipt of a recommendation from the Plan Commission, must approve, approve with conditions or deny the request for a major change within a reasonable time following the receipt of the Plan Commission recommendation. The Village Board may also decide that the request for a major change is so significant that it must be considered a new planned unit development application and should be resubmitted as such. 
(C)  Major changes include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(i)  A change equal to or greater than five percent (5%) in the number of dwelling units, the gross floor area of the development, or the gross floor area devoted to any particular use. 
(ii)  A change of five (5) feet or more in building height. 
(iii)  An increase in building coverage of more than five percent (5%) than that approved in the Final Plan (for example, an increase from 25% coverage to 30% coverage). Any building coverage increase above that permitted by this Ordinance is considered a major change. 
(iv)  A decrease in open space. 
(v)  A change in the location of any open space in any manner that detracts from its intended function in the previously approved plan. 
(vi)  A change in excess of ten (10) feet in the location of walkways, vehicle circulation ways and parking areas, or exterior building or structure walls. 
(vii)  A change in the location and arrangement of land uses within the development as shown on the previously approved final plan. 
(viii)  A change or relocation of rights of way shown on the approved final plan in any manner or to any extent that decreases their functionality, adversely affects their relation to surrounding land use and rights-of-way elements, or reduces their effectiveness as buffers or amenities. 
(ix)  An alteration, whether an increase or decrease, in the amount of any land use in any stage of the development by more than ten percent (10%) or a change in the overall final approved and use mix. 
(x)  A reduction in the number of parking spaces or an increase of more than five (5) parking spaces. An increase of up to five (5) spaces is considered a minor change. 
(xi)  A change to the landscape plan that results in a reduction in the net amount of plant material. Changes to the landscape plan that do not result in a reduction in the net amount of plant material, a change in plant species or a change that does not violate the landscaping requirements of this Ordinance is considered a minor change. 
(b)  After Construction. After the completion of construction of the planned unit development, all changes to the Final Plan must be made by the Village Board under the procedure authorized for a special use (Section 30-5.3). Upon review of the proposed changes, the Village Board may determine that the proposed changes to the planned unit development constitute a new application and must be resubmitted as a new planned unit development application in accordance with this Article. 
(Code 1993, § 20-6.7) 
Sec. 30-6.8. - Progress and revocation. 
(a)  The Village Board may, at any time, request written reports from the Zoning Administrator on the progress and development of the planned unit development. 
(b)  If the Village Board makes the determination that the applicant has abandoned the development of the planned unit development or failed to follow the approved Final Plan, it shall hold a public hearing for the purpose of determining the revocation of all permits, approvals and action taken. Written notice of the public hearing must be sent to the applicant by certified mail (return receipt requested) to the business address indicated in the PUD application. Further notice of the public hearing must be provided in the manner described in Section 30-4.3 (Notice) of this Ordinance for special uses. 
(c)  At the public hearing, the Village Board will receive such evidence as it deems relevant and the applicant is permitted to respond and present evidence on his/her own behalf. If the Village Board determines, by a majority vote, that the applicant has abandoned the development of the proposed planned unit development or has failed to follow the approved Final Plan, the Village Board may revoke all permits, approvals and other actions taken under this Article. The Corporation Counsel may thereafter cause to have filed with the Recorder of Deeds a memorandum of such revocation. 
(Code 1993, § 20-6.8) 
Sec. 30-6.9. - Conditions and guarantees. 
    Prior to granting any special uses, the Plan Commission may recommend, and the Village Board may stipulate, such conditions and restrictions upon the establishment, location, construction, maintenance and operation of the planned unit development as deemed necessary to guarantee performance of all conditions. 
(Code 1993, § 20-6.9) 
Sec. 30-6.10. - Issuance of building permit. 
    Building permits may only be issued if the construction work in question is in conformity with the approved Final Plan and with all other applicable ordinances and regulations. 
(Code 1993, § 20-6.10) 
Sec. 30-6.11. - Enforcement of planned unit development. 
(a)  The Zoning Administrator may periodically review all permits issued for the planned unit development in conjunction with the construction that has taken place on the planned unit development site, and compare actual development with the approved development and construction schedule. 
(b)  If the Zoning Administrator finds that the applicant has failed to meet the approved development and construction schedule, the Zoning Administrator will notify the Village Board in writing. Within a reasonable time after receiving such notice, the Village Board will either revoke the special use or, for good cause shown by the applicant, the development and construction schedule may be extended for a reasonable time. 
(Code 1993, § 20-6.11) 
ARTICLE 30-7. - ZONING DISTRICTS 

Sec. 30-7.1. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this Article is to outline the different zoning districts within this Zoning Ordinance and introduce the Official Zoning Map. 
(Code 1993, § 20-7.1) 
Sec. 30-7.2. - Districts. 
    In order to carry out the purpose and intent of this Ordinance, the Village of Wilmette is divided into the following zoning districts: 
(a)  Residential Districts. 
R Single-Family Detached Residence District. 
R1 Single-Family Detached Residence District. 
R2 Attached Residence District. 
R3 Multi-Family Residence District. 
R4 Multi-Family Residence District. 
(b)  Commercial Districts. 
NR Neighborhood Retail Business District. 
NR-1 Linden Square Neighborhood Business District. 
VC Village Center Business District. 
GC-1 General Commercial District. 
GC-2 General Commercial District. 
OR Office-Research District. 
(c)  Planned Commercial Development Districts. 
PCD-1 Planned Commercial Development District. 
PCD-2 Planned Commercial Development District. 
PCD-3 Planned Commercial Development District. 
(Code 1993, § 20-7.2) 
Sec. 30-7.3. - Zoning map. 
(a)  Location of Districts. 
    The location and boundaries of the zoning districts established by this Ordinance are set forth in the Official Zoning Map, as periodically amended. The Official Zoning Map is incorporated into, and made an integral part of, this Ordinance. 
    It is the intent of this Ordinance that the entire area of the Village, including all land and water areas, be included in the zoning districts established by this Ordinance. Any land lying within the Village, but not shown on the Official Zoning Map as being included within a district, is classified as the R Single-Family Detached Residence District. 
(b)  Interpretation of Boundary Lines. 
(1)  Right-of-Way Lines. Where zoning district boundary lines coincide with streets, alleys, highways, easements, or right-of-way lines of railroads, toll roads or expressways, the boundary line is construed to be the center line of the right-of-way. 
(2)  Property Lines and Municipal Borders. Where zoning district boundary lines coincide with a recorded property line or a municipal border, the property line is construed to be the boundary line of the district. 
(3)  Scaled Lines. Where the district boundary lines do not coincide with a right-of-way line or recorded property line, the district boundary is determined by measuring such boundary line(s) by using the map scale as provided on the Official Zoning Map. 
(4)  District Boundary Dividing a Lot. Where the map shows a district boundary dividing a lot, each part of the lot must be used in conformity with the standards established by this Ordinance for the zoning district in which that part is located. 
(5)  Clarification of Boundary Lines. The Zoning Board of Appeals will decide all interpretations of zoning district boundary lines, where the application of Paragraphs (1) through (4) above leaves doubt as to the boundary between two (2) zoning districts. 
(Code 1993, § 20-7.3) 
Sec. 30-7.4. - Annexed land. 
    Any territory annexed into the Village shall automatically upon annexation be classified as R Single-Family Detached Residence District. That land is subject to the requirements of the R District, unless otherwise provided for in the annexation agreement or until the territory is rezoned. 
(Code 1993, § 20-7.4) 
Sec. 30-7.5. - Exemptions for public utilities and certain village facilities. 
    The following essential services are permitted to be erected, constructed, altered, or maintained in any zoning district: 
(a)  Traffic signals, fire hydrants, street lights, and similar equipment and accessories. 
(b)  Gas, electric, communication, water supply, and transmission/distribution systems. 
(c)  Elevated or underground water storage tanks. 
(d)  Storm and sanitary sewer collection and disposal systems. 
(e)  Utility poles, wires, mains, drains, pipes, conduits and cables reasonably necessary for the furnishing of adequate service by public utilities, municipal or other governmental agencies for the public health, safety, convenience, comfort and general welfare. Wireless communications antennas, facilities and towers are subject to all requirements of this Ordinance and are not considered exempt under this Article. 
(Code 1993, § 20-7.5) 
ARTICLE 30-8. - RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS 

Sec. 30-8.1. - Residential zoning districts purpose statements. 
(a)  Purpose of the R Single-Family Detached Residence District. The R District is established to protect, promote, and maintain the development of single-family detached housing and limited public and institutional uses that are compatible with the surrounding residential neighborhood. The development standards and range of allowable uses for this district are designed to maintain a suitable environment for family living at the low density of development characteristic of the current pattern of development in the district, which consists of large lots with abundant open space. The R District includes one (1) sub-district which allows the same uses but provides bulk provisions that reflect the specific attributes of the development pattern that results in lot width and lot area that are less than that of the R District but still larger than that typically found in any R1 sub-district. 
(b)  Purpose of the R1 Single-Family Detached Residence District. The R1 District is established to protect, promote, and maintain the development of single-family detached housing and limited public and institutional uses that are compatible with the surrounding residential neighborhood. The development standards and range of allowable uses for this district are designed to maintain a suitable environment for family living at the relatively low density of development characteristic of the current pattern of development in the district. The R1 District contains nine (9) sub-districts each of which allows the same uses but provides bulk and height provisions that reflect the specific attributes of the development patterns found in those sub-districts. Such attributes are described below. 
(1)  The R1-A Sub-district contains predominantly single story and split-level homes developed since the 1950s. 
(2)  The R1-B Sub-district contains residential development of a relatively low scale character having height and land coverage characteristics smaller than other areas. 
(3)  The R1-C Sub-district contains a set of relatively uniform lots that tend to contain a mostly two (2) story homes located on a majority of lots smaller than found in other parts of the community. 
(4)  The R1-D Sub-district contains predominantly two (2) story homes located on lots that range between fifty (50) and sixty (60) feet in width. 
(5)  The R1-E Sub-district contains one (1) and two (2) story homes located on smaller lots, many less than fifty (50) feet in width, and accommodating smaller footprint buildings scaled to those lots. 
(6)  The R1-F Sub-district contains a mix of homes built after the 1950s and containing primarily less than three (3) stories. 
(7)  The R1-G Sub-district contains height and bulk provisions that typify the large home and lot development pattern found in the area roughly comprising the residential area abutting Chestnut, Ashland, Greenwood and Elmwood Streets east of Green Bay Road. 
(8)  The R1-H Sub-district contains predominantly older homes, many of which are three (3) stories and are located on lots of fifty (50) to sixty (60) feet in width. 
(9)  The R1-I Sub-district contains some of the smallest residential lots in the village and accommodates limited space between buildings. Development in this area fronts on narrow rights of way imparting a specific character to the neighborhood. 
(c)  Purpose of the R2 Attached Residence District. The R2 District is established to protect, promote, and maintain the development of single-family detached and attached housing and limited public and institutional uses that are compatible with the surrounding residential neighborhood. The development standards and range of allowable uses for this district are designed to provide for residential living in areas that have a single-family residential character but are transitions between areas of commercial or multi-family uses and areas of predominantly single-family detached dwellings. 
(d)  Purpose of the R3 Multi-Family Residence District. The R3 District is established to protect, promote, and maintain the development of multi-family housing and limited public and institutional uses that are compatible with the surrounding residential neighborhood. The development standards and range of allowable uses for this district are designed to provide for convenience and affordability in residential living, at densities characteristic of low-rise multi-family residential buildings. 
(e)  Purpose of the R4 Multi-Family Residence District. The R4 District is established to protect, promote, and maintain the development of multi-family housing and limited public and institutional uses that are compatible with the surrounding residential neighborhood. The development standards and range of allowable uses for this district are designed to provide for convenience and affordability in residential living, at a density characteristic of high-rise multi-family residential buildings. 
(Code 1993, § 20-8.1) 
Sec. 30-8.2. - Permitted and special uses. 
    Table 8-1: Residential Zoning Districts Permitted and Special Uses lists permitted and special uses for the residential districts. A "P" indicates that a use permitted within that district. An "S" indicates that a use a special use in that district and must obtain a special use permit as required in Section 30-5.3 (Special Use). No letter (i.e., a blank space), or the absence of the use from the table, indicates that use is not permitted within that district. 
VILLAGE OF WILMETTE, ILLINOIS

TABLE 8-1: RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS PERMITTED and SPECIAL USES 

P = Permitted Use // S = Special Use USE DISTRICT USE STANDARDS R R1 R2 R3 R4 RESIDENTIAL USES Accessory Living Unit S S S Section 30-12.3.(a) Adaptive Reuse Senior Housing/55+ Development S S S S Dwelling, Single-Family P P P P Dwelling, Two-Unit P P Dwelling, Multi-Family: up to 18 dwelling units per acre P Section 30-12.3.(r) Dwelling, Multi-Family: up to 30 dwelling units per acre S Section 30-12.3.(r) Dwelling, Multi-Family: up to 40 dwelling units per acre P Section 30-12.3.(r) Dwelling, Townhouse/Stacked Flat: up to 4 dwelling units per building and only 1 building per lot P P P Section 30-12.3.(i) Dwelling, Townhouse/Stacked Flat: more than 4 dwelling units per building or more than 1 building per lot, or with not all units fronting a public street S S S Section 30-12.3.(i) Group Home P P P P Section 30-12.3.(m) Group Home 6-8 S S S S Section 30-12.3.(m) Residential Care Facility S S P Section 30-12.3.(w) INSTITUTIONAL USES Cemetery S Cultural Facility S S S S S Section 30-12.3.(d) Day Care Center, Adult or Child S S S S S Section 30-12.3.(e) Day Care Home, Adult or Child S S S S S Section 30-12.3.(f) Educational Facility, College S S S S Section 30-12.3.(j) Educational Facility, Primary S S S S S Section 30-12.3.(j) Educational Facility, Secondary S S S S S Section 30-12.3.(j) Golf Course S Section 30-12.3.(l) Park/Playground S S S S S Place of Worship S S S S S Section 30-12.3.(v) Public Safety Facility S S S S S Recreation Center S S S S S Social Club or Lodge S S S Section 30-12.3.(y) OTHER Car-Sharing Spaces (Accessory Use) P P P Section 30-12.3.(b) Parking Lot (Principal Use) S S S S S Section 30-12.3.(s)2 Planned Unit Development S S S S S Article 30-6 Small Wireless Facilities S S Section 30-12.3.(cc) Unusual Recreation Equipment S S S S S Section 30-13.4.(x) Utility S S S S S Section 30-12.3.(aa) Wind Turbines S S S S S Section 30-13.4.(y) Wireless Telecommunications Equipment S S S S S Section 30-12.3.(bb) Exterior Lighting Section 30-13.3.(cc)  
;hn0; (Code 1993, § 20-8.2; Ord. No. 2015-O-13, 4-14-2015; Ord. No. 2016-O-11, 4-12-2016; Ord. No. 2018-O-48, § 3, 7-24-2018; Ord. No. 2018-O-57, § 3, 10-25-2018) 
Sec. 30-8.3. - Bulk and yard regulations. 
    The bulk and yard regulations for the residential districts are separated into two (2) separate tables. Table 8-2: R, R2, R3 and R4 Residential Zoning Districts Bulk and Yard Regulations establishes bulk and yard regulations for the R, R2, R3 and R4 residential zoning districts. Table 8-3: R1 Sub-District Residential Zoning Districts Bulk and Yard Regulations establishes bulk and yard regulations for the nine (9) R1 Sub-districts. The following additional standards apply to the bulk regulations: 
(a)  Building Height. 
(1)  On lots that slope downward towards the rear or side lot line, the height of the principal building shall not exceed a height of forty-five (45) feet as measured perpendicular to the existing grade. 
(2)  Single-family and two-unit dwellings with a predominantly flat roof, as determined by the Zoning Administrator, may not exceed a maximum height of twenty-seven (27) feet and two (2) stories. 
(3)  Non-habitable architectural features on institutional use principal buildings shall not exceed a height of sixty (60) feet provided that all required side and rear yards shall be increased by one (1) foot for each additional foot of height over thirty-five (35) feet. 
(b)  Townhouse/Stacked Flat Development. 
(1)  Bulk and yard requirements shall apply to the development as a whole, rather than to each individual dwelling unit, and shall not apply to lot lines dividing dwellings that share a party wall. 
(2)  When developed so that the individual units face the side lot line rather than the street, the combined side yards shall be no less than fifty percent (50%) of the lot width, with no one (1) side yard being less than twenty (20) feet. 
(c)  Multi-Family Dwellings. 
(1)  In the R4 district any side yard and rear yard that abuts property in an R, R1, R2 or R3 district shall be increased by one (1) foot for each one (1) foot above thirty-five (35) feet that the principal building or structure exceeds a height of thirty-five (35) feet. 
(d)  Maximum Lot Coverage and Floor Area for Single-Family Dwellings. The maximum lot coverage and floor area for single-family dwellings shall be one (1) of the two (2) following formulas, applicable as referenced in Table 8-2: R, R2, R3 and R4 Residential Zoning Districts Bulk and Yard Regulations and Table 8-3: R1 Sub-District Residential Zoning Districts Bulk and Yard Regulations: 
(1)  Original (1990). 
(A)  Lot Coverage: (0.40-((1.33 x Lot Area)/100,000)) x Lot Area 
In no event shall the maximum lot coverage be less than 20%. 
(B)  Floor Area: ((0.40-((1.33 x Lot Area)/100,000)) x 1.5) x Lot Area 
In no event shall the maximum floor area be less than 30%. 
(2)  Modified (2003). 
(A)  Lot Coverage: (((0.5-(Lot Area/80,000))/1.38)) x Lot Area 
In no event shall the maximum lot coverage be less than 20%. 
(B)  Floor Area: ((0.5-(Lot Area/80,000))) x Lot Area 
In no event shall the maximum floor area be less than 30%. 
(3)  Lot Coverage and Floor Area Bonuses. Lot coverage and floor area bonuses in addition to the maximum lot coverage and maximum floor area established by formula above shall be applicable as referenced in Table 8-2 and Table 8-3. 
VILLAGE OF WILMETTE, ILLINOIS 

TABLE 8-2: R, R2, R3 AND R4 RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS BULK AND 

YARD REGULATIONS DISTRICTS R R-A R2 R3 R4 LOT AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS MINIMUM LOT AREA 15,000 s.f. 10,000 s.f. Townhouse/ 
Stacked Flat: 3,000 s.f./du 
All Other Uses: 8,400 s.f. Townhouse/ 
Stacked Flat: 3,000 s.f./du 
All Other Uses: 8,000 s.f. Townhouse/ 
Stacked Flat: 3,000 s.f./du 
All Other Uses: 6,000 s.f. MINIMUM LOT WIDTH 100' 60' Townhouse/ 
Stacked Flat: 100' 
All Other Uses: 50' Townhouse/ 
Stacked Flat: 100' 
All Other Uses: 50' 100' MAXIMUM BUILDING HEIGHT (1) Lesser of 35' or 2.5 stories Lesser of 35' or 2.5 stories Lesser of 35' or 2.5 stories Multi-Family: Lesser of 48' or 4 stories 
All Other Uses: Lesser of 36' or 2.5 stories 85' MAXIMUM FIRST FLOOR HEIGHT (2) SF Dwelling built on or before July 1, 2003: max of 5' 
SF Dwelling built after July 1, 2003: max of 4' SF Dwelling built on or before July 1, 2003: max of 5' 
SF Dwelling built after July 1, 2003: max of 4' SF Dwelling built on or before July 1, 2003: max of 5' 
SF Dwelling built after July 1, 2003: max of 4' 
Townhouse/ 
Stacked Flat: max of 4' SF Dwelling built on or before July 1, 2003: max of 5' 
SF Dwelling built after July 1, 2003: max of 4' Not Applicable MINIMUM YARD REGULATIONS FRONT YARD Greater of 40' or Established Front Yard Greater of 25' or Established Front Yard Greater of 25' or Established Front Yard Greater of 25' or Established Front Yard Greater of 30' or Established Front Yard INTERIOR SIDE YARD SF Dwelling: Greater of 10% of lot width or 5' 
All Other Uses: 50' SF Dwelling: Greater of 10% of lot width or 5' 
All Other Uses: 50' SF Dwelling: Greater of 10% of lot width or 5' 
Townhouse/ 
Stacked Flat: 
Greater of 10% of lot width or 5' (10) 
All Other Uses: (11) 12' Dwelling: 12' (4) 
All Other Uses: 30' COMBINED SIDE YARD Greater of 25% of lot width or 12.5' Greater of 25% of lot width or 12.5' Greater of 25% of lot width or 12.5' Greater of 25% of lot width or 12.5' 24' SIDE YARD ADJOINING A STREET SF Dwelling: 30% of lot width, min. of 15' to a max. of 30' 
All Other Uses: 50' SF Dwelling: 30% of lot width, min. of 15' to a max. of 30' 
All Other Uses: 50' 30% of lot width, min. of 15' to a max. of 25' SF Dwelling: Greater of 10% of lot width or 5' 
All Other Uses: 25' Dwelling: 24' 
All Other Uses: 60' REAR YARD SF Dwelling: 20% of lot depth, min. of 40' to a max. of 50' (3) 
All Other Uses: 50' 20% of lot depth, min. of 25' to a max. of 40' 
All Other Uses: 50' 20% of lot depth, min. of 30' to a max. of 40' 20% of lot depth, min. of 30' to a max. of 40' 35' (4) MAXIMUM AREA AND COVERAGE REGULATIONS (5) MAXIMUM LOT COVERAGE SF Dwelling:See 30-8.3.(d)(2)(A) 
Other Uses: 
Not Applicable SF Dwelling:See 30-8.3.(d)(2)(A) 
Other Uses: 
Not Applicable SF Dwelling:See 30-8.3.(d)(2)(A) 
Two-Unit: 
((0.5-(Lot Area/80,000))/1.38) x 1.25) x Lot Area 
Other Uses: 
Not Applicable SF Dwelling:See 30-8.3.(d)(2)(A) 
Other Uses: 
Not Applicable Not Applicable MAXIMUM LOT COVERAGE 
BONUS FOR 
GARAGE SF Dwelling built on or before March 3, 1990: 200 s.f. 
SF Dwelling built after March 3, 1990: 0 s.f. SF Dwelling built on or before March 3, 1990: 200 s.f. 
SF Dwelling built after March 3, 1990: 0 s.f. SF Dwelling built on or before March 3, 1990: 200 s.f. 
SF Dwelling built after March 3, 1990: 0 s.f. Not Applicable Not Applicable MAXIMUM FLOOR AREA SF Dwelling:See 30-8.3.(d)(2)(B) 
All Other Uses: 
(0.7 x Lot Area) SF Dwelling:See 30-8.3.(d)(2)(B) 
All Other Uses: 
(0.7 x Lot Area) SF Dwelling:See 30-8.3.(d)(2)(B) 
Two-Unit: ((0.5-(Lot Area/80,000)) x 1.25) x Lot AreaTownhouse/ 
Stacked Flat: (0.7 x Lot Area) 
All Other Uses: 
(0.8 x Lot Area) SF Dwelling:See 30-8.3.(d)(2)(B) 
Two-Unit: ((0.5-(Lot Area/80,000)) x 1.25) x Lot AreaTownhouse/ 
Stacked Flat: (0.7 x Lot Area) 
All Other Uses: 
(1.0 x Lot Area) 3.0 MAXIMUM FLOOR AREA BONUS FOR GARAGE (6) (7) 440 s.f. 440 s.f. 440 s.f. 440 s.f. Not Applicable MAXIMUM FLOOR AREA BONUS FOR FRONT PORCH (8) (Lot Area /8,400) x 200, but not to exceed 200 s.f. (Lot Area /8,400) x 200, but not to exceed 200 s.f. (Lot Area /8,400) x 200, but not to exceed 200 s.f. (Lot Area /8,400) x 200, but not to exceed 200 s.f. Not Applicable MAXIMUM FLOOR AREA BONUS FOR ATTIC (9) (Lot Area /12,000) x 300, but not to exceed 300 s.f. (Lot Area /12,000) x 300, but not to exceed 300 s.f. (Lot Area /12,000) x 300, but not to exceed 300 s.f. (Lot Area /12,000) x 300, but not to exceed 300 s.f. Not Applicable  
NOTES: 
(1)  See Section 30-8.3.(a) for more height information. 
(2)  First floor height measured from calculated grade to top of finished first floor. 
(3)  See Section 30-2.5.(a)(2)(B) regarding when the rear lot line is the ordinary high water mark. 
(4)  See Section 30-8.3.(d) for additional setback requirements. 
(5)  Lot coverage and floor area bonuses apply only to single-family dwellings. 
(6)  See Section 30-2.5.(g) for more information about the garage bonus. 
(7)  See Section 30-13.4.(i)(1) for more information about garage requirements. 
(8)  The front porch bonuses only apply to front porches in accordance with Section 30-2.5.(h). 
(9)  The attic floor area bonus applies to the space above the second floor and below the roof rafters; see also Section 30-2.5.(i). 
(10)  See Section 30-12.3.(i) and Section 30-8.3.(b) for setbacks applicable to townhouse/stacked flat dwellings. 
(11)  For all other uses, each side yard shall be no less than twelve (12) feet. For all other uses on a corner lot, the side yard abutting the street shall be no less than thirty percent (30%) of the lot width or twenty-five (25) feet, whichever is less, but in no event less than fifteen (15) feet. 
VILLAGE OF WILMETTE, ILLINOIS

TABLE 8-3: R1 SUB-DISTRICT RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS BULK AND YARD REGULATIONS DISTRICTS R1-A R1-B R1-C R1-D LOT AND HEIGHT 
REGULATIONS MINIMUM LOT AREA 8,400 s.f. 6,000 s.f. 6,000 s.f. 8,400 s.f. MINIMUM LOT WIDTH 60' 40' 50' 50' MAXIMUM BUILDING HEIGHT (1) Lesser of 35' or 2.5 stories Lesser of 30' or 2.5 stories Lesser of 30' or 2.5 stories Lesser of 35' or 2.5 stories MAXIMUM FIRST FLOOR HEIGHT EXISTING (2) SF Dwelling built on or before March 5, 1990: max of 5' 
SF Dwelling built after March 5, 1990: max of 3' SF Dwelling built on or before March 5, 1990: max of 5' 
SF Dwelling built after March 5, 1990: max of 3' SF Dwelling built on or before July 1, 2003: max of 4' 
SF Dwelling built after July 1, 2003: max of 3' SF Dwelling built on or before July 1, 2003: max of 5' 
SF Dwelling built after July 1, 2003: max of 4' MINIMUM YARD 
REGULATIONS FRONT YARD Greater of 25' or Established Front Yard Greater of 25' or Established Front Yard Greater of 25' or Established Front Yard Greater of 25' or Established Front Yard INTERIOR SIDE YARD SF Dwelling: Greater of 10% of lot width or 5' 
All Other Uses: 20' SF Dwelling: Greater of 10% of lot width or 4' 
All Other Uses: 20' SF Dwelling: Greater of 10% of lot width or 5' 
All Other Uses: 20' SF Dwelling: Greater of 10% of lot width or 5' 
All Other Uses: 20' COMBINED SIDE YARD Greater of 25% of lot width or 12.5' Greater of 25% of lot width or 10' Greater of 25% of lot width or 12.5' Greater of 25% of lot width or 12.5' SIDE YARD ADJOINING A STREET SF Dwelling: 30% of lot width, min. of 15' to a max. of 25' 
All Other Uses: 20' SF Dwelling: 30% of lot width, min. of 12' to a max. of 25' 
All Other Uses: 20' SF Dwelling: 30% of lot width, min. of 15' to a max. of 25' 
All Other Uses: 20' SF Dwelling: 30% of lot width, min. of 15' to a max. of 25' 
All Other Uses: 20' REAR YARD SF Dwelling: 20% of lot depth, min. of 25' to a max. of 40' 
All Other Uses: 40' SF Dwelling: 20% of lot depth, min. of 25' to a max. of 40' 
All Other Uses: 40' SF Dwelling: 20% of lot depth, min. of 25' to a max. of 40' 
All Other Uses: 40' SF Dwelling: 20% of lot depth, min. of 25' to a max. of 40' 
All Other Uses: 40' MAXIMUM AREA AND COVERAGE 
REGULATIONS (3) MAXIMUM LOT 
COVERAGE See 30-8.3.(d)(2)(A) See 30-8.3.(d)(1)(A) See 30-8.3.(d)(1)(A) See 30-8.3.(d)(2)(A) MAXIMUM LOT 
COVERAGE BONUS 
FOR GARAGE SF Dwelling built on or before March 3, 1990: 200 s.f. 
SF Dwelling built after March 3, 1990: 0 s.f. Lot size less than 8,400 s.f.: 200 s.f. 
Lot size 8,400 s.f. or greater: 400 s.f. Lot size less than 8,400 s.f.: 200 s.f. 
Lot size 8,400 s.f. or greater: 400 s.f. SF Dwelling built on or before March 3, 1990: 200 s.f. 
SF Dwelling built after March 3, 1990: 0 s.f. MAXIMUM LOT 
COVERAGE BONUS 
FOR FRONT PORCH Not Applicable 100 s.f. 100 s.f. Not Applicable MAXIMUM FLOOR AREA SF Dwelling:See: 20-8.3.(d)(2)(B) 
All Other Uses: (0.7 x Lot Area) SF Dwelling:See: 20-8.3.(d)(1)(B) 
All Other Uses: (0.7 x Lot Area) SF Dwelling:See: 20-8.3.(d)(1)(B) 
All Other Uses: (0.7 x Lot Area) SF Dwelling:See: 20-8.3.(d)(2)(B) 
All Other Uses: (0.7 x Lot Area) MAXIMUM FLOOR AREA BONUS FOR GARAGE (4) (5) 440 s.f. 440 s.f. 440 s.f. 440 s.f. MAXIMUM FLOOR AREA BONUS FOR FRONT PORCH (6) (Lot Area /8,400) x 200, not to exceed 200 s.f. (Lot Area /8,400) x 100, not to exceed 100 s.f. (Lot Area /8,400) x 100, not to exceed 100 s.f. (Lot Area /8,400) x 200, not to exceed 200 s.f. MAXIMUM FLOOR AREA BONUS FOR ATTIC (7) (Lot Area /12,000) x 300, not to exceed 300 s.f. Not Applicable Not Applicable (Lot Area /12,000) x 300, not to exceed 300 s.f.  
NOTES: 
(1)  See Section 30-8.3.(a) for more height information. 
(2)  First floor height measured from calculated grade to top of finished first floor. 
(3)  Lot coverage and floor area bonuses apply only to single-family dwellings. 
(4)  See Section 30-2.5.(g) for more information about the garage bonus. 
(5)  See Section 30-13.4.(i)(1) for more information about garage requirements. 
(6)  The front porch bonuses only apply to front porches in accordance with Section 30-2.5.(h). 
(7)  The attic floor area bonus applies to the space above the second floor and below the roof rafters; see also Section 30-2.5.(i). 
VILLAGE OF WILMETTE, ILLINOIS 

TABLE 8-3: R1 SUB-DISTRICT RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS BULK AND YARD REGULATIONS DISTRICTS R1-E R1-F R1-G R1-H R1-I LOT AND HEIGHT 
REGULATIONS MINIMUM LOT AREA 6,000 s.f. 8,400 s.f. 8,400 s.f. 7,500 s.f. 5,000 s.f. MINIMUM LOT WIDTH 40' 50' 60' 50' 40' MAXIMUM BUILDING HEIGHT (1) Lesser of 30' or 2.5 stories Lesser of 30' or 2.5 stories Lesser of 35' or 2.5 stories Lesser of 35' or 2.5 stories Lesser of 35' or 2.5 stories MAXIMUM FIRST FLOOR HEIGHT EXISTING (2) SF Dwelling built on or before July 1, 2003: max of 5' 
SF Dwelling built after July 1, 2003: max of 4' SF Dwelling built on or before July 1, 2003: max of 4' 
SF Dwelling built after July 1, 2003: max of 3' SF Dwelling built on or before July 1, 2003: max of 5' 
SF Dwelling built after July 1, 2003: max of 4' SF Dwelling built on or before July 1, 2003: max of 5' 
SF Dwelling built after July 1, 2003: max of 4' SF Dwelling built on or before July 1, 2003: max of 5' 
SF Dwelling built after July 1, 2003: max of 4' MINIMUM YARD 
REGULATIONS FRONT YARD Greater of 25' or Established Front Yard Greater of 25' or Established Front Yard Greater of 25' or Established Front Yard Greater of 25' or Established Front Yard Greater of 18' or Established Front Yard INTERIOR SIDE YARD SF Dwelling: Greater of 10% of lot width or 3' 
All Other Uses: 20' SF Dwelling: Greater of 10% of lot width or 5' 
All Other Uses: 20' SF Dwelling: Greater of 10% of lot width or 5' 
All Other Uses: 20' SF Dwelling: Greater of 10% of lot width or 5' 
All Other Uses: 20' SF Dwelling: Greater of 10% of lot width or 4' 
All Other Uses: 20' COMBINED SIDE YARD Greater of 25% of lot width or 7.5' Greater of 25% of lot width or 12.5' Greater of 25% of lot width or 12.5' Greater of 25% of lot width or 12.5' Greater of 25% of lot width or 10' SIDE YARD ADJOINING A STREET SF Dwelling: 30% of lot width, min. of 9' to a max. of 25' 
All Other Uses: 20' SF Dwelling: 30% of lot width, min. of 15' to a max. of 25' 
All Other Uses: 20' SF Dwelling: 30% of lot width, min. of 15' to a max. of 25' 
All Other Uses: 20' SF Dwelling: 30% of lot width, min. of 15' to a max. of 25' 
All Other Uses: 20' SF Dwelling: 30% of lot width, min. of 12' to a max. of 25' 
All Other Uses: 20' REAR YARD SF Dwelling: 20% of lot depth, min. of 25' to a max. of 40' 
All Other Uses: 40' SF Dwelling: 20% of lot depth, min. of 25' to a max. of 40' 
All Other Uses: 40' SF Dwelling: 20% of lot depth, min. of 25' to a max. of 40' 
All Other Uses: 40' SF Dwelling: 20% of lot depth, min. of 25' to a max. of 40' 
All Other Uses: 40' SF Dwelling: 20% of lot depth, min. of 25' to a max. of 40' 
All Other Uses: 40' MAXIMUM AREA AND COVERAGE 
REGULATIONS (3) MAXIMUM LOT 
COVERAGE See 30-8.3.(d)(1)(A) See 30-8.3.(d)(1)(A) See 30-8.3.(d)(2)(A) See 30-8.3.(d)(2)(A) See 30-8.3.(d)(1)(A) MAXIMUM LOT 
COVERAGE BONUS 
FOR GARAGE Lot size less than 8,400 s.f.: 200 s.f. 
Lot size 8,400 s.f. or greater: 400 s.f. Lot size less than 8,400 s.f.: 200 s.f. 
Lot size 8,400 s.f. or greater: 400 s.f. SF Dwelling built on or before March 3, 1990: 200 s.f. 
SF Dwelling built after March 3, 1990: 0 s.f. SF Dwelling built on or before March 3, 1990: 200 s.f. 
SF Dwelling built after March 3, 1990: 0 s.f. Lot size less than 8,400 s.f.: 200 s.f. 
Lot size 8,400 s.f. or greater: 400 s.f. MAXIMUM LOT COVERAGE BONUS FOR FRONT PORCH 100 s.f. 100 s.f. Not Applicable Not Applicable 100 s.f. MAXIMUM FLOOR AREA SF Dwelling: See 30-8.3.(d)(1)(B) 
All Other Uses: (0.7 x Lot Area) SF Dwelling: See 30-8.3.(d)(1)(B) 
All Other Uses: (0.7 x Lot Area) SF Dwelling: See 30-8.3.(d)(2)(B) 
All Other Uses: (0.7 x Lot Area) SF Dwelling: See 30-8.3.(d)(2)(B) 
All Other Uses: (0.7 x Lot Area) SF Dwelling: See 30-8.3.(d)(1)(B) 
All Other Uses: (0.7 x Lot Area) MAXIMUM FLOOR AREA BONUS FOR GARAGE (4) (5) 440 s.f. 440 s.f. 440 s.f. 440 s.f. 440 s.f. MAXIMUM FLOOR AREA BONUS FOR FRONT PORCH (6) (Lot Area /8,400) x 200, not to exceed 200 s.f. (Lot Area /8,400) x 100, not to exceed 100 s.f. (Lot Area /8,400) x 300, not to exceed 300 s.f. (Lot Area /8,400) x 300, not to exceed 300 s.f. (Lot Area /8,400) x 200, not to exceed 200 s.f. MAXIMUM FLOOR AREA BONUS FOR ATTIC (7) Not Applicable Not Applicable (Lot Area /12,000) x 400, not to exceed 400 s.f. (Lot Area /12,000) x 400, not to exceed 400 s.f. Not Applicable  
NOTES: 
(1)  See Section 30-8.3.(a) for more height information. 
(2)  First floor height measured from calculated grade to top of finished first floor. 
(3)  Lot coverage and floor area bonuses apply only to single-family dwellings. 
(4)  See Section 30-2.5.(g) for more information about the garage bonus. 
(5)  See Section 30-13.4.(i)(1) for more information about garage requirements. 
(6)  The front porch bonuses only apply to front porches in accordance with Section 30-2.5.(h). 
(7)  The attic floor area bonus applies to the space above the second floor and below the roof rafters; see also Section 30-2.5.(i). 
(4)  Applicability of Contextual Bulk Regulations. For single-family dwellings, if the average height of all homes on either side and within one hundred (100) feet of the subject property is more than thirty (30) feet, the applicant may choose to apply the lot coverage and floor area formulas contained in Table 8-4: Contextual Bulk Regulations. If the mean average height of these homes is less than or equal to thirty (30) feet, the applicant may choose to apply the lot coverage and floor area formulas contained in Table 8-4. 
VILLAGE OF WILMETTE, ILLINOIS 

TABLE 8-4: CONTEXTUAL BULK REGULATIONS AVERAGE HEIGHT 
30' OR LESS AVERAGE HEIGHT 
GREATER THAN 30' MAXIMUM BUILDING HEIGHT (1) Lesser of 30' or 2.5 stories Lesser of 35' or 2.5 stories MAXIMUM LOT COVERAGE See 30-8.3.(d)(1)(A) See 30-8.3.(d)(2)(A) MAXIMUM LOT COVERAGE BONUS FOR 
GARAGE Lot size less than 8,400 s.f.: 200 s.f. 
Lot size 8,400 s.f. or greater: 400 s.f. SF Dwelling built on or before March 3, 1990: 200 s.f. 
SF Dwelling built after March 3, 1990: 0 s.f. MAXIMUM LOT COVERAGE BONUS FOR FRONT PORCH 100 s.f. Not Applicable MAXIMUM FLOOR AREA See 30-8.3.(d)(1)(B) See 30-8.3.(d)(2)(B) MAXIMUM FLOOR AREA BONUS FOR GARAGE AND SHED (2) (3) 440 s.f. 440 s.f. MAXIMUM FLOOR AREA BONUS FOR FRONT PORCH (4) (Lot Area /8,400) x 100, but not to exceed 100 s.f. (Lot Area /8,400) x 200, but not to exceed 200 s.f. MAXIMUM FLOOR AREA BONUS FOR ATTIC (5) Not Applicable (Lot Area /12,000) x 300, but not to exceed 300 s.f.  
NOTES: 
(1)  See Section 30-8.3.(a) for more height information. 
(2)  See Section 30-2.5.(g) for more information about the garage bonus. 
(3)  See Section 30-13.4.(i)(1) for more information about garage requirements. 
(4)  The front porch bonuses only apply to front porches in accordance with Section 30-2.5.(h). 
(5)  The attic floor area bonus applies to the space above the second floor and below the roof rafters; see also Section 30-2.5.(i). 
(e)  Impervious Surface Limits. In no event shall there be more impervious surface coverage upon a lot than given in Table 8-5: R, R1, R2, R3 and R4 Residential Zoning Districts Impervious Surface Coverage Requirements, except for the following conditions: 
(1)  Properties improved with two-unit or townhouse/stacked flat dwellings located in the R2 district may cover up to sixty percent (60%) of the required rear yard with a detached garage. 
(2)  Properties located along Lake Michigan may cover up to seventy-five percent (75%) of the required rear yard to accommodate the installation of a lake shoreline erosion control system necessary, as approved by the Illinois Department of Transportation or other designated body, to protect the integrity of the shoreline. 
VILLAGE OF WILMETTE, ILLINOIS 

TABLE 8-5: R, R1, R2, R3 AND R4 RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS IMPERVIOUS SURFACE COVERAGE REQUIREMENTS R R1 R2 R3 R4 FRONT YARD MAXIMUM COVERAGE (4) 30% 30% 30% 30% 30% COMBINED SIDE YARD MAXIMUM COVERAGE (4) 60% 60% 60% 60% 60% SIDE YARD ADJOINING A STREET MAXIMUM COVERAGE (1) (4) 30% 30% 30% 30% 30% REAR YARD MAXIMUM COVERAGE 60% 60% 60% 60% 60% REAR YARD STRUCTURE COVERAGE (2) 35% 35% 35% 35% 35% REAR YARD PAVEMENT COVERAGE (3) (4) 30% 30% 30% 30% 30%  
NOTES: 
(1)  For the purpose of this section, the side yard adjoining a street shall end at the rear yard setback line, not the rear lot line. 
(2)  Including but not limited to garages, sheds, playhouses, cabanas, sport courts, swimming pools, and similar structures. 
(3)  Including but not limited to driveways, aprons, sidewalks, patios, decks, parking pads, and similar at-grade structures. 
(4)  For single-family and two-unit dwellings, the maximum amount of coverage may be increased by ten percent (10%) of the allowable square footage of impervious surface coverage when all such flat surfaces in the yard are non-mortared pavers or a similar pervious surface over a non-compacted base. 
(Code 1993, § 20-8.3; Ord. No. 2014-O-65, 11-11-2014; Ord. No. 2015-O-13, 4-14-2015; Ord. No. 2016-O-11, 4-1216; Ord. No. 2017-O-59, 10-10-2017) 
Sec. 30-8.4. - General standards of applicability. 
(a)  Accessory Structures and Uses. See Section 30-13.4 (Accessory Structures and Uses) for standards covering accessory structures and uses. 
(b)  Permitted Encroachments. See Section 30-13.5 (Permitted Encroachments) for standards governing encroachments. 
(c)  Temporary Uses and Structures. See Section 30-13.6 (Temporary Uses and Structures) for standards governing temporary uses. 
(d)  Off-Street Parking and Loading. See Article 30-14 (Off-Street Parking and Loading) for standards governing off-street parking and loading. 
(e)  Landscaping and Screening. See Article 30-15 (Landscaping and Screening) for standards governing landscaping and screening. 
(f)  Signs. See Article 30-16 (Signs) for standards governing signs. 
(Code 1993, § 20-8.4) 
ARTICLE 30-9. - COMMERCIAL ZONING DISTRICTS 

Sec. 30-9.1. - Commercial zoning districts purpose statements. 
(a)  Purpose of the NR Neighborhood Retail Business District. The NR District is established to promote the continuation of existing commercial centers that provide goods and services primarily for the convenience of the residents of the surrounding neighborhood. In addition, the district is designed to accommodate limited multi-family housing opportunities in a small-scale, mixed-use neighborhood environment. The development standards and range of allowable uses for the NR District are designed to maintain a relatively small-scale, pedestrian-oriented environment with the character of neighborhood commercial districts. 
(b)  Purpose of the NR-1 Linden Square Neighborhood Business District. The NR-1 Linden Square District is centered at the intersection of Linden Avenue and 4th Street to promote commercial and multi-family housing primarily for the benefit of district residents and the surrounding neighborhood, in a small-scale, mixed-use neighborhood environment. The development standards and range of allowable uses are designed to maintain a relatively small-scale, pedestrian-oriented environment that capitalizes on the synergies with the public transportation and tourist activities afforded by the Linden CTA Station, Baha'i House of Worship, and Wilmette Harbor. 
(c)  Purpose of the GC-1 General Commercial District. The GC-1 District is established to provide a location for higher-volume and higher intensity commercial uses which provide employment and revenues for the Village. Due to the higher volume of such establishments, and the traffic they typically generate, the GC-1 District is intended to be located along arterial streets and rail lines, and generally confined to existing commercial areas to ensure that the traffic generated by such uses does not impact nearby residential neighborhoods and that the uses themselves create less of an impact on residential areas than they would in other locations in the Village. The development standards for the GC-1 District are designed to buffer the GC-1 District from nearby residential properties and to maintain the general appearance of major thoroughfares through the Village. 
(d)  Purpose of the GC-2 Heavy Commercial District. The GC-2 District is established to provide a location for commercial uses which do not involve a high level of retail customer traffic or a large number of employees, but represent relatively intensive use of land, such as establishments involving manufacturing, heavy equipment, and the processing, distribution, and storage of goods and equipment. The GC-2 District is intended to be located only on properties which abut the railroad right-of-way and which are not well suited for other commercial or residential uses, in order to provide a buffer between the railroad right-of-way and nearby residential areas. The development standards for the GC-2 District are designed to buffer the GC-2 District from nearby residential properties and to maintain and improve the general appearance of such areas. 
(e)  Purpose of the OR Office-Research District. The OR District is established to promote and accommodate unified development projects for offices, research facilities, and related uses. The development standards for the OR District are designed to maintain a low-intensity environment that is compatible with nearby residential areas. 
(Code 1993, § 20-9.1) 
Sec. 30-9.2. - Permitted and special uses. 
    Table 9-1: Commercial Zoning Districts Permitted and Special Uses lists permitted and special uses for the commercial districts. A "P" indicates that a use is permitted within that district. An "S" indicates that a use is a special use in that district and must obtain a special use permit as required in Section 30-5.3 (Special Use). No letter (i.e., a blank space), or the absence of the use from the table, indicates that use is not permitted within that district. 
VILLAGE OF WILMETTE, ILLINOIS 

TABLE 9-1: COMMERCIAL ZONING DISTRICTS PERMITTED AND SPECIAL USES 

P = Permitted Use // S = Special Use USE DISTRICT USE STANDARDS NR NR-1 GC-1 GC-2 OR RESIDENTIAL USES Dwelling, Above the Ground Floor P P P Section 30-12.3.(h) Residential Care Facility S Section 30-12.3.(w) INSTITUTIONAL USES Cultural Facility S S S Section 30-12.3.(d) Day Care Center, Adult or Child S S S S Section 30-12.3.(e) Educational Facility, Vocational S S P S S Section 30-12.3.(j) Government Facility P P P P P Park/Playground P P P P P Place of Worship S S S Section 30-12.3.(v) Public Safety Facility S S S S S Engineering and Public Works Facility S Recreation Center S S S S S Social Club or Lodge S S S Section 30-12.3.(y) COMMERCIAL USES Animal Hospital S S P Art Gallery P P P Art Studio P P P Broadcasting Studio S S Brew Pub S S S Car Wash S Section 30-12.3.(c) Convenience Mart S S S Craft Brewery/Distillery S S S Drive-Through Facility S S Section 30-12.3.(g) Financial Institution P P P P Garden Center S Gas Station S S Section 30-12.3.(k) Health Club S S S Heavy Retail, Rental and Service S Hotel/Motel S Indoor Amusement Facility S S S Kennel S Section 30-12.3.(n) Live Performance Venue S S S Manufacturing, General S Medical/Dental Clinic, Small P P P P Medical/Dental Clinic, Large S S P P Medical Cannabis Cultivation Center S Medical Cannabis Dispensing Organization S Motor Vehicle Dealership S S Section 30-12.3.(o) Motor Vehicle Operations Facility S Section 30-12.3.(p) Motor Vehicle Rental Establishment S S Section 30-12.3.(o) Motor Vehicle Service and Repair, Minor S S S S Section 30-12.3.(q) Motor Vehicle Service and Repair, Major S Section 30-12.3.(q) Office, Above the Ground Floor P P P P Office, Less than ten percent (10%) linear street frontage of the district (1) P P P P Office, ten percent (10%) or greater of linear street frontage of the district (2) S S P P Outdoor Dining P P P Section 30-12.3.(u) Outdoor Storage S Section 30-12.3.(v) Pawn Shop S S S S Personal Services Establishment P P P Pet Day Care Facility S S S Section 30-12.3.(n) Printing and Photocopying Establishment S S S Research and Development Facility S S Restaurant, Carry-Out/Delivery S S S Section 30-12.3.(x) Restaurant, Full Service P P P Restaurant, Limited Service S S S Section 30-12.3.(x) Restaurant, Specialty P P P Retail Goods Establishment P P P Twenty-four-Hour Business Use S S S S S Section 30-12.3.(z) Warehouse/Distribution S OTHER Car-Sharing Spaces (Accessory Use) P P P P P Section 30-12.3.(b) Parking Lot (Principal Use) S S S Section 30-12.3.(s)(2) Parking Structure (Principal Use) S S S Section 30-12.3.(s)(1) Planned Unit Development S S S S S Article 30-6 Small Wireless Utility S S S S S Section 30-12.3.(aa) Wind Turbines S S S S S Section 30-13.4.(y) Wireless Telecommunications Equipment S S S S S Section 30-12.3.(bb)  
NOTES: 
(1)  Offices located at grade or up to eight (8) feet above or below grade, which occupy less than ten percent (10%) of frontage in the district where it is located. 
(2)  Offices located at grade or up to eight (8) feet above or below grade, which occupy ten percent (10%) or more of frontage in the district where it is located. 
(Code 1993, § 20-9.2; Ord. No. 2015-O-13, 4-14-2015) 
Sec. 30-9.3. - Bulk and yard regulations. 
    Table 9-2: Commercial Zoning Districts Bulk and Yard Regulations establishes bulk and yard regulations for the commercial zoning districts. 
VILLAGE OF WILMETTE, ILLINOIS 

TABLE 9-2: COMMERCIAL ZONING DISTRICTS BULK AND YARD REGULATIONS DISTRICT NR NR-1 GC-1 GC-2 OR BULK REGULATIONS MINIMUM LOT AREA None None None None 1 acre MINIMUM LOT WIDTH 30' 30' 30' 30' 200' MAXIMUM BUILDING HEIGHT 30' and 21/2 stories 35' and 3 stories 30' and 21/2 stories 30' 48' and 4 stories MAXIMUM FAR 1.0 1.0 1.0 0.5 1.0 MINIMUM YARDS FRONT YARD None Build-to line: 0' None None 30' REAR YARD 25' 25' 25' 25' 50' INTERIOR SIDE YARD None, but if provided a min. of 5' (1) None, but if provided a min. of 5' (1) None, but if provided a min. of 5' (1) None, but if provided a min. of 5' (1) 50' SIDE YARD ADJOINING A STREET None Build-to line: 0' None None 30'  
NOTES: 
(1)  Where the side lot line is adjacent to a residential zoning district, then the side yard requirement of the adjacent residential district shall apply along that side lot line; if an alley or a street intervenes between the property and the adjacent residential district, then the side yard shall be a minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the side yard requirement of the adjacent residential district. 
(Code 1993, § 20-9.3) 
Sec. 30-9.4. - General standards of applicability. 
(a)  Accessory Structures and Uses. See Section 30-13.4 (Accessory Structures and Uses) for standards covering accessory structures and uses. 
(b)  Permitted Encroachments. See Section 30-13.5 (Permitted Encroachments) for standards governing encroachments. 
(c)  Temporary Uses and Structures. See Section 30-13.6 (Temporary Uses and Structures) for standards governing temporary uses. 
(d)  Off-Street Parking and Loading. See Article 30-14 (Off-Street Parking and Loading) for standards governing off-street parking and loading. 
(e)  Landscaping and Screening. See Article 30-15 (Landscaping and Screening) for standards governing landscaping and screening. 
(f)  Signs. See Article 30-16 (Signs) for standards governing signs. 
(Code 1993, § 20-9.4) 
ARTICLE 30-10. - VILLAGE CENTER DISTRICT 

Sec. 30-10.1. - VC Village Center District purpose statement. 
    The purpose of the VC, Village Center District is to promote a transit oriented, mixed use, walkable village center. The VC District is designed to accommodate pedestrian-oriented development in the Village core as well as development oriented to both pedestrian and motorist along Green Bay Road at the gateways leading into this area. The design regulations of the VC District are of critical importance to the image of the Village and are more specific than those provided elsewhere in this Ordinance. 
(Code 1993, § 20-10.1) 
Sec. 30-10.2. - Existing development deemed conforming. 
    As of the date of adoption of this Ordinance, all existing structures within the boundaries of the VC District that do not conform to the standards of this Ordinance shall be deemed conforming until such time as the structure is destroyed by any means to an extent of more than fifty percent (50%) of its replacement cost at the time of destruction, and may be repaired, enlarged or altered in conformance with the requirements of Article 30-17 (Non-conformities). Any structure destroyed by any means to an extent of more than fifty percent (50%) of its replacement cost at the time of destruction shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with the requirements of the VC District. 
(Code 1993, § 20-10.2) 
Sec. 30-10.3. - Street frontage designations. 
    All public ways within the VC District are assigned a street frontage designation as shown on Figure 10-1: Village Center Street Frontage Map. Each designation establishes a set of site and building location, design and use regulations for structures and lots that abut such frontages. Where a lot abuts more than one (1) street frontage designation, the requirements of each street frontage designation shall apply to the appropriate frontage of the lot: (See Table 10-1: Village Center Building Setback Regulations and Table 10-2 Permitted and Special Uses.) Where a use abuts more than one (1) street frontage designation the use must conform to the requirements of both frontage designations. The street frontage designations are: 
(a)  Pedestrian Commercial East Street Frontage. 
(b)  Pedestrian Commercial West Street Frontage. 
(c)  Arterial Street Frontage. 
(d)  Pedestrian Institutional Street Frontage. 
(e)  Pedestrian Residential Street Frontage. 
FIGURE 10-1: VILLAGE CENTER STREET FRONTAGE MAP 

(Code 1993, § 20-10.3) 
Sec. 30-10.4. - Building setback. 
    The location of a building shall be regulated by Table 10-1: Village Center Building Setback Regulations. Such regulations are further illustrated in Figure 10-2: Pedestrian Commercial East Street Frontage, Figure 10-3: Pedestrian Commercial West Street Frontage, Figure 10-4: Arterial Street Frontage, Figure 10-5: Pedestrian Institutional Street Frontage and Figure 10-6: Pedestrian Residential Street Frontage. 
VILLAGE OF WILMETTE, ILLINOIS 

TABLE 10-1: VILLAGE CENTER BUILDING SETBACK REGULATIONS REGULATIONS FRONTAGE Pedestrian Commercial East Pedestrian Commercial West Arterial Pedestrian Institutional Pedestrian Residential FRONT YARD SETBACK (1) MINIMUM 0' 5' 0' 5' 0' MAXIMUM 0' 5' 15' 25' (2) 10' INTERIOR SIDE YARD SETBACK MINIMUM 0' 0' 0' 0' 0' MAXIMUM 
(non-corner lots only) 0' (3) 0' (3) None 0' (3) 0' (3) SIDE YARD ADJOINING A STREET SETBACK MINIMUM 0' 0' (5) 0' 5'( 2) 0' MAXIMUM 0' 0' (5) 15' 25' (2) 10' REAR YARD SETBACK MINIMUM 
(adjacent to residential district) 25' (4) 25' (4) 25' (4) 25'(4) 25' (4) MINIMUM 
(adjacent to non-residential district) 0' 0' 0' 0' 0'  
NOTES: 
(1)  See Figure 10-10: Overall Building Frontage Diagram to determine the allowable configuration of the ground floor facade. 
(2)  Front setback shall be equal to the setback provided on the blockface on opposite side of street, but in no case less than five (5) feet or greater than twenty-five (25) feet. 
(3)  Minimum interior side yard setbacks shall be zero (0) feet, except when side building pedestrian access is provided along an adjacent building. In this case, the interior side yard facade shall be setback a minimum of five (5) feet and a maximum of ten (10) feet from the existing adjacent building facade. 
(4)  For a corner lot, the side yard adjoining a street setback requirement shall extend to the rear property line. 
(5)  When the side yard adjoining a street adjoins Green Bay Road, the minimum and maximum setback shall be five (5) feet. 
FIGURE 10-2: PEDESTRIAN COMMERCIAL FRONTAGE - EAST 

FIGURE 10-3: PEDESTRIAN COMMERCIAL FRONTAGE - WEST 

FIGURE 10-4: ARTERIAL FRONTAGE 

FIGURE 10-5: PEDESTRIAN INSTITUTIONAL FRONTAGE 

FIGURE 10-6: PEDESTRIAN RESIDENTIAL FRONTAGE 

(Code 1993, § 20-10.4) 
Sec. 30-10.5. - Permitted and special uses. 
    Table 10-2: Village Center District Permitted and Special Uses lists permitted and special uses for the district. A "P" indicates that a use permitted within that district. An "S" indicates that a use a special use in that district and must obtain a special use permit as required in Section 30-5.3 (Special Use). No letter (i.e., a blank space), or the absence of the use from the table, indicates that use is not permitted within that district. 
VILLAGE OF WILMETTE, ILLINOIS 

TABLE 10-2: VILLAGE CENTER DISTRICT PERMITTED AND SPECIAL USES 

P = Permitted Use // S = Special Use USE DISTRICT USE STANDARDS Pedestrian Commercial East Pedestrian Commercial West Arterial Pedestrian Institutional Pedestrian Residential RESIDENTIAL USES Dwelling, Above the Ground Floor P P P P P Section 30-12.3.(h) Dwelling, Townhouse/Stacked Flat P S Section 30-12.3.(i) Dwelling, Multi-Family S Residential Care Facility S S Section 30-12.3.(w) INSTITUTIONAL USES Cultural Facility S S S S S Section 30-12.3.(d) Day Care Center, Adult or Child S S Section 30-12.3.(e) Educational Facility, Vocational S Section 30-12.3.(j) Government Facility P P P P S Park/Playground S S S S S Place of Worship S S S Section 30-12.3.(v) Recreation Center S S S S Social Club or Lodge S S S S S Section 30-12.3.(y) COMMERCIAL USES Animal Hospital S Art Gallery P P P P Art Studio S S P S Brew Pub S S S S Broadcasting Studio S S S Convenience Mart S S S Craft Brewery/Distillery S S S S Drive-Through Facility - 
For Financial Institution Only S S Section 30-12.3.(g) Financial Institution S S P Funeral Home S Gas Station S Section 30-12.3.(k) Health Club S S S Hotel/Motel S S S Indoor Amusement Facility S S S Kennel S S S Section 30-12.3.(n) Live Performance Venue S S S S Medical/Dental Clinic, Small S S P S Medical/Dental Clinic, Large S S P Motor Vehicle Dealership S S Section 30-12.3.(o) Motor Vehicle Rental 
Establishment S S Section 30-12.3.(o) Motor Vehicle Service and 
Repair, Minor S S Section 30-12.3.(q) Office, Above the Ground Floor P P P P Office, Ground Floor S S P P Outdoor Dining P P P P Section 30-12.3.(u) Personal Services Establishment, Above the Ground Floor P P P P Personal Services Establishment, Ground Floor S S P P Pet Day Care Facility S S S S Section 30-12.3.(n) Printing and Photocopying 
Establishment S S Restaurant, Carry-Out/Delivery S S S S Section 30-12.3.(x) Restaurant, Full Service P P P P Restaurant, Limited Service S S S S Section 30-12.3.(x) Restaurant, Specialty P P P P Retail Goods Establishment P P P P Twenty-four-hour business Use S S S Section 30-12.3.(z) OTHER Parking Lot (Principal Use) S S S S S Section 30-12.3.(s)(2) Parking Structure (Principal Use) S S S S S Section 30-12.3.(s)(1) Planned Unit Development S S S S S Article 30-6 Small Wireless Facilities P P P P P Section 30-12.3.(cc) Utility S S S S S Section 30-12.3.(aa) Wind Turbines S S S S S Section 30-13.4.(y) Wireless Telecommunications Equipment S S S S S Section 30-12.3.(bb)  
(Code 1993, § 20-10.5; Ord. No. 2018-O-48, § 5, 7-24-2018) 
Sec. 30-10.6. - Permitted building height. 
    The VC district contains three (3) height sub-districts as listed in Table 10-3: Village Center Building Height Regulations and as identified on Figure 10-7: Village Center Allowable Building Height Map. 
(a)  Core Height District. The Core Sub-District is intended for application in areas where new development is proposed in the 2011 Village Center Master Plan. 
(b)  Traditional Height District. The Traditional Sub-District is intended for application in the central areas of the Village Center that have been traditionally developed for pedestrian access. 
(c)  Corridor Height District. The Corridor Sub-District is intended for application along portions of Green Bay Road where uses are oriented to automobile as well as pedestrian access. 
VILLAGE OF WILMETTE, ILLINOIS

TABLE 10-3: VILLAGE CENTER BUILDING HEIGHT REGULATIONS REGULATIONS SUB-DISTRICT BUILDING HEIGHT Traditional Height Core Height Corridor Height MINIMUM 24' and 2 stories 24' and 2 stories 16' and 1 story MAXIMUM 52' and 4 stories 65' and 5 stories 52' and 4 stories MINIMUM GROUND FLOOR HEIGHT (1) 14' 14' 14'  
NOTES: 
(1)  Minimum ground floor height shall be measured from the finished floor of the ground floor to the finished floor of the second story. 
FIGURE 10-7: VILLAGE CENTER ALLOWABLE BUILDING HEIGHT MAP 

(Code 1993, § 20-10.6) 
Sec. 30-10.7. - Building design and location regulations. 
    The following regulations shall apply to all frontage designations except where applies to specific frontage designations. 
(a)  Building Massing. 
(1)  All buildings over one (1) story must evidence a design that illustrates a bottom, middle and top. 
(2)  Buildings with priority corners are encouraged to use architectural massing elements, such as towers, turrets, or chamfered facades, to create interest and draw attention to highly visible areas. (See Figure 10-8: Village Center Priority Corners and Figure 10-9: Priority Corner Articulation.) 
FIGURE 10-9: PRIORITY CORNER ARTICULATION 

Example of a Chamfered Corner 
(3)  The front yard may be increased to a maximum of ten (10) feet if a courtyard, plaza or seating area is incorporated into the development adjacent to the public street. At least fifty percent (50%) of the building frontage must meet the required setbacks. (See Figure 10-10: Overall Building Frontage Diagram.) 
FIGURE 10-8: VILLAGE CENTER PRIORITY CORNERS 

FIGURE 10-10: OVERALL BUILDING FRONTAGE DIAGRAM 

(4)  Facades of buildings that face the public right-of-way including side and rear facades must be visually broken into bays to avoid the appearance of large, blank walls. Visual breaks in the facade include alterations in materials, color, texture or pattern, and/or the addition of columns, pilasters and/or windows. (See Figure 10-11: Facade Articulation.) In addition, the following requirements apply: 
(A)  For every twenty-five (25) linear feet of building length, roof lines must either be varied with a change in height or within the incorporation of a major focal point feature such as a dormer, gable or projected wall feature. 
(B)  The ground floor of commercial buildings must be designed with a minimum ground floor height of fourteen (14) feet, as measured from the finished floor of the ground floor to the finished floor of the second story. 
(C)  Horizontal ground floor facade elements shall, to the extent possible, align with horizontal ground floor facade elements of surrounding buildings in order to create continuity at the pedestrian level. 
(D)  Horizontal ground floor facade elements may be interrupted in specific locations to allow for significant architectural features, for example turrets and articulated entryways, that add visual interest and reinforce the overall design theme. 
(E)  Upper story horizontal elements should be generally consistent with surrounding buildings. Small variations can be used to create visual interest and attractive building silhouettes. 
FIGURE 10-11: FACADE ARTICULATION 

(5)  The use of vertical cornice line elements is encouraged to create visual interest and articulate the building facade at the roof line. Such elements should align with facade articulation elements on the ground floor or upper story facades. (See Figure 10-12: Roofline Articulation.) 
FIGURE 10-12: ROOFLINE ARTICULATION 

(b)  Building Orientation and Pedestrian Access. 
(1)  A building shall be oriented with its primary facade towards the front lot line. The primary facade shall include transparency requirements as described in Section 30-10.7.(c) (Ground Floor Transparency) of this Article and the highest level of architectural design. Building access shall be provided from dedicated on-site or adjacent off-site parking areas. 
(2)  Direct access shall be provided from parking areas to individual ground floor tenants or shared lobby areas. A secondary building entry may be used for this purpose if it provides access to all ground floor tenants and vertical circulation similar to the primary entry. 
(3)  Multi-family buildings shall provide entry from the public sidewalk to shared entry areas or lobbies. 
(4)  Multiple-tenant commercial buildings, including the ground floor of mixed-use buildings, may include an individual entry for each tenant, or a primary lobby entrance that provides internal access to individual tenants. (See Figure 10-13: Permitted Commercial Building Entry Access.) 
FIGURE 10-13: PERMITTED COMMERCIAL BUILDING ENTRY ACCESS 

(5)  For commercial and mixed-use projects, a designated pedestrian access path from rear parking areas to the public sidewalk shall be provided based on the following regulations: 
(A)  For parcels fifty (50) feet to seventy-four (74) feet in width, no dedicated pedestrian access path is required. 
(B)  For parcels seventy-five (75) feet to one hundred forty-nine (149) feet in width, one (1) dedicated pedestrian access path is required. 
(C)  For parcels one hundred fifty (150) feet or more in width, two (2) dedicated pedestrian access paths are required. 
(D)  Permitted pedestrian access paths may include the following (See Figure 10-14: Permitted On-Site Pedestrian Paths): 
(i)  Side building access path. 
(ii)  Passageway between buildings. 
(iii)  Internal corridor. 
(iv)  Side yard adjoining a street public sidewalk. 
FIGURE 10-14: PERMITTED ON-SITE PEDESTRIAN PATHS 

(E)  All parking lot pedestrian access paths shall have a minimum width of five (5) feet. 
(F)  All passageways between buildings shall have a minimum width of five (5) feet and a maximum width of ten (10) feet. 
(G)  On a parcel with a side yard adjoining a street, a public sidewalk on the secondary street may serve as the designated pedestrian access if the following are true: 
(i)  The sidewalk has a minimum width of five (5) feet. 
(ii)  The sidewalk is determined to be in good condition and meeting all accessibility requirements. 
(iii)  Direct pedestrian access is provided from the on-site parking area to the public sidewalk. 
(c)  Ground Floor Transparency. Ground floor facades for single-story commercial and mixed use projects shall include a minimum of forty percent (40%) clear glass (no tinting) that allows full view into the facility. This requirement applies to any portion of the exterior wall facade that separates the exterior from a publicly accessible interior space (i.e., restaurant seating area, retail display area, etc.) Exterior walls that enclose private areas, such as kitchens, storage, articulated entries to upper story residential units, are not required to conform to the fenestration regulation. The percent of ground floor transparency is calculated as the total window and door area (not including mullions) divided by the total facade area between the ground plane and the awning/signage frieze. (See Figure 10-15: Facade Transparency Measurement Diagrams.) 
FIGURE 10-15: FACADE TRANSPARENCY MEASUREMENT DIAGRAMS 

(d)  Pedestrian Frontage, Infill Building Relationships. Infill buildings must match the height of an adjacent building or be at least twenty-four (24) feet in height and two (2) stories. (See Figure 10-16: Infill Building Context.) 
FIGURE 10-16: INFILL BUILDING CONTEXT 

(e)  Pedestrian Frontage Design Regulations. The facades of the bottom three (3) stories shall be within the permitted build-to-zone. Stories above the third story may be setback beyond the build-to-zone. (See Figure 10-17: Upper Story Setback.) 
FIGURE 10-17: UPPER STORY SETBACK 

(f)  Roof Types. Roof types are permitted in the Village Center district according to Table 10-4: Permitted Roof Types. Buildings are encouraged to include design elements, such as turrets, dormers, or articulated roof elements that break up large roof areas. Decorative mansard roofs are permitted for projects that are four (4) or more stories. (See Figure 10-18: Illustration of Permitted Roof Types and Figure 10-19: Techniques for Creating Decorative Mansard Roofs.) 
VILLAGE OF WILMETTE, ILLINOIS

TABLE 10-4: PERMITTED ROOF TYPES ALLOWABLE ROOF FORMS HEIGHT DISTRICT TRADITIONAL HEIGHT CORE 
HEIGHT CORRIDOR HEIGHT BUILDING HEIGHT 52' OR LESS 40' OR LESS OVER 40' 36' OR LESS OVER 36' FLAT X X X X X DECORATIVE MANSARD X X HIP X GABLE X X X X X  
FIGURE 10-18: ILLUSTRATION OF PERMITTED ROOF TYPES 

FIGURE 10-19: TECHNIQUES FOR CREATING DECORATIVE MANSARD ROOFS 

(g)  Prohibited Building Materials. 
(1)  The following exterior building materials are prohibited in the VC District. The use of any materials not specifically prohibited in this section are subject to the review of the Zoning Administrator. 
(A)  Plain concrete masonry units (CMU); however, CMU is permitted as a base course (foundation) for residential uses for a maximum of four (4) feet in height as measured from grade. 
(B)  Vinyl siding, aluminum or wood-slat siding. 
(C)  Formstone. 
(D)  Exterior Insulation Finish System, EIFS or "Dryvit" (non-masonry stucco products a.k.a. Artificial Stucco, Synthetic Stucco, Vinyl Stucco, and Latex Stucco). 
(E)  T-111 Composite plywood siding. 
(F)  Utility-sized, king-size or jumbo brick. 
(G)  Fiberglass or plastic. 
(H)  Exposed aggregate (rough finish) concrete wall panels. 
(I)  Reflective, tinted or colored glass. 
(2)  Any expansions of structures existing in the VC District as of the date of the adoption of this Ordinance may use the same building materials on the facade as the facade of the existing structure, even if such materials are not listed as permitted or are listed as prohibited in this section. The use of such materials is subject to approval by the Appearance Review Commission (ARC). 
(Code 1993, § 20-10.7) 
Sec. 30-10.8. - Off-street parking access and design regulations. 
(a)  Access to parking shall be provided in accordance with the following regulations: 
(1)  Access to on-site parking shall be provided via an abutting alley, drive aisle from the public street as permitted on a portion of the site, or a cross-access agreement with an adjacent property owner. 
(2)  Parking access to lots abutting alleys. All lots with access to a rear or side public alley shall comply with the following regulations: 
(A)  Pedestrian Frontage. 
(i)  No parking is allowed in front of a building line established along pedestrian frontage streets. 
(ii)  Parking that abuts and fronts on a pedestrian frontage must be set back a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet. 
(iii)  Lots with pedestrian frontage and access to alleys are not permitted a curb cut. 
(B)  Arterial Frontage. 
(i)  No parking is allowed in front of a building line established along arterial frontage streets. 
(ii)  Parking that abuts and fronts on an arterial frontage must be set back a minimum of ten (10) feet, such area to be screened according to the standards provided in Article 30-15 (Landscaping and Screening). 
(iii)  Lots having at least one hundred twenty-five (125) feet of frontage are allowed one (1) curb cut along the arterial frontage. 
(3)  Parking access to lots without abutting alleys. All lots without access to a rear or side public alley shall comply with the following regulations: 
(A)  For corner lots with less than one hundred fifty (150) feet of lot frontage, one (1) curb cut is permitted on the non-arterial frontage. If both streets consist of arterial frontage, only one (1) of the arterial streets can have a curb cut allowed on that street. 
(B)  For corner lots with at least one hundred fifty (150) feet of lot frontage, one (1) curb cut is permitted on each frontage that is at least one hundred fifty (150) feet. 
(C)  Interior lots without an abutting alley are not permitted a curb-cut. 
(4)  Cross-Access Easement. See Section 30-14.5.(b)(6), Cross Access Driveway Easements. 
FIGURE 10-20: CROSS-ACCESS EASEMENTS 

(5)  Parking Lot Layout. For commercial or mixed-use projects, one (1) aisle of parking is permitted to the side of or between primary buildings, subject to meeting all other pertinent conditions of this Article. No parking lot located at grade may be located within twenty-five (25) feet of a lot line adjoining a street along a pedestrian frontage, and ten (10) feet of a lot line adjoining a street along an arterial frontage. (See Figure 10-21: Permitted Side Parking Aisles.) 
FIGURE 10-21: PERMITTED SIDE PARKING AISLES 
Conforming Side Parking Aisle Non-conforming Side Parking Aisle 

(Code 1993, § 20-10.8) 
Sec. 30-10.9. - Village center accessory structures and uses. 
(a)  Coordination with Principal Building. All accessory structures shall complement and coordinate with the principal buildings on the lot, both in architectural style and material selection. Accessory structures shall comply with the following design regulations: 
(1)  Accessory structures shall be constructed of facade materials that reflect the general character and theme of the principal building. 
(2)  Accessory structures shall apply the same facade articulation as the principal building. 
(3)  Accessory structures that abut the principal building shall, to the extent possible, include horizontal design elements, such as knee walls and cornices, that match the character and elevations of those on the principal building. 
(b)  Refuse Containers. 
(1)  Refuse containers shall be located only to the rear or side of the building. No refuse containers shall be located within the front or side yard adjoining a street, or within five (5) feet of an adjacent parcel or on-site primary structure. 
(2)  Shared refuse containers and enclosures among adjacent properties are encouraged. 
(c)  Roof-Mounted Mechanical Equipment. 
(1)  Roof-mounted mechanical equipment shall be screened from view from the all surrounding public sidewalks. The full enclosure of mechanical equipment within the building is encouraged. 
(2)  Screening shall be accomplished by the roof structure, parapet walls, or other screening structure. The height of the screening shall equal the height of the tallest rooftop mechanical element installed on the building. Such screening shall be designed to blend in with and complement the architecture of the building. 
(d)  Ground-Based Mechanical Equipment. 
(1)  Ground-based mechanical equipment is discouraged. Wherever possible, mechanical equipment shall be contained within buildings or shall be roof-mounted. 
(2)  All ground-based mechanical equipment including, but not limited to, heating, ventilating, and air-conditioning units (HVAC), shall be located only in the rear of the building or interior side yard. No ground-based mechanical equipment shall be located within the front or side yard adjoining a street. 
(3)  All ground-based mechanical equipment, including, but not limited to, heating, ventilating, and air-conditioning units (HVAC), shall be fully screened from public view in accordance with the screening regulations of Article 30-15 (Landscaping and Screening). 
(Code 1993, § 20-10.9) 
Sec. 30-10.10. - General standards of applicability. 
(a)  Accessory Structures and Uses. See Section 30-13.4 (Accessory Structures and Uses) for standards covering accessory structures and uses. 
(b)  Permitted Encroachments. See Section 30-13.5 (Permitted Encroachments) for standards governing encroachments. 
(c)  Temporary Uses and Structures. See Section 30-13.6 (Temporary Uses and Structures) for standards governing temporary uses. 
(d)  Off-Street Parking and Loading. See Article 30-14 (Off-Street Parking and Loading) for standards governing off-street parking and loading. 
(e)  Landscaping and Screening. See Article 30-15 (Landscaping and Screening) for standards governing landscaping and screening. 
(f)  Signs. See Article 30-16 (Signs) for standards governing signs. 
(Code 1993, § 20-10.10) 
ARTICLE 30-11. - PLANNED COMMERCIAL DEVELOPMENT DISTRICTS 

Sec. 30-11.1. - Planned commercial development districts purpose statements. 
(a)  Purpose of PCD-1 Planned Commercial Development District. 
    The PCD-1 District is established to provide a location for retail-oriented commercial development that serves residents of the Village of Wilmette and the surrounding region. It is intended that the PCD-1 District be characterized by a somewhat intense, mixed-use development that is unified in design and unified in ownership or control. Given the intensity of such development, and the traffic it will generate, the PCD-1 District will be located specifically at the northwest corner of the intersection of Skokie Boulevard and Lake Avenue bounded on the west and northwest by the Edens Expressway. The development standards and range of allowable uses for the PCD-1 District are designed to make such development compatible with or buffered from nearby residential neighborhoods, and to provide a degree of flexibility in the mix and scale of uses located in a single development project in the PCD-1 District. 
    Prior to applying for a building permit, special use permit, or variation, the applicant shall participate in a preliminary review conference with the Appearance Review Commission. 
(b)  Purpose of PCD-2 Planned Commercial Development District. The PCD-2 District is established to provide locations for retail-oriented commercial development that serves residents of the Village of Wilmette and the surrounding area. It is intended that the PCD-2 District be characterized by relatively small-scale mixed-use development that is unified in design and unified in ownership or control. Uses in the District shall include commercial uses and limited residential uses and to provide a degree of flexibility in the mix and scale of uses located in a single development. The development standards and range of allowable uses for the PCD-2 District are designed to make such development compatible with or buffered from nearby residential neighborhoods. 
(c)  Purpose of PCD-3 Planned Commercial Development District. The PCD-3 District is established to provide locations for retail-oriented commercial development that serves residents of the Village of Wilmette and the surrounding area. It is intended that the PCD-3 District be characterized by relatively small-scale shopping center development that is unified in design and unified in ownership or control. The development standards and range of allowable uses for the PCD-3 District are designed to make such development compatible with or buffered from nearby residential neighborhoods. 
(Code 1993, § 20-11.1) 
Sec. 30-11.2. - Permitted and special uses. 
    Table 11-1: Planned Commercial Development District Permitted and Special Uses lists permitted and special uses for the planned commercial development district. A "P" indicates a permitted use within that district. An "S" indicates a special use in that district and must obtain a special use permit as required in Section 30-5.3 (Special Use). No letter (i.e., a blank space), or the absence of the use from the table, indicates that use is not permitted within that district. 
VILLAGE OF WILMETTE, ILLINOIS

TABLE 11-1: PLANNED COMMERCIAL DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT PERMITTED AND SPECIAL USES 

P = Permitted Use // S = Special Use USE DISTRICT USE STANDARDS PCD-1 PCD-2 PCD-3 Edens All Other Arcade Only West Lake RESIDENTIAL USES Dwelling, Above The Ground Floor S Section 30-12.3.(g) INSTITUTIONAL USES Cultural Facility S S S S Section 30-12.3.(c) Recreation Center S S S COMMERCIAL USES Art Gallery P P P P Art Studio P P P P Convenience Mart S S Drive-Through Facility S S S Section 30-12.3.(g) Financial Institution S S P S Health Club S S S S Hotel S Indoor Amusement Facility P P P P Live Performance Venue S S S Medical/Dental Clinic, Small, Above the Ground Floor P P P P Medical/Dental Clinic, Large, Above the Ground Floor P P P P Medical/Dental Clinic, Small S S P S Medical/Dental Clinic, Large S S P S Office, Above The Ground Floor P P Office S S P S Outdoor Dining P P P Section 30-12.3.(u) Personal Services Establishment P P P P Restaurant, Carry-Out/Delivery S S P S Section 30-12.3.(x) Restaurant, Full Service P P P S Restaurant, Limited Service S S S S Section 30-12.3.(x) Restaurant, Specialty P P P S Retail Goods Establishment P P P P OTHER Car-Sharing Spaces (Accessory Use) P Planned Unit Development S S S S Article 30-6 Small Wireless Utility S S S S Section 30-12.3.(aa) Wind Turbines S S S S Section 30-13.4.(y) Wireless Telecommunications Equipment S Section 30-12.3.(bb)  
(Code 1993, § 20-11.2) 
Sec. 30-11.3. - Bulk and yard regulations. 
    Table 11-2: Planned Commercial Development District Bulk and Setback Regulations establishes bulk and setback regulations for the planned commercial development districts. 
VILLAGE OF WILMETTE, ILLINOIS

TABLE 11-2: PLANNED COMMERCIAL DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT BULK AND SETBACK REGULATIONS BULK AND SETBACK

REGULATIONS DISTRICT PCD-1 PCD-2 PCD-3 Edens Plaza Plaza del Lago West Lake Plaza BULK REGULATIONS MINIMUM LOT AREA 19.76 acres 5 acres 2 acres MINIMUM LOT WIDTH 200' 200' 200' MAXIMUM PRINCIPAL BUILDING HEIGHT 55' 40' 30' MAXIMUM FAR 0.4 + 70,000 s.f. of floor area for office space associated with a development 0.5 0.4 MINIMUM YARD REGULATIONS FRONT YARD Determined by Street: (2) 
Skokie Blvd.: 75' 
Lake Ave.: 
Based on structure height - 
Up to 20' in height: 25' 
21 to 40' in height: 50' 
41 to 55' in height: 75' 
  
Edens Expressway: 
Determined by Village Fire Chief and Police Chief None, unless the lot being developed abuts and fronts on the same street as a lot in a residential district, then the front yard requirement of the residential district 
apply None, unless the lot being developed abuts and fronts on the same street as a lot in a residential district, then the front yard requirement of the residential district 
apply REAR YARD 25' 25' INTERIOR SIDE YARD None, but a min. of 5' if provided (1) None, but a min. of 5' if provided (1) SIDE YARD ADJOINING A STREET None, but a min. of 5' if provided (1) None, but a min. of 5' if provided (1)  
NOTES: 
(1)  Where the side lot line is adjacent to a residential zoning district, then the side yard requirement of the adjacent residential district shall apply along that side lot line; if an alley or a street intervenes between the property and the adjacent residential district, then the side yard shall be no less than fifty percent (50%) of the side yard requirement of the adjacent residential district. 
(2)  Separate lots which do not front on a public street may be established and conveyed in the PCD-1 District, provided that the lot is part of a shopping center, and the lot is subject to a reciprocal operating agreement, covenant, or other instrument that ensures that any development on the lot will remain under common control or management with the rest of the shopping center. 
(Code 1993, § 20-11.3) 
Sec. 30-11.4. - General standards of applicability. 
(a)  Accessory Structures and Uses. See Section 30-13.4 (Accessory Structures and Uses) for standards covering accessory structures and uses. 
(b)  Permitted Encroachments. See Section 30-13.5 (Permitted Encroachments) for standards governing encroachments. 
(c)  Temporary Uses. See Section 30-13.6 (Temporary Uses) for standards governing temporary uses. 
(d)  Off-Street Parking and Loading. See Article 30-14 (Off-Street Parking and Loading) for standards governing off-street parking and loading. 
(e)  Landscaping and Screening. See Article 30-15 (Landscaping and Screening) for standards governing landscaping and screening. 
(f)  Signs. See Article 30-16 (Signs) for standards governing signs. 
(g)  Local Sign Ordinances. See Appendix A, Appendix B and Appendix C for additional sign requirements. 
(Code 1993, § 20-11.4) 
ARTICLE 30-12. - USE STANDARDS 

Sec. 30-12.1. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this Article is to set forth additional requirements for certain permitted and special uses. These standards are intended to ensure that the use is compatible with the surrounding area. 
(Code 1993, § 20-12.1) 
Sec. 30-12.2. - Use of land and structures. 
    No structure or land may be used or occupied except in conformity with the regulations for the zoning district in which it is located. 
(Code 1993, § 20-12.2) 
Sec. 30-12.3. - Use standards. 
    In addition to the use standards below, all uses are required to comply with all provisions of this Ordinance including, but not limited to, Article 30-13 (On-Site Development Standards), Article 30-14 (Off-Street Parking and Loading), Article 30-15 (Landscaping and Screening), and Article 30-16 (Signs), and all other Village regulations. 
(a)  Accessory Living Unit. 
(1)  The principal dwelling or the accessory living unit must be occupied by the owner(s) of the subject property as the owner(s) principal place of residence for at least six (6) months of the year. 
(2)  The resident of the principal dwelling or the accessory living unit must be fifty-five (55) years of age or older, or disabled. 
(3)  The maximum size of the accessory living unit is limited to twenty-five percent (25%) of the total area of the principal structure. The minimum size of the accessory living unit shall not be less than six hundred (600) square feet. 
(4)  Only one (1) accessory living unit is permitted on any lot. 
(5)  An accessory living unit must be located wholly within the principal structure on the lot. No accessory living unit is permitted in any accessory structure. 
(6)  The principal structure on the lot must maintain a single-family appearance with a single, common front entrance on the principal structure shared by the principal dwelling and the accessory living unit. 
(7)  Any second entrance for the accessory living unit may be located at the rear or side of the principal structure. 
(8)  Only the owner(s) of the subject property may apply for a special use for an accessory living unit. 
(9)  An accessory living unit is illegal if it is established without an approved special use permit. 
(10)  If granted by the Village Board, a special use for an accessory living unit automatically expires when the Zoning Administrator determines that one (1) or more of the requirements of this section have not been met. When a detached single-family dwelling that includes an accessory living unit is sold, the special use associated with the accessory living unit continues provided that the requirements of this section are met by the new owner(s). 
(11)  The owner(s) granted a special use to establish an accessory living unit must file an affidavit with the Village annually, no later than ten (10) days after the date of the anniversary on which the Village Board granted the special use, stating that the accessory living unit complies with all the provisions of this Ordinance. 
(b)  Car Sharing. 
(1)  Two (2) Car-sharing spaces are permitted in any principal use or accessory use parking lot or parking garage serving a commercial, mixed-use, institutional or multi-family structure in any zone in which car-sharing services are permitted, and may occupy up to two (2) required or provided parking spaces. 
(2)  A car-sharing vehicle must be no more than eighteen (18) feet in length and must bear a decal that provides the name of the car-sharing service. 
(3)  Car Sharing vehicles must be available on an hourly basis through a self-service reservation system. 
(4)  Car Sharing vehicles must be located at unstaffed locations. 
(5)  Car Sharing vehicles must be available twenty-four (24) hours a day. 
(6)  The car-share company must provide insurance for its members and maintains vehicles. 
(c)  Car Wash. 
(1)  The site must be fenced with an open fence along the lot line that abuts any right-of-way and opaque fencing a minimum of six (6) feet in height along all other lot lines. A continuous thirty (30) inch-high evergreen hedge must be installed along the fence that abuts the right-of-way. 
(2)  An attendant must be on duty during hours of operation. 
(3)  The structure and all car wash facilities and bays must be securely locked when the operation is closed. 
(4)  A litter and noise abatement plan is required for the facility with a contact person designated to notify for violations. 
(5)  Lighting provided for the site must be directed away from adjacent properties. 
(d)  Cultural Facility. Cultural facilities must be designed so that the location of entrances and exits, exterior lighting, service areas, and parking and loading facilities will minimize traffic congestion, pedestrian hazards, and adverse impacts on adjoining properties. 
(e)  Day Care Center, Child or Adult. Day care centers must meet all federal, state and local requirements including, but not limited to, licensing, health, safety and building code requirements. In addition, the following criteria shall be required: 
(1)  Adequate on-site drop-off zones, sidewalks and exterior lighting are provided. 
(2)  The amount of traffic or noise to be generated is not excessive. 
(3)  Adequate open space and recreational areas must be provided. All outdoor play space must be fenced to a height no less than three and one-half (3 1/2) feet and no more than six and one-half (6 1/2) feet. 
(f)  Day Care Home, Child or Adult. Day care homes must meet all federal, state and local requirements including, but not limited to, licensing, health, safety and building code requirements. In addition, the following criteria shall be required: 
(1)  Adequate on-site drop-off zones, sidewalks and exterior lighting are provided. 
(2)  The amount of traffic or noise to be generated is not excessive. 
(3)  Adequate open space and recreational areas are provided. All outdoor play space must be fenced to a height no less than three and one-half (3 1/2) feet and no more than six and one-half (6 1/2) feet. 
(4)  The day care home retains a residential character and the affect of the day care home does not alter the residential character of the neighborhood. 
(5)  The operation of the day care home does not adversely impact surrounding properties. 
(g)  Drive-Through Facility. A drive-through facility is considered a separate use, rather than accessory to the principal use, and is subject to the following standards: 
(1)  Drive-through facilities are allowed only on lots of one (1) acre or more in area. 
(2)  All drive-through facilities must provide adequate stacking spaces, in accordance with Article 30-14 (Off-Street Parking and Loading). 
(3)  All drive-through lanes must be located and designed to ensure that they do not adversely affect the safety and efficiency of traffic circulation on adjoining streets. Internal traffic circulation patterns on the lot must be adequate to keep traffic from backing into a street and blocking access to any required parking spaces located on the lot. Vehicular access to the drive-in window or service area must be provided only from a collector or arterial street. 
(4)  No exterior lighting may glare into or upon the surrounding area or any residential premises. All drive-through facilities must be properly screened, in accordance with this Ordinance, to prevent glare from vehicles passing through service lanes. 
(5)  Drive aisles must be separated from landscaped areas by a six (6) inch curb. 
(6)  The volume on all intercom menu displays must be maintained at a level so as not to be audible in adjoining residential districts. The volume on all intercom menu displays must comply with all local noise regulations. 
(7)  The operator of the drive-through facility must provide adequate on-site outdoor waste receptacles and provide daily litter clean-up of the facility and along the rights-of-way abutting the property. 
(h)  Dwelling, Above Ground Floor. 
(1)  No dwelling units are permitted at grade or within eight (8) feet of grade. 
(2)  No residential common areas greater than six hundred (600) square feet are permitted at grade or within eight (8) feet of grade. 
(3)  No parking required by the dwelling units are permitted at grade or within eight (8) feet of grade. Parking required by the residential dwelling units and common areas may be located entirely below grade. 
(i)  Dwelling, Townhouse/Stacked Flat. 
(1)  A townhouse/stacked flat development is limited to a maximum of one hundred eighty (180) feet of building frontage. 
(2)  Each unit within a townhouse/stacked flat development is limited to a maximum of thirty (30) feet in width. 
(3)  No more than four (4) dwelling units are permitted in one (1) townhouse/stacked flat building. All stacked flat units within a townhouse/stacked flat building must be accessed by a shared entry from the public sidewalk. 
(4)  Exterior stairs are permitted for rear facades that do not front on public streets. These stairs may provide access to units on various floors through rear patios or porches. 
(5)  All townhouse/stacked flat developments must be designed with the front or side facade of the buildings facing the street. When the units are oriented to face the side lot lines, the end unit that fronts the street must have the primary entrance facing the street. 
(6)  Front-loaded attached garages shall not face the front lot line. 
(7)  All dwelling units must be laid out to ensure adequate privacy for residents, such as by the separation of buildings or landscaping between buildings. There must be a minimum separation of ten (10) feet between sidewalls of the development. 
(8)  Where the front or rear wall of a row of a development faces the front, side or rear wall of another row of dwellings, the minimum required separation between such buildings must be a minimum of thirty (30) feet. Driveways and parking areas may be located within this minimum separation area. 
(9)  All off-street parking areas and interior driveways are located and designed to provide safe, quick and convenient access for emergency vehicles, refuse collection and service and delivery vehicles. 
(j)  Educational Facility, Primary, Secondary, College, and Vocational. 
(1)  Educational facilities must be designed so that the location of entrances and exits, exterior lighting, outdoor recreation areas, service areas, and parking and loading facilities will minimize traffic congestion, pedestrian hazards and adverse impacts on adjoining properties. 
(2)  Any education facility that includes on-site boarding of students must be located on a lot with a minimum lot area of five (5) acres. 
(k)  Gas Station. 
(1)  Gas station canopies must be designed with luminaires recessed under the canopy to minimize light pollution. Light intensity directly under the canopy shall not exceed ten (10) footcandles at any location. All lighting mounted under the canopy, including auxiliary lighting within signs and panels over the pumps, is included in the ten (10) footcandle limit. 
(2)  All gas station driveways must be located and designed to ensure that they do not adversely affect the safety and efficiency of traffic circulation on adjoining streets. 
(3)  Gas stations may offer convenience items for sale as a secondary activity. 
(4)  In addition, gas stations may be included accessory to a "Minor Motor Vehicle Repair and Service Shop." 
(5)  Gas stations are subject to any front yard requirements, when applicable within a zoning district. However, a minimum five (5)-foot landscape setback must be provided. 
(l)  Golf Course. 
(1)  Golf courses must be located on a lot of a minimum of five (5) acres. 
(2)  Administration and maintenance buildings must be located at least fifty (50) feet from a residential lot line. 
(m)  Group Home. Group homes must meet all federal, state and local requirements including, but not limited to, licensing, health, safety and building code requirements. In addition, the following criteria shall be required. 
(1)  The location, design and operation of the facility will not alter the residential character of the neighborhood. 
(2)  The facility retains a residential character that is compatible with the surrounding neighborhood. 
(3)  The operation of the facility does not adversely impact surrounding properties. 
(n)  Kennel and Pet Day Care Service. Kennels and pet day care services must meet all federal, state and local requirements including, but not limited to, licensing, health and safety code requirements. In addition, the following standards must be met: 
(1)  Exterior enclosures and runs must provide protection against weather extremes. Floors of runs must be made of impervious material to permit proper cleaning and disinfecting. 
(2)  All animal quarters and runs are to be kept in a clean, dry and sanitary condition. 
(3)  Fencing surrounding exercise areas and/or runs must be of a sufficient height to prevent escape and buried as part of installation to prevent escape by digging beneath the fence posts. 
(4)  Noise must be mitigated so as not to create a public nuisance for adjoining properties and must comply with all local noise regulations. This excludes noise from exercise or training while outdoors during the daytime. 
(5)  Kennels and pet day care services must be located at least one thousand three hundred twenty (1,320) feet from other kennels and pet day care services. 
(6)  The total number of animals per overnight stay at a kennel or pet day care service is limited to twelve (12) animals. 
(o)  Motor Vehicle Dealership or Motor Vehicle Rental Establishment. Motor vehicle dealerships or rental establishments with an outdoor display component must have a minimum lot size of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet. This standard does not apply to fully enclosed dealerships (i.e., indoor showrooms only) or rental establishments located within a parking structure. 
(p)  Motor Vehicle Operations Facility. All repair operations and service bays must be fully enclosed. 
(q)  Motor Vehicle Service and Repair, Major or Minor. 
(1)  Minor motor vehicle service and repair shops may not store the same vehicles outdoors on the site for longer than ten (10) days. Major motor vehicle service and repair shops may not store the same vehicles outdoors on the site for longer than thirty (30) days. 
(2)  All driveways must be located and designed to ensure that they will not adversely affect the safety and efficiency of traffic circulation on adjoining streets. 
(3)  All repair operations must be fully enclosed. Wrecked or junked vehicles must not be stored for longer time periods than those specified above and must be screened from the public right-of-way and any adjacent residential districts. 
(4)  Minor motor vehicle service and repair shops may be accessory to gas stations. 
(r)  Multi-Family Dwelling. Multi-family dwellings must meet the bulk requirements: 
(1)  In the R3 District: 
(A)  The gross density of development on the property must not exceed eighteen (18) dwelling units per acre. A gross density in excess of eighteen (18) dwelling units per acre, up to a maximum of thirty (30) dwelling units per acre, shall be a special use. 
(B)  There are no more than twenty-four (24) dwelling units in any one (1) building. 
(2)  In the R4 District: 
(A)  The gross density of development on the property shall not exceed forty (40) dwelling units per acre on lots of fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet or greater. The gross density of development on the property must not exceed twenty-seven (27) dwelling units per acre on lots smaller than fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet. 
(B)  No more than ten percent (10%) of the dwelling units on the property are efficiency units. 
(s)  Off-Street Parking, Structure or Lot. 
(1)  Parking Structure. Where no commercial frontage is provided on a parking structure, a landscape yard a minimum of ten (10) feet in width must be provided adjacent to a public right-of-way, excluding alleys. 
(2)  Off-Street Parking Lot. 
(A)  Off-street parking lots serving non-residential uses must be solely for the parking of vehicles for periods of less than one (1) day and must not be used as an off-street loading area. 
(B)  No sales, display, repair or service of any kind may be conducted in any off-street parking lot. 
(C)  No signs of any kind, other than signs designating entrances, exits and conditions of use, may be maintained on any off-street parking lot. 
(D)  No buildings other than those for shelter of attendants may be erected upon any off-street parking lots. The allowable shelters must not exceed ten (10) feet in height and fifty (50) square feet in area. 
(E)  The off-street parking lot must be screened and landscaped in accordance with Article 30-15 (Landscaping and Screening). 
(F)  The off-street parking lot must be kept free from refuse and debris. All landscaping must be maintained in a healthy growing condition, and be neat and orderly in appearance. 
(G)  An off-street parking lot located in a residential zoning district shall only serve an off-site institutional use or residential use. 
(t)  Outdoor Dining. Outdoor dining is considered a separate use, rather than accessory to the principal use, and subject to the following standards: 
(1)  All outdoor dining areas require a valid license from the Village pursuant to Chapter 24 of this Code. 
(2)  Outdoor dining is prohibited in any yard that abuts a residential district. 
(3)  The seating shall not occupy or interfere with the use of required parking spaces and aisles. 
(4)  Picnic tables located in a park, golf course or recreation center are not considered outdoor dining. 
(u)  Outdoor Storage. 
(1)  All outdoor storage must comply with the screening requirements of this Ordinance. 
(2)  The storage area should be located to the rear of the lot when possible. 
(3)  Outdoor storage areas must be surfaced, and graded and drain all surface water. Outdoor storage areas may be surfaced with semi-pervious materials, if adequate drainage and erosion and dust control are provided. 
(4)  Any lighting used to illuminate an outdoor storage area must be directed and shielded as to not illuminate any adjacent lots. All exterior lighting must comply with the requirements of this Ordinance. 
(v)  Place of Worship. Places of worship must be designed so that the location of entrances and exits, exterior lighting, service areas, and parking and loading facilities will minimize traffic congestion, pedestrian hazards and adverse impacts on adjoining properties. 
(w)  Residential Care Facility. Residential care facilities must meet all federal, state and local requirements including, but not limited to, licensing, health, safety and building code requirements. In addition, the following must be met: 
(1)  The location, design and operation of the facility is compatible with, and does not adversely affect, adjacent properties and the surrounding area. 
(2)  The facility is harmonious with surrounding buildings, in respect to scale, architectural design and building placement. If located within a residential district, the facility does not alter the residential character of the neighborhood. 
(3)  The surrounding street network is capable of accommodating the traffic generated by the facility. 
(4)  Residential care facilities must meet the bulk requirements: 
(A)  R2 District: The gross density of development on the property must not exceed eighteen (18) dwelling units per acre and no more than twenty-four (24) dwelling units in any one (1) building. 
(B)  R3 District: The gross density of development on the property must not exceed thirty (30) dwelling units per acre. 
(C)  R4 District: The gross density of development on the property must not exceed forty (40) dwelling units per acre on lots of fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet or greater. The gross density of development on the property must not exceed twenty-seven (27) dwelling units per acre on lots smaller than fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet. 
(x)  Restaurant, Carry-Out/Delivery and Limited Service. 
(1)  A restaurant must submit the following operation plans: 
(A)  Days and hours of operation. 
(B)  The size of the establishment. 
(C)  The number and location of seats, tables and other furniture proposed for outdoor seating. 
(D)  Exterior lighting design. 
(E)  Maximum occupancy loads. 
(2)  Only carry out/delivery, limited service and specialty restaurants are allowed a drive-through facility, which must comply with the standards of the Article. The drive-through facility is considered a separate use on the site and must be approved separately. 
(y)  Social Club or Lodge. 
(1)  Social clubs or lodges must be designed so that the location of entrances and exits, exterior lighting, service areas, and parking and loading facilities will minimize traffic congestion, pedestrian hazards, and adverse impacts on adjoining properties. 
(2)  No more than fifty percent (50%) of the gross floor area may be used as office space for the social club or lodge. 
(3)  Social clubs and lodges are permitted to serve meals and alcohol on the premises for members only. 
(4)  Lodging for members or guests on premises is prohibited. 
(z)  Twenty-four-hour business. 
(1)  The privilege granted by approval of a 24-hour business special use is not a property right and is not deemed to attach to or run with the land, but runs solely with the applicant for the use described in the application, and is deemed solely as granting authority under this Article to operate the business in conformance with all other provisions of this Ordinance. 
(2)  Only a permitted or special use in a zoning district is eligible to obtain a special use to operate as a 24-hour business. No variation to this requirement is permitted. 
(3)  A special use for a 24-hour business must meet each of the following standards: 
(A)  The 24-hour business special use will not create, or has not created, a materially adverse impact on neighboring properties resulting from generation or accumulation of refuse or from generation of an unreasonable level of noise from business activities or motor vehicle traffic during times of operation that require the 24-hour business special use. 
(B)  The 24-hour business special use will not create, or has not created, due to its operation or the nature of its operation during those hours that require the 24-hour special use, a material policing problem. 
(4)  Prior to making any material change in the operation of the 24-hour business special use from that described in the original application for the special use, the applicant must submit a new application to modify the existing special use in the same manner as an original application. 
(5)  In the event that any business license or other license or permit required by this Ordinance and the Village Code for the operation of the 24-hour business special use is revoked, then the 24-hour business special use is terminated on that date of revocation. 
(aa)  Utility. Private utilities must be designed so that the location of entrances and exits, exterior lighting, service areas, and parking and loading facilities will minimize traffic congestion, pedestrian hazards, and adverse impacts on adjoining properties. Additional landscaping and screening may be required. 
(1)  All utility distribution lines for telephone, cable television, electrical, and other utility services in subdivisions platted and recorded after the effective date of this Ordinance must be installed underground. 
(2)  All underground installations must be placed within easements or dedicated public ways in a manner that does not conflict with previously installed services. 
(3)  Underground installations must be made in accordance with the rules and regulations from time to time on file with the Illinois Commerce Commission. Nothing contained herein relieves the developer from the standard charges on file with said Commission. 
(4)  All utility easement areas must be kept free and clear of all physical encumbrances so that the easements are readily available and accessible. Proposed easements must be submitted to the utility companies for their suggestions prior to the recording of a subdivision plat. 
(5)  All transformer boxes must be located so as not to be hazardous to the public. 
(bb)  Wireless Telecommunications Equipment. 
(1)  Purpose. 
(A)  The purpose these regulations are to provide for the placement, construction and modification of wireless telecommunications facilities. These provisions are not intended and must not be interpreted to prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the provision of wireless services, nor will the provisions be applied in such a manner as to unreasonably discriminate between providers of functionally equivalent wireless services. 
(B)  In the course of reviewing any request for any approval required by an applicant to provide wireless service or to install wireless service facilities, the Zoning Board of Appeals or the Village Board, as the case may be, must act within a reasonable period of time after the request is duly filed with the Village, taking into account the nature and scope of the request. Any decision to deny such a request must be in writing and supported by substantial evidence contained in a written record. 
(C)  Should the application of these regulations prohibit a person or entity from providing wireless service to all or a portion of the Village, such provider may petition the Village Board for an amendment to this Ordinance. The Village Board, upon receipt of such a petition, must promptly undertake review of the petition and make a determination on the petition within a reasonable period of time, taking into account the nature and scope of the petition. Any decision to deny such a petition must be in writing and supported by substantial evidence contained in a written record. 
(2)  Permitted Locations. 
(A)  Free Standing Wireless Communication Antennas. 
(i)  Free standing wireless communication antennas shall be a special use in the following areas and are limited to seventy-three (73) feet in height above grade: 
a.  That portion of the PCD-1 District west of the northerly extension of Lavergne Avenue and south of the westerly extension of Walden Lane. 
b.  That portion of the GC-2 District lying north of Illinois Road and west of Happ Road. 
c.  That portion of the GC-2 District lying west of southeasterly extension of vacated Manor Drive, as extended, south of the westerly extension of Washington Avenue, and one hundred ninety (190) feet north of the westerly extension of vacated Central Avenue. 
d.  The eastern one-half of that portion of the OR District consisting of Lot 1 of the Edens Executive Center Subdivision. 
e.  That portion of the VC District within the following boundaries: Starting from the northeast corner of the intersection of Green Bay Road and Wilmette Avenue, running northeasterly to the southeast corner of the intersection of Wilmette Avenue and the southeasterly extension of Electric Place, thence northwest along the east side of Electric Place, as extended, to the northeast corner of the intersection of Electric Place and Washington Court, thence west along the north side of westerly extension of Washington Court to the east side of Green Bay Road, thence southeast to the point of the beginning. 
(ii)  Free standing wireless communication antennas in excess of seventy-three (73) feet in height above grade shall require a height variation for that portion above seventy-three (73) feet above grade. 
(iii)  Free standing wireless communication antennas must meet all minimum setback and yard requirements of the district and all applicable federal laws and regulations concerning its use and operation. 
(B)  Roof- or Structure-Mounted Wireless Communication Antennas. 
(i)  A roof- or structure-mounted wireless telecommunications antenna that is directly affixed to an existing structure or roof-mounted antenna pole that does not exceed ten (10) feet above the roof of an existing building shall be a special use in the following areas: 
a.  That portion of the PCD-1 District west of the northerly extension of Lavergne Avenue and south of the westerly extension of Walden Lane. 
b.  That portion of the GC-2 District lying north of Illinois Road and west of Happ Road. 
c.  That portion of the GC-2 District lying west of southeasterly extension of vacated Manor Drive, as extended, south of the westerly extension of Washington Avenue, and one hundred ninety (190) feet north of the westerly extension of vacated Central Avenue. 
d.  The eastern one-half of that portion of the OR District consisting of Lot 1 of the Edens Executive Center Subdivision. 
e.  That portion of the VC District within the following boundaries: Starting from the northeast corner of the intersection of Green Bay Road and Wilmette Avenue, running northeasterly to the southeast corner of the intersection of Wilmette Avenue and the southeasterly extension of Electric Place, thence northwest along the east side of Electric Place, as extended, to the northeast corner of the intersection of Electric Place and Washington Court, thence west along the north side of westerly extension of Washington Court to the east side of Green Bay Road, thence southeast to the point of the beginning. 
A roof- or structure-mounted wireless telecommunications antenna in excess of ten (10) feet in height above the roof shall require a height variation for that portion above ten (10) feet above the roof. 
(ii)  Roof- or structure-mounted wireless telecommunications antenna are a special use in the Commercial and Planned Commercial Districts not delineated in Section 30-12.3.(bb)(2)(B)(i) and the R4 District. No variations from the maximum height requirement shall be granted. 
(iii)  A roof- or structure-mounted wireless telecommunications antenna that is directly affixed to an existing structure- or roof-mounted antenna pole that does not exceed ten (10) feet above the roof of an existing building shall be a special use in any zoning district when the roof- or structure-mounted wireless telecommunications antenna is either: 
a.  Directly affixed to a structure used to hold existing telecommunications antennae other than those for wireless service, such as police and fire telecommunications, where the structure and existing telecommunications antennae are both accessory to an existing institutional use. 
b.  The personal wireless service facility is directly affixed to an existing institutional use structure or to a non-habitable architectural feature on an institutional use structure. 
(iv)  Roof- or structure-mounted wireless communication antennas must meet all minimum setback and yard requirements of the district and all applicable federal laws and regulations concerning its use and operation. 
(3)  Co-Location. 
(A)  In considering a request for approval of a wireless service facility, the Zoning Board of Appeals or the Village Board, as the case may be, must, in addition to these standards, also give due consideration and weight to whether the applicant has sought and been denied the opportunity to co-locate its personal wireless service facility on an existing antenna-supporting structure and, if the proposed site is located outside of the areas listed in Paragraph (2)(A) above, whether the applicant has made adequate efforts to obtain a site in those areas. 
(B)  In considering a request for approval of a wireless service facility, the Zoning Board of Appeals or the Village Board, as the case may be, may by express condition require that the applicant allow, on a commercially reasonable basis, other providers of wireless telecommunications services to co-locate additional personal wireless service facilities on a free standing pole which is part of the applicant's proposed personal wireless service facility, where such co-location is technologically feasible. 
(4)  Non-conformities. Any wireless service facility installed and operating that is a legal non-conforming use or a legal non-conforming structure, as the case may be, and is subject to the rules on non-conformities provided in this Ordinance. 
(cc)  Small Cell Facilities. 
(1)  Purpose. The purpose of this Ordinance is to establish regulations, standards and procedures for the siting and collocation of small wireless facilities outside the rights-of-way on property zoned by the Village exclusively for commercial or industrial use, in a manner that is consistent the Act and for alternate locations outside the rights-of-way on all other zoned property. 
(2)  Regulations of small wireless facilities on property zoned exclusively for commercial or industrial use. 
The regulation of and application for small wireless facilities (as defined in Chapter 16) shall be subject to the regulations and application procedure provided for in Chapter 16. 
(3)  Regulations of small wireless facilities located on property not zoned exclusively for commercial or industrial uses. 
a.  This Section shall regulate small wireless facilities that are not mandated to be "permitted uses" pursuant to the Small Wireless Facilities Act. 
b.  Small wireless facilities shall not be a permitted or special use except as provide for in this Section. Except for those provisions below that conflict with Chapter 16-17 of the Village Code, the regulation of and application for small wireless facilities shall be subject to Chapter 16-17 of the Village Code. 
c.  No freestanding small wireless facility shall be allowed. 
d.  A roof- or structure-mounted small wireless facility that is directly affixed to an existing structure or roof-mounted antenna pole that does not exceed ten (10) feet above the roof of an existing building shall be a special use when the roof-or structure-mounted small wireless facility is either: 
i.  Directly affixed to a structure used to hold existing telecommunications antennae other than those for wireless service, such as police and fire telecommunications, where the structure and existing telecommunications antennae are both accessory to an existing institutional use. 
ii.  The small wireless facility is directly affixed to an existing institutional use structure or to a non-habitable architectural feature on an institutional use structure. 
iii.  The small wireless facility is direct affixed to an existing Multi-Family Dwelling, as follows: 
1.  The applicant must show that there is no other location within the right-of-way that would adequately provide the necessary service required for the wireless facility; or 
2.  The Village Engineer, in response to a filed application, requested that the proposed location of the small wireless facility be changed. 
(Code 1993, § 20-12.3; Ord. No. 2015-O-13, 4-14-2015; Ord. No. 2016-O-11, 4-12-2016; Ord. No. 2018-O-48, § 6, 7-24-2018) 
ARTICLE 30-13. - ON-SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS 

Sec. 30-13.1. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this Article is to address the regulation of those other site improvements on a lot other than the regulations for the principal building. This includes site design standards, accessory structures and uses, and permitted encroachments. 
(Code 1993, § 20-13.1) 
Sec. 30-13.2. - Use of land and buildings. 
(a)  Number of Buildings on a Lot. No more than one (1) principal building may be located on a lot, except for uses owned or operated by the Village itself, or by a public school district, public library district, or public park district, or where Article 30-8 of this Ordinance allows more than one (1) townhouse/stacked flat building on a lot as a special use. 
(b)  All Activities within an Enclosed Structure. Within all districts, all activities must be conducted entirely within an enclosed structure, with the exception of the following activities and uses: 
(1)  Off-street parking and loading. 
(2)  Only outdoor businesses and those businesses with an outdoor component are permitted accessory outdoor storage, as listed below. Additional uses may be permitted accessory outdoor storage by special use. 
(A)  Garden center. 
(B)  Heavy retail, rental and service. 
(C)  Kennel (exercise area only; no outdoor boarding). 
(D)  Manufacturing, general (storage only; no manufacturing activities). 
(E)  Motor vehicle dealership. 
(F)  Motor vehicle rental establishment 
(G)  Motor vehicle service and repair, major or minor. 
(H)  Outdoor dining, in accordance with Section 30-12.3.(u). 
(I)  Outdoor storage (principal use). 
(J)  Pet day care facility (exercise area only; no outdoor boarding). 
(K)  Public safety facility. 
(L)  Public works facility. 
(3)  Permitted outdoor display and sales areas for retail goods establishments, in accordance with Section 30-13.4.(n). 
(4)  Temporary uses, in accordance with Section 30-13.6 (Temporary Uses and Structures). 
(c)  Frontage on a Public Street. All lots must front on a public street within the Village. 
(d)  Required Yards. No lot may be reduced in area so that the yards are less than that required by this Ordinance. The required yard for a zoning lot is not considered a yard for any other zoning lot. All yards allocated to a structure must be located on the same zoning lot as the structure. 
(e)  Bulk Requirements. All structures erected must meet the requirements for the zoning district in which the structure is located. 
(f)  Use Permissions. No structure or land may be used for any use other than one (1) allowed as either a permitted or special use in the zoning district in which such structure or land is located. Structures or land may also be used for a temporary use or accessory use, in accordance with the requirements of Section 30-13.4 (Accessory Structures and Uses) and Section 30-13.6 (Temporary Uses and Structures). 
(g)  View Obstruction. A use, structure, sign or landscape must be located so that it does not obstruct or otherwise interfere with public use of a street right-of-way or other public easement, in accordance with the Village Code. 
(Code 1993, § 20-13.2) 
Sec. 30-13.3. - Exterior lighting. 
(a)  Light Trespass and Distraction. 
(1)  The following types of light trespass are prohibited: 
(A)  No exterior lighting may glare into, or upon, any adjacent lots. 
(B)  No exterior lighting may be used in any manner that could interfere with the safe movement of motor vehicles on public or private streets and alleys. 
(C)  The light level must be no greater than one-half (0.5) footcandle at any property line. 
(2)  The following types of light distraction are prohibited: 
(A)  Any light not designed for roadway illumination that produces direct or reflected glare that could disturb the operator of a motor vehicle. 
(B)  Any light that may be confused with, or construed as, a traffic control device, except as authorized by state, federal or local government. 
(b)  Unshielded Lighting. The use of unshielded lighting, including incandescent light bulbs hung or strung on poles, wires or any other type of support, is prohibited, except on a temporary basis in areas where approved carnivals/circuses, fairs, or other similar temporary uses are held and only when such activities are taking place. 
(c)  Light Pole and Building-Mounted Lighting Heights. The maximum height of light poles on private property, as measured from grade at the base to the bottom of the luminaire, is specified below, unless otherwise required by the Building Code. These standards do not apply to public right-of-way lighting. Permitted light pole heights are as follows: 
(1)  Non-Residential Uses. 
(A)  Lights poles and building-mounted fixtures must be designed with fully shielded luminaires. Such poles or mounts must not exceed eighteen (18) feet in height. 
(B)  All new lighting for outdoor recreational facilities, such as those at parks, recreation centers, and golf courses, are a special use. In addition to the special use standards, outdoor lighting must meet the requirements of Paragraph (a) above. Outdoor lighting for playing fields located in a park or recreation center may be located and mounted at heights up to seventy (70) feet, provided that any structure on which such lights are mounted is located a minimum of twenty (20) feet from any residential lot line and special use approval is obtained. 
(2)  Residential Uses. Light poles for single-family and two-unit dwellings are limited to eight (8) feet in height. Light poles for townhouse/stacked flat and multi-family uses are limited to fifteen (15) feet in height. Lighting, including under-soffit lighting mounted upon a single-family, two-unit or townhouse/stacked flat residential dwelling may not be mounted higher than fifteen (15) feet above grade. 
(Code 1993, § 20-13.3) 
Sec. 30-13.4. - Accessory structures and uses. 
    All accessory structures and uses are subject to the requirements of this Article and the requirements of Section 30-13.5 (Permitted Encroachments) below. Additional accessory structures not regulated in this section may be regulated by Section 30-13.5 (Permitted Encroachments) below. 
(a)  Accessory Structures - General Regulations. All accessory structures are subject to the following regulations, in addition to any other regulations within this Article and this Ordinance. 
(1)  No accessory structure may be constructed prior to construction of the principal building to which it is accessory. 
(2)  Only those accessory structures permitted by this section or Section 30-13.5 (Permitted Encroachments) are permitted in required yards. 
(3)  The maximum height of any detached accessory structure is measured from average abutting grade to the peak of the roof. No detached accessory structure may exceed fifteen (15) feet, unless otherwise permitted or limited by this Ordinance. 
(4)  A detached accessory structure must be located a minimum of ten (10) feet from a principal building with the exception of swimming pools, spas, patios and decks that are not subject to this separation requirement. A roofed detached accessory structure must be located a minimum of four (4) feet from another roofed detached accessory structure. 
(5)  For lots less than fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet, no more than two (2) detached accessory structures are permitted on a lot. For lots fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet or greater, no more than three (3) detached accessory structures are permitted on a lot. 
(A)  This requirement shall not apply to uses owned or operated by a Unit of Local Government. 
(B)  For the purposes of this requirement, fences, walls, retaining walls, arbors, trellises, playground equipment, patios, decks, swimming pools and spas, tennis and similar recreation courts, and pergolas attached to the principal structure are not considered detached accessory structures. Construction of additional detached accessory structures above that permitted by this Ordinance is a special use. However, as of the effective date of this Ordinance, a lot that exceeds the maximum number of permitted detached accessory structures may replace an existing detached garage without special approval. 
(6)  All detached accessory structures are limited to a maximum area of two hundred (200) square feet each, unless otherwise permitted by this Ordinance. The total area of all roofed detached accessory structures is limited to a maximum of twenty-five percent (25%) of the permitted total principal structure floor area, not including applicable floor area bonuses. Unless otherwise permitted by this Ordinance, additional area for detached accessory structures above that permitted by this Ordinance is a special use. This requirement shall not apply to uses owned or operated by a Unit of Local Government. 
(7)  No detached accessory structures may be designed or used for housing. Basements are prohibited except in the case of a beach house/cabana or boat house on a sloping lot, which may have a basement for storage purposes only. 
(8)  A detached accessory structure may be equipped with a sink, toilet, and oven or microwave oven but bathing facilities are prohibited. However a beach house/cabana or boat house may have an outdoor shower head. 
(9)  Upon the demolition of a principal building, any remaining non-conforming accessory structures on the same property as the demolished structure must also be demolished or altered so that they conform to this Ordinance. 
(10)  Accessory structures on lots containing a side yard adjoining a street, or a double-frontage lot with a no-access strip along the rear lot line, shall be treated in the same manner as allowed in any required yard that abuts a street. However, fences in rear yards of double-frontage lots with a no-access strip are treated the same as fences in rear yards of double-frontage lots without a no-access strip. 
(b)  Amateur (HAM) Radio Equipment. 
(1)  Towers that solely support amateur (HAM) radio equipment and conform to all applicable performance criteria as set forth in Section 30-13.7 (Environmental Performance Standards) are permitted only in the rear yard and must be located ten (10) feet from any lot line. 
(2)  Towers are limited to the maximum building height of the applicable district, unless a taller tower is technically necessary to engage successfully in amateur radio communications in accordance with Paragraph (4) below. 
(3)  Antenna may be ground-, building- or roof-mounted. Every effort must be made to install radio antennae in locations that are not readily visible from neighboring properties or from the public right-of-way, excluding alleys. 
(4)  An antenna or tower that is proposed to exceed the height limitations is a special use. The operator must provide evidence that a taller tower and/or antenna is necessary to successfully engage in amateur radio communications. In addition, the applicant must provide evidence that the tower and/or antenna do not prove a hazard to birds (i.e., minimal chance of bird strikes). As part of the application, the applicant must submit a site plan showing the proposed location of the tower and/or antenna, as well as its relation to the principal building and any additional accessory structures. 
(5)  Antennae and/or towers owned and operated by the Village are exempt from these requirements. 
(c)  Arbors or Trellises. 
(1)  Arbors and trellises are limited to maximum height of nine (9) feet, a maximum width of six (6) feet and a maximum depth of three (3) feet. The sum of depth in feet and width in feet is limited to eight (8) feet. 
(2)  Each surface of an arbor or trellis must be at least fifty percent (50%) open. 
(3)  No more than a total of three (3) arbors or trellises, or a combination thereof, is permitted on a lot. No more than one (1) arbor or one (1) trellis is permitted along a single lot line. 
(4)  Arbors attached to a principal building may not encroach more than four (4) feet into the required front, side yard adjoining a street, or rear yard, and no more than two (2) feet into the interior side yard. Attached arbors are limited to ten percent (10%) coverage of a front yard. Detached arbors are permitted encroachments in any required yard. Trellises are permitted encroachments in the interior side and rear yards. 
(d)  Beach Houses/Cabanas or Boat Houses. A beach house/cabana or boat house is permitted a maximum area of seven hundred fifty (750) square feet. 
(e)  Dog Runs. Dog runs shall comply with all applicable Village ordinances including the following: 
(1)  Location. Dog runs shall be located a minimum of three (3) feet from any side or rear lot line. Dog runs shall not be located in a front yard or side yard adjoining a street. 
(2)  Enclosure. 
(A)  Dog runs shall be enclosed with a fence or other enclosure approved by the Community Development, Engineering and Public Works Services, and Community Development Departments. 
(B)  Dog runs shall comply with the fence regulations set forth in Section 30-13.4.(f). 
(C)  Dog runs shall not utilize or adjoin the neighboring fence on any side. 
(D)  The enclosure of a property with a fence shall not constitute a dog run. 
(3)  Surfacing. Dog runs shall be constructed so as to permit proper filtering and/or drainage. 
(A)  Dog runs may be surfaced with one (1) or more of the following materials: 
(i)  Grass; and/or 
(ii)  In whole or in part, concrete or other impervious material, the surface of which must pitch to the perimeter when a filtration bed consisting of eight (8) inches of crushed limestone and sand, covered with a four (4) inch layer of gravel, has been installed; and/or 
(iii)  In whole or in part, an eight (8) inch layer of crushed limestone and sand, covered by a four (4) inch layer of gravel. 
(B)  The area must be properly confined to prevent a washout of the gravel, limestone, and sand. 
(C)  Dog runs may not be constructed or surfaced with any absorbent material which may cause nuisance odors or the inability to maintain the area in a sanitary condition. 
(D)  Dog runs surfaced with an impervious material must comply with the impervious surface coverage regulations set forth in the zoning district in which they are located. 
(4)  Cleaning. Dog runs must be cleaned at least daily or more often as necessary to prevent odors and other nuisances. 
(f)  Donation Boxes. Donation boxes are permitted for non-residential uses. 
(1)  Only one (1) donation box is permitted per zoning lot. The donation box must be related to and owned by the principal use on the site. 
(2)  No donation box may be located in the front yard. Donation boxes may be located in the side yard adjoining a street, interior side or rear yard but must be three (3) feet from any property line. No donation box may be located within a required parking space. 
(3)  The area surrounding the donation box must be kept free of any junk, debris or other material. 
(4)  Donation boxes shall be maintained in good condition and appearance with no structural damage, holes, or visible rust, and shall be free of graffiti. 
(5)  Donation boxes shall be locked or otherwise secured. 
(6)  Donation boxes shall contain the following contact information on the front of each donation box: the name, address, email, and phone number of the operator. 
(7)  Donation boxes shall be serviced and emptied as needed, but a minimum of every fifteen (15) days. 
(8)  Donation boxes shall not exceed five (5) feet in height and sixty (60) cubic feet. 
(g)  Eaves. 
(1)  Eaves are permitted to encroach no more than four (4) feet into a required front, side yard adjoining a street, or rear yard and no more than two (2) feet in to a side yard. 
(2)  Where the line of an existing eave is to be continued, the eave may encroach three (3) feet into a side yard. 
(3)  Eaves of detached garages located entirely in the required rear yard may encroach to within one (1) foot of the side and rear lot lines. 
(h)  Fences and Walls. 
(1)  General Requirements. 
(A)  The following fences are prohibited: 
(i)  Fences prohibited under Section 8-107 of the Village Code. 
(ii)  Fences that do not comply with article 4 of chapter 20 of the Village Code. 
(iii)  Wire fences of a gauge lighter than eleven (11). 
(iv)  A variation to permit the construction or maintenance of such a fence shall not be granted. 
(B)  The finished side of all fences must face the street, alley or abutting property. The finished side of a fence is defined as the smooth side or the side not containing structural supports. If structural elements are an integral part of the fence design, such elements must be centered on the line of the fence. 
(C)  Strips or slats are prohibited among the links of a chain link fence. 
(D)  Synthetic fiber fences must meet the following requirements: 
(i)  Plumbing material is prohibited. 
(ii)  All fence material must have color consistency throughout. 
(iii)  Any post or horizontal component must have a minimum thickness of a twelfth (0.12) of an inch. 
(iv)  All fence material must be recyclable at the conclusion of its useful life. 
(E)  Gates shall not overhang any public way including sidewalks, streets, alleys, and parkways. 
(2)  Fence Location, Type and Height. 
(A)  Fences are permitted in a required front yard, side yard adjoining a street, and rear yard of a double-frontage lot if such fence meets the following standards: 
(i)  Fences are limited to a maximum height of four (4) feet, as measured from abutting grade. 
(ii)  Fences must be a minimum of fifty percent (50%) open as measured in Section 30-2.5.(k). 
(iii)  Chain link fences are prohibited. 
(iv)  Finials on support posts are limited to four (4) inches above the finished top of the fence. 
(v)  Fence piers are limited to a maximum column width of eighteen (18) inches. Columns must be set no less than eight (8) feet apart on center. However, for residential lots in the R Zoning District that are twenty thousand (20,000) square feet or more in lot area, up to four (4) columns no wider than twenty-four (24) inches and six-and-one-half (6.5) feet in height are permitted in a front yard or side yard adjoining a street. 
(vi)  No planter, lamp or similar decorative element that exceeds eighteen (18) inches may be installed above the finished top of the column. 
(vii)  Fences requiring a footing must be set back three (3) feet from the property line. 
(B)  Solid fences are permitted in interior side yards and rear yards, and are limited to six and one-half (6.5) feet in height. No solid fence is permitted in any required front yard, side yard adjoining the street, or in the required rear yard of a double-frontage lot, unless permitted by Paragraph (C) below. 
(C)  A solid fence of up to six and one-half (6.5) feet in height may be permitted in a front yard where the fence adjoins and is parallel to a portion of the streets listed in Table 13-1: Front Yard Solid Fence Exceptions. In addition, such fence is permitted along the interior sides of the front yard of properties listed below. 
(D)  A solid fence of up to six and one-half (6.5) feet in height may be permitted in a rear yard, side yard adjoining a street or the required rear yard of a double-frontage lot where the fence adjoins and is parallel to a portion of the streets listed in Table 13-2: Solid Fence Exceptions. In addition, such fence is permitted along the interior sides of the required rear yard of properties listed below. 
VILLAGE OF WILMETTE, ILLINOIS

TABLE 13-1: FRONT YARD SOLID FENCE EXCEPTIONS ROAD BLOCK CROSS STREET(S) PERMITTED LOCATION Sheridan Road 1400 Block Chestnut Avenue to Westerfield Drive West Side Only Skokie Boulevard 200 Block Old Glenview Road to New Glenview Road West of 208 and 234- 240 Adjoining Skokie Boulevard  
VILLAGE OF WILMETTE, ILLINOIS

TABLE 13-2: SOLID FENCE EXCEPTIONS ROAD BLOCK CROSS STREETS(S) PERMITTED LOCATION Briar Drive 200 Block Old Glenview Road to Lilac Lane Carriage Way 100 Block South Side Only Chestnut Avenue 700 Block North Side Only Crawford Avenue 100-300 Blocks Wilmette Avenue to Old Glenview Road Fairway Drive 3900 Block South Side Only Hibbard Road 700-900 Blocks Skokie Boulevard to Indianwood Road Hunter Road 500 Block North of Wilmette Avenue West Side Only Hunter Road 900-1000 Blocks Lake Avenue to Iroquois Road West Side Only Illinois Road 3300 Block South Side Only Lake Avenue 2300-3000 Blocks Hunter Road to Hibbard Road North Side Only Lake Avenue 3900-4100 Blocks West of Harms Road North Side Only; Chain link is permitted Lockerbie Lane 100 Block Along Cul-de-sac Adjoining Old Orchard Road Millbrook Lane 100-200 Blocks Old Glenview Road to Lilac Lane West Side, Only Those Adjoining Briar Drive New Glenview Road 2400-2900 Blocks Hunter Road to Valley View Lane Both Sides New Glenview Road 2900-3100 Blocks Valley View Lane to Hibbard Road South Side Only Old Glenview Road 2100 Block South Side Only Old Glenview Road 3000 Block South Side Only Pioneer Lane 2100 Block South Side Only Plum Tree Lane 100 Block South Side Only Skokie Boulevard 300-800 Blocks New Glenview Road to Lake Avenue Both Sides Sprucewood Lane 3200 Block Only Those Adjoining Skokie Boulevard Thelin Court 200 Block East Side Adjoining Skokie Boulevard and North Side Adjoining New Glenview Road Virginia Lane 1100 Block West Side Adjoining Hibbard Road Only; No Closer Than 30' South of Illinois Right-of-Way Westerfield Drive 801-819 South Side Only Wilmette Avenue 2300-2500 Blocks West of Hunter Road North Side Only  
(3)  Free Standing Walls. 
(A)  Free standing walls may not be located in a required front yard, side yard adjoining a street or rear yard of a double-frontage lot. A free standing wall may be located in a side yard or rear yard no closer than three (3) feet from a lot line provided it does not exceed three (3) feet in height. 
(B)  Any free standing wall must be built upon a footing. 
(i)  Garages, Attached and Detached. 
(1)  Attached Garages. The following regulations apply only to single-family and two-unit dwellings constructed after the effective date of this Ordinance. Attached garages are not considered an accessory structure but are subject to the regulations of this section for attached garages. 
(A)  Front-loaded attached garages are limited to fifty percent (50%) of the width of the front facade of the house or twenty-two (22) feet in width, whichever is greater, as measured along the building line that faces the street. 
(B)  Attached front-loaded garages must be located a minimum of five (5) feet behind the main front facade of the house. This measurement is taken from the part of the front facade that is immediately adjacent to the garage, except that the measurement may be taken from the part of the house closest to the street if all of the following conditions are met: 
(i)  The front facade of the house is irregular, i.e., the front foundation is not a straight line. 
(ii)  The portion closest to the street is actual living space. 
(iii)  No measurement may be taken from a porch, bay window, turret or similar architectural feature that protrudes from the facade. 
(C)  Sub-paragraphs (A) and (B) above do not apply if more than fifty percent (50%) of the single-family homes on the same block (counting homes on both sides of the street) have garages not meeting the requirements of Sections 30-13.4.(i)(1)(A) and (B) and more than fifty percent (50%) of the single-family homes located within five-hundred (500) feet of the subject property and within the same zoning district do not meet the requirements of Sections 30-13.4.(i)(1)(A) and (B). 
(2)  Detached Garages. The following design standards apply to all detached garages. 
(A)  Detached garages are limited to the following height maximums: 
(i)  A detached garage with a flat roof is limited to a maximum of twelve (12) feet in height as measured from average abutting grade to the peak of the roof. 
(ii)  A detached garage with a pitched or mansard roof is limited to a maximum of fifteen (15) feet in height as measured from average abutting grade to the peak of the roof. 
(iii)  A detached garage with a pitched roof may be a maximum of eighteen (18) feet in height under the following conditions: 
a.  The maximum distance measured from the floor of the garage to the top of the exterior wall framing does not exceed nine (9) feet and four (4) inches. 
b.  Dormers or other projections outward from the plane of the roof do not exceed a height of twelve (12) feet above average abutting grade. 
(iv)  A detached garage with a pitched roof may be a maximum of twenty (20) feet in height under the following conditions: 
a.  The pitch and the roof type of the garage roof equals the primary roof pitch and roof type of the principal structure subject to review by the Zoning Administrator. 
b.  The maximum distance measured from the floor of the garage to the top of the exterior wall framing does not exceed nine (9) feet and four (4) inches. 
c.  Dormers or other projections outward from the plane of the roof do not exceed a height of twelve (12) feet above average abutting grade. 
(v)  A detached garage with a cross gable is limited to fifteen (15) feet in height above average abutting grade. 
(B)  The area above the vehicle parking spaces in a detached garage may not contain a kitchen or sleeping area. 
(C)  Detached garages on lots less than fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet in lot area are limited to six hundred (600) square feet in area. Detached garages on lots fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet or more in lot area are limited to eight hundred (800) square feet in area. However, a detached garage for a townhouse development in the R2 or R3 District is limited to four hundred (400) square feet of area per dwelling unit. Request for relief from this section is treated as a special use. Additional area for detached garages above that permitted by this Ordinance is a special use. 
(D)  No garage located in the R, R1, R2, or PCD-1 District shall contain spaces for more than four (4) vehicles. 
(E)  Detached garages are permitted in the rear yard and must be located a minimum of three (3) feet from any lot line. Detached garages must be located a minimum of ten (10) feet from the principal building on a lot. These distances are measured from the finished walls of the structures. 
(j)  Home Occupations. 
(1)  The home occupation must be conducted entirely within the dwelling unit and clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for residential purposes. 
(2)  A home occupation may not be established prior to the member(s) of the family who are conducting the home occupation taking possession of, and residing in, the dwelling. 
(3)  No person other than a family member residing on the premises may be employed by or engaged in part of a home occupation. 
(4)  Vehicular traffic and on-street parking must not be increased by the home occupation. 
(5)  The receipt, sale or shipment of deliveries is not permitted on or from the premises, with the exception of regular U.S. Mail and/or an express shipping service that is characteristic of service to residential neighborhoods. 
(6)  A home occupation must not generate noise, solid waste, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electrical interference beyond what normally occurs in a residential use. No outside storage or display of materials, merchandise, inventory or heavy equipment is permitted. 
(7)  No exterior alteration that changes the residential character of the principal building is permitted. 
(8)  No home occupation may provide service or instruction simultaneously to a group of more than four (4) persons while such persons are present in the dwelling unit. 
(9)  Any type of motor vehicle service and repair is a prohibited home occupation. 
(10)  Day care homes are not considered a home occupation, but rather a principal use. 
(k)  Mechanical Equipment. 
(1)  In all districts, all mechanical equipment including, but not limited to, heating, ventilating and air-conditioning (HVAC) units, may not be located in a required front yard, side yard adjoining a street or rear yard of a double-frontage lot. When located in an interior side yard or rear yard, such equipment may be no closer than ten (10) feet from a lot line. 
(2)  All ground-based mechanical equipment that is located between the principal building and a street must be screened from the street by non-deciduous landscaping or conforming fencing. 
(3)  Double-stacked mechanical equipment, i.e., condenser units stacked vertically, is prohibited for single-family, two-unit, townhouse/stacked flat dwellings in a residential district. 
(4)  Any mechanical equipment located on the roof of any structure must be located at least six (6) feet from any supporting wall of the building to permit safe access to the roof, and must be screened by an architectural element of the roof. 
(l)  Outdoor Fireplaces and Fire Pits. 
(1)  The chimney height on an outdoor fireplace shall not exceed fifteen (15) above average abutting grade. Fire pits shall not have a chimney. 
(2)  The outdoor fireplace and fire pit may not be located in a required front yard, side yard adjoining a street, or rear yard of a double-frontage lot. 
(3)  The outdoor fireplace and fire pit shall comply with article XVII of chapter 12 of the Village Code. 
(m)  Outdoor Kitchenettes. In all residential districts, outdoor kitchenettes must comply with the required front yard, side yard adjoining a street, and interior side yard setback requirements. When located entirely within the rear yard, an outdoor kitchenette may encroach no closer than three (3) feet to a lot line. 
(n)  Outdoor Display and Sales Areas - Accessory. 
(1)  All business operations must be conducted within a completely enclosed building, except for the display, but not the sale, of plants or flowers in durable containers, or fresh fruits or vegetables, provided that the display is located within fifteen (15) feet of the principal building, is not located on public property or within a public right-of-way, and does not occupy or interfere with the use of required parking spaces and aisles. 
(2)  Vending machines located outside of the principal building are prohibited. 
(o)  Permanently Installed Stand-By Generators. 
(1)  The sound rating value of stand-by generators in any residential district is limited to seventy (70) decibels at the receiving lot line under normal load. The owner must maintain the generator so that this sound level is not exceeded during its operation. However, all permanently installed stand-by generators are exempt from the noise performance standard of this Ordinance when operated during power outages. 
(2)  In a residential zoning district, an electrical stand-by generator must be installed a minimum of fifteen (15) feet from any side or rear lot line or five (5) feet from any side or rear lot line abutting a public alley. However, on a residential lot less than thirty (30) feet in width, the generator may be installed at the point closest to equidistant between the side lot lines that does not interfere with ingress and egress to the dwelling or a garage. All such units must be installed at ground level only with exhaust ports oriented away from adjacent property. 
(3)  In a non-residential zoning district, an electrical stand-by generator must be installed no less than five (5) feet from any lot line. 
(4)  Permanent stand-by generators may be operated for testing purposes one (1) time for a period not to exceed thirty (30) minutes in any seven (7) day period. Testing of stand-by generators in all residential districts must take place between 9:00 a.m. and 11:00 a.m. Monday through Friday. 
(5)  All permanent stand-by generators must be installed in accordance with the requirements of the Village Code. 
(p)  Porches. 
(1)  Open porches may encroach six (6) feet into any required front, side yard adjoining a street or rear yard. Steps attached to open porches in any required front or side yard adjoining a street may encroach an additional three (3) feet from the edge of the porch, for a maximum encroachment of nine (9) feet (six (6)-foot porch plus three (3)-foot step encroachment). 
(2)  Open porches may encroach two (2) feet into an interior side yard. Steps attached to open porches in an interior side yard may encroach an additional three (3) feet into an interior side yard but in no event have a side yard setback less than three (3) feet. 
(3)  Porches may not cover more than ten percent (10%) of the front yard. 
(4)  Stoops are not considered porches. 
(5)  A roof line that is the continuous extension of a porch roof shall be considered part of the porch for setback, floor area, and lot coverage porch bonus, and floor area porch bonus purposes. 
(q)  Retaining Walls. 
(1)  Retaining walls must be located at least one (1) foot from any property line and shall not encroach into any public right-of-way. 
(2)  Retaining walls, including the terracing of retaining walls for landscaping effect, shall be limited to two (2) feet in height. Retaining walls over two (2) feet in height shall be permitted only if approved by the Village Engineer. 
(3)  Retaining walls that exist as of the effective date of this Ordinance may be repaired and replaced, so long as there is no increase in height. 
(r)  Satellite Dish Antennas. Regulations in this subsection are imposed to the extent permissible under the Over the Air Reception Device Rule (OTARD) of the Federal Communications Commission. 
(1)  General Requirements. 
(A)  Satellite dish antennas must be permanently installed on a building, in the ground or on a foundation, and not mounted on a portable or movable structure. 
(B)  Subject to operational requirements, the dish must be of a neutral color, such as white or grey, and blend with the surroundings as best as possible. No additional signs or advertising are permitted on the satellite dish itself, aside from the logos of the satellite dish service provider or dish manufacturer. 
(C)  Cables and lines serving ground-mounted satellite dish antennas must be located underground. 
(D)  Compliance with all federal, state and local regulations is required in the construction, installation and operation of satellite dish antennas. 
(E)  All exposed surfaces of the antenna must be kept clean and all supports must be painted to maintain a well-kept appearance. 
(F)  Antennas no longer in use must be removed. 
(2)  Small Satellite Dish Antennas (One (1) Meter or Less in Diameter). Small satellite dish antennas, which are one (1) meter or less in diameter (thirty-nine and three-eighths (39-3/8) inches), are subject to the general requirements of Paragraph (1) above. Every effort must be made to install small satellite dish antennas in locations that are not readily visible from neighboring properties or from the public right-of-way. 
(3)  Large Satellite Dish Antennas (More than One (1) Meter). 
(A)  Residential Districts. 
(i)  Large satellite dish antennas are permitted only in the rear yard of residential districts, and must be setback a distance from all lot lines that is equal to the height of the dish, but in no case less than five (5) feet from any lot line. 
(ii)  A large satellite dish antenna must be located and screened so that it cannot be readily seen from public streets or adjacent properties. Screening includes fences and landscape located to conceal the sides and rear of the antenna and its support structure. Landscape must be, at minimum, five (5) feet tall at the time of installation. 
(B)  Non-Residential Districts. 
(i)  A large satellite dish antenna is permitted only in the rear or interior side yard and setback, and must be setback a distance from all lot lines that is equal to the height of the dish, but in no case less than five (5) feet from any lot line. 
(ii)  Roof-mounting is permitted only if the satellite dish antenna is in scale with the overall building mass and location, and must be screened by an architectural feature. The bottom of the satellite dish antenna may not be more than two (2) feet above the roof. The visible portion of the dish must not comprise more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the corresponding height or width of the screen. 
(iii)  Ground-mounted satellite dish antenna must provide screening, which includes fencing or landscape to accomplish the following: 
a.  All ground-mounted accessory equipment and the lower part of the support structure must be completely screened. 
b.  Where feasible, trees must be installed to the side and rear of the antenna and at a height/elevation equal to the tallest portion of the dish. 
(s)  Sheds and Greenhouses. 
(1)  Sheds and greenhouses may not be located in a required front yard, side yard adjoining a street, interior side yard or rear yard of a double-frontage lot. When located in a rear yard, sheds and greenhouses may be no closer than three (3) feet from a lot line. 
(2)  Sheds and greenhouses must be located a minimum of ten (10) feet from the principal building and a minimum of four (4) feet from any other roofed accessory structure. 
(3)  The structures are limited to ten (10) feet in height. 
(t)  Solar Energy Systems. 
(1)  A solar energy system is subject to the following development and design standards: 
(A)  A solar energy system may be building- or ground-mounted, or integrated into a building. 
(B)  Solar panels must be placed so that concentrated solar radiation or glare is not directed onto nearby properties or roadways. 
(C)  All power transmission lines from a ground-mounted solar energy system to any structure must be located underground. 
(D)  Advertising, including signs, streamers, pennants, spinners, reflectors, ribbons, tinsel, balloons, flags, banners or similar materials are prohibited. Only manufacturer and equipment information, warning signs or ownership information is permitted on any equipment of the solar energy system. 
(E)  A solar energy system connected to the utility grid must provide written authorization from the local utility company acknowledging and approving such connection. 
(2)  Building-Mounted Systems. 
(A)  A building mounted system may be mounted on a principal building or accessory structure in the following locations: 
(i)  When mounted on a roof: 
a.  The solar panel system is limited to one (1) foot above the maximum building height of the zoning district for the building type (principal building or accessory structure). Height is measured from the roof surface on which the system is mounted to the highest edge of the system. 
b.  The solar panel system must meet the required setbacks of the structure it is placed upon. 
c.  1. The panels should be located no higher than three (3) feet below the ridge to allow for smoke ventilation. 
2.  Panels should be located in a manner that provides one (1) three (3)-foot wide clear access pathway from eave to the ridge on each roof slope where modules are located. 
    Modules adjacent to a Hip or Valley shall provide one and a half (1.5) foot of clearance on both faces if modules are located on both sides, but may be placed directly adjacent to a hip or valley if modules only occupy one side. 
3.  A three (3)-foot perimeter should be observed around a solar panel system placed on a flat roof, pitch of 2:12 or less. 
d.  The Fire Chief or his/her designee may grant exceptions to the requirements contained under Section (t)(2)(A)(i)c.1., 2. and 3. above where access, pathway or ventilation requirements are reduced due to: 
  Proximity and type of adjacent exposures. 
  Alternative access opportunities (as from adjoining roofs). 
  Ground level access to the roof area in question. 
  Adequate ventilation opportunities beneath solar array (as with significantly elevated or widely-spaced arrays). 
  Adequate ventilation opportunities afforded by module set back from other rooftop equipment (example: shading or structural constraints may leave significant areas open for ventilation near HVAC equipment). 
  Automatic ventilation device. 
  New technology, methods, or other circumstances that ensure adequate fire department access, pathways and ventilation opportunities. 
(ii)  When mounted on a facade: 
a.  Side and rear building facades. 
b.  Front or corner building facades provided that systems are simultaneously used to shade the structure's windows. 
c.  Solar panels may project up to two (2) feet from a facade. 
(3)  Building Integrated Photovoltaic Solar Energy Systems. Building integrated photovoltaic solar energy systems will be allowed on all building facades and roof sides provided the building component in which the system is integrated meets all required setbacks for the district in which the building is located. 
(4)  Free Standing Systems. 
(A)  A free standing system is permitted only in the rear yard and must be setback a minimum of five (5) feet from any lot line. 
(B)  A free standing system must not exceed the maximum fifteen (15) feet above adjacent grade. 
(C)  Single-family residential lots twenty thousand (20,000) square feet or less in size are limited to a total of one hundred (100) square feet in area of panels. Single-family residential lots over twenty thousand (20,000) square feet are limited to a total of two hundred (200) square feet in area of panels. 
(u)  Swimming Pools, Spas and Hot Tubs. All swimming pools, spas, and hot tubs must be reviewed and approved in administrative zoning review, and must comply with the requirements of the Village and the following standards: 
(1)  Swimming pools, spas, hot tubs and related pumping and filtering equipment are permitted in the rear yard. The swimming pool, spa, hot tub or related equipment shall not be located between the principal building and a street. 
(2)  The pumping and filtering equipment must be located fifteen (15) feet from any lot line. However, on a lot that is less than thirty-five (35) feet wide, such equipment may be installed at a point approximately equidistant from the side lot lines. 
(3)  The required setbacks for swimming pools shall be increased by one (1) foot for each foot that the swimming pool projects above grade. 
(4)  The swimming pool, spa, hot tub and all related equipment must be sited to meet the following standards: 
(A)  Water will not drain onto adjacent properties. 
(B)  There is minimal visual and noise impact on adjacent properties. 
(C)  All lighting for the swimming pool, spa or hot tub is oriented away from or shielded from adjacent properties. 
(v)  Tents. Small tents customarily used for recreational purposes are permitted and must be located in the rear yard. Tents for entertainment, promotional or assembly purposes are permitted as an accessory use for no longer than five (5) days and must be in conjunction with a special event of a use located on the same lot. Tents must be removed within two (2) days of the end of the event for which it was erected, but in no case may a tent be in place for longer than five (5) days. Unless waived in writing by the Zoning Administrator, every tent shall comply with the bulk requirements applicable to accessory structures. Additionally, the size and location of tents may be restricted where it is determined that it creates parking and/or access problems on the site. 
(w)  Tree Houses, Play Houses and Play Ground Equipment. 
(1)  Tree houses and play houses may not be located in a required front yard, side yard adjoining a street, interior side yard or rear yard of a double-frontage lot. When located in a rear yard, tree houses and play houses may be no closer than three (3) feet from a lot line. 
(2)  Tree houses and play houses are limited to fifteen (15) feet in height above adjacent grade and may not exceed one hundred fifty (150) square feet in area. 
(3)  Play houses must be located a minimum of ten (10) feet from the principal building and a minimum of four (4) feet from any other roofed accessory structure. 
(x)  Unusual Recreation Equipment. 
(1)  The installation and character of the equipment must reflect the scale and location of facilities generally accepted as usual and customary in single-family districts. 
(2)  The level and duration of noise produced by the use of such equipment must reflect that which is accepted as usual and customary in single-family neighborhoods. 
(y)  Wind Turbines. 
(1)  General Requirements. 
(A)  The sound levels of the wind turbine may not exceed the decibel sound limits in the zoning district in which the wind turbine is located. 
(B)  Wind turbines must be sited in a manner that does not result in significant shadow flicker impacts. Significant shadow flicker is defined as more than thirty (30) hours per year on abutting occupied buildings. The applicant has the burden of proving that the shadow flicker will not have significant adverse impact on neighboring or adjacent uses. Potential shadow flicker must be addressed either through siting or mitigation measures. 
(C)  Advertising, including signs, streamers, pennants, spinners, reflectors, ribbons, tinsel, balloons, flags, banners or similar materials are prohibited. Only manufacturer and equipment information, warning signs or ownership information is permitted on the wind turbine and equipment. 
(D)  A wind turbine connected to the utility grid must provide written authorization from the local utility company acknowledging and approving such connection. 
(E)  The wind turbine must comply with all applicable Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) regulations and all state and local regulations. 
(2)  Building-Mounted Wind Turbines. Wind turbines may be mounted on principal buildings and accessory structures, subject to the following: 
(A)  The maximum height of any wind turbine mounted on a detached accessory structure or upon a principal structure is the height limit of the applicable zoning district. 
(B)  The maximum height is calculated as the total height of the turbine system including the tower, and the maximum vertical height of the turbine's blades. Maximum height therefore is calculated measuring the length of a blade at maximum vertical rotation to the base of the tower. 
(C)  No portion of exposed turbine blades may be within twenty (20) feet of the ground. Unexposed turbine blades may be within ten (10) feet of the ground. Blades and tail vane must be a minimum of ten (10) feet from utility lines in all wind directions. 
(3)  Ground-Mounted Systems. 
(A)  The maximum height of any ground-mounted wind turbine (a tower) is the height limit of the applicable zoning district. Additional height may be granted as a special use if the tower needs additional height to exceed the tree canopy. 
(B)  The maximum height of any ground-mounted wind energy system is measured from grade to the length of a prop at maximum vertical rotation. 
(C)  No portion of exposed turbine blades may be within twenty (20) feet of the ground. Unexposed turbine blades may be within ten (10) feet of the ground. Blades and tail vane must be a minimum of ten (10) feet from utility lines in all wind directions. 
(D)  Ground-mounted wind turbines may be located in the rear yard only. A ground-mounted tower must be set back from all lot lines equal to one hundred ten percent (110%) of the height of the tower. Additional equipment outside of the tower, including guy wire anchors, must be ten (10) feet from any lot line. 
(E)  To reduce the visual impacts of a tower, the following standards must be met: 
(i)  The applicant must demonstrate that the wind turbine's visual impact will be minimized for surrounding neighbors and the community. This may include, but is not limited to, siting, wind generator design or appearance, buffering, and screening of ground-mounted electrical and control equipment. 
(ii)  The color of the small wind energy system must either be the stock color from the manufacturer or painted with a non-reflective, unobtrusive color that blends in with the surrounding environment. Approved colors include, but are not limited to, white, off-white or gray. 
(iii)  Artificial lighting is prohibited unless such lighting is required by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA). 
(iv)  All electrical wires associated with a ground-mounted wind turbine, other than wires necessary to connect the wind generator to the tower wiring, the tower wiring to the disconnect junction box, and the grounding wires, must be located underground. 
(z)  Window Wells. 
(1)  Window wells may encroach up to three (3) feet into any yard but no closer than two (2) feet from a lot line. 
(2)  When more than one (1) window well is installed along a wall, each shall be separated at least three (3) feet from one another. 
(3)  Window wells shall comply with the provisions of the building code for an emergency escape window. 
(Code 1993, § 20-13.4; Ord. No. 2014-O-58, 11-11-2014; Ord. No. 2014-O-65, 11-11-2014; Ord. No. 2015-O-13, 4-14-2015; Ord. No. 2017-O-59, 10-10-2017) 
Sec. 30-13.5. - Permitted encroachments. 
(a)  An encroachment is the extension or placement of any structure or building, or component of such, into a required yard. Additional restrictions on permitted encroachments, including additional location requirements and dimensional regulations, can be found in Section 30-13.4 (Accessory Structures and Uses) above and are referenced within the following table. Permitted encroachments are found in Table 13-2: Permitted Encroachments. 
(b)  All encroachments must be a minimum of three (3) feet from all lot lines, except for arbors, awnings, driveways, eaves, fences, retaining walls, sidewalks, signs, trellises, and window wells. 
(c)  All encroachments shall be measured from the finished exterior face or edge of the component to the lot line. 
VILLAGE OF WILMETTE, ILLINOIS

TABLE 13-5: PERMITTED ENCROACHMENTS 

X= Permitted // Blank = Not Permitted TYPE OF ENCROACHMENT YARD WHERE PERMITTED FRONT YARD AND SIDE YARD
ADJOINING A STREET INTERIOR SIDE YARD REAR YARD Accessibility Ramp 
- No more than 5' into required front, side adjoining a street or rear yard, and no more than 3' into required side yard X X X Amateur (HAM) Radio Equipment 
- Subject to Section 30-13.4.(b) X Arbor or Trellis 
- Subject to Section 30-13.4.(c) X X X Architectural Features 
- On principal structure 
- No more than 2' into a required yard X X X Artificial Turf 
- No closer than 3' to any lot line X X Awning and Canopy (Residential Use) 
- No more than 4' into required front, side yard adjoining a street or rear yard, and no more than 2' into required side yard X X X Awning and Canopy (Commercial Use) 
- Minimum clearance above grade of 7'6" 
- Subject to Article 30-16 Signs X X X Balcony 
- No more than 5' into a required yard X Bay Window 
- Must be located at least 2' above ground 
- No more than 3' into required yard 
- Must not have a width greater than 50% of the room of which it is a part X X X Beach Houses/Cabanas 
- Subject to Section 30-13.4.(d) X Boat Houses 
- Subject to Section 30-13.4.(d) X Chimney 
- No more than 2' into a required yard X X X Deck, no more than 2' above adjacent grade 
- No closer than 3' to any lot line 
- Must not cover more than 10% of the front yard X X X Deck, 2' or more above adjacent grade 
- No more than 4' into a required front, side yard adjoining a street or rear yard and no more than 2' into a required side yard 
- Must not cover more than 10% of the front yard X X X Driveway X X X Eaves 
- Subject to Section 30-13.4.(g) X X X Emergency (Fall-Out) Shelter 
- Must be 10' from any lot line X Farm and Garden Crops 
- 3' from any lot line X X X Fence 
- Subject to Section 30-13.4.(h) X X X Fire Escape and Exterior Stairwell 
- No more than 5' into a required front, side yard adjoining a street or rear yard, and no more than 3' into a side yard X X X Flagpole 
- No more than 1 per zoning lot 
- Not to exceed 15' in height X X X Garages, Detached 
- Subject to Section 30-13.4.(i) X Gazebo and Detached Pergola X Laundry Clothesline 
- 3' from a lot line X X Loading Berth 
- Must be open to the sky X X Mechanical Equipment 
- Subject to Section 30-13.4.(k) X X Ornamental Lighting, Lamp Posts, and Lawn Decorations (Benches, statues, birdbaths, sculptures, etc.) 
- Subject to view obstruction and exterior lighting regulations 
- 3' from a lot line 
- Lighting subject to Section 30-13.3 X X X Outdoor Fireplace 
- 5' from a lot line 
- Subject to Section 30-13.4.(l) X Outdoor Kitchenette 
- 3' from a lot line 
- Subject to Section 30-13.4.(m) X Parking Space 
- In residential districts, open to the sky and encroaching no closer than 5' from a lot line X Parking Space 
- In non-residential districts, open to the sky and encroaching no closer than 5' from a lot line Only in PCD Districts See Section 30-14.4.(b)(3) X X Patio, less than 2' above adjacent grade 
- No closer than 3' to any lot line 
- Must not cover more than 10% of the front yard X X X Patio, 2' or more above adjacent grade 
- No more than 4' into a required front, side yard adjoining a street or rear yard and no more than 2' into a required side yard 
- Must not cover more than 10% of the front yard X X X Permanently Installed Stand-By Generator 
- Subject to Section 30-13.4.(o) X X Porch, Open 
- Subject to Section 30-13.4.(p) 
- Replacement of non-conforming porches, see Section 30-17.4.(b)(2) X X X Porch Steps (Open Porch) 
- Subject to Section 30-13.4.(p) 
- Replacement of non-conforming porch steps, see Section 30-17.4.(b)(2) X X X Retaining Walls 
- Subject to Section 30-13.4.(q) X X X Satellite Dish Antenna (1 meter or less in diameter) 
- Subject to Section 30-13.4.(r) X X X Satellite Dish Antenna (More than 1 meter in diameter) 
- Subject to Section 30-13.4.(r) X - Non-Residential Districts X Sidewalk and Private Walkway 
- Steps that are part of a sidewalk or walkway that follows the topography of a property shall be treated as part of the sidewalk or walkway for setback purposes. X X X Sheds and Greenhouses 
- Subject to Section 30-13.4.(s) X Signs 
- Subject to Article 30-16 X X X Solar Panels (Facade-Mounted) 
- Subject to Section 30-13.4.(t) X X X Solar Panels (Ground-Mounted) 
- Subject to Section 30-13.4.(t) X Steps and Stoops (Excludes Open Porch Steps) 
- No more than 5' into required front, side yard adjoining a street or rear yard and no more than 3' into required interior side yard 
- Replacement of non-conforming steps or stoops, see Section 30-17.4.(b)(2) X X X Swimming Pool, Spa or Hot Tub 
- Subject to Section 30-13.4.(u) X Tree Houses, Play Houses, and Play Ground Equipment 
- Subject to Section 30-13.4.(w) X Unusual Recreational Equipment (Includes Sport Courts) 
- Does not include equipment located on park/playground, school or day care center site 
- Must be 3' from any lot line 
- Prohibited in the front yard 
- Portable basketball standards and backboards are permitted in all yards X Walls 
- Subject to Section 30-13.4.(h)(3) X X Water Garden - 
5 feet from a lot line X Wind Turbine (Ground-Mounted) 
- Subject to Section 30-13.4.(y) X Window Well 
- Subject to Section 30-13.4.(z) X X X  
(d)  Height Encroachments. The following structures and equipment that project upward from the roof of the principal building on the lot may be erected up to the designated number of feet above the basic height limit for the zoning district: 
(1)  Chimneys and firewalls: three (3) feet above the height limit. 
(2)  Skylights, ventilation fans, and heating and air conditioning equipment: six (6) feet above the height limit. 
(3)  Elevator and stairway housings: twelve (12) feet above the height limit. 
(4)  Parapets: two (2) feet above the height limit. 
(5)  Solar panels: one (1) foot above the height limit. 
(Code 1993, § 20-13.5; Ord. No. 2014-O-65, 11-11-2014; Ord. No. 2015-O- 13, 4-14-2015; Ord. No. 2017-O-59, 10-10-2017) 
Sec. 30-13.6. - Temporary uses and structures. 
    Temporary uses and structures may be approved either by the Zoning Administrator or the Village Board in accordance with this section. 
(a)  Temporary Use or Structure Permit. 
(1)  Any temporary use or structure requires a temporary use or structure permit issued by the Zoning Administrator or Village Board, as appropriate. This permit does not override or substitute for any other section of this Ordinance or the Village Code that requires another type of permit, certificate or approval for the use or structure. 
(2)  An application for a temporary use or structure permit must be filed with Zoning Administrator. 
(3)  A temporary use or structure permit is valid for a period of no more than six (6) months. An applicant may request an extension of the permit period by filing a letter stating the reasons for the request with the Zoning Administrator. The Zoning Administrator will transmit the letter to the Village Board, who, at a regular meeting, may grant the request for good cause shown by the applicant. 
(4)  An applicant who requests a temporary permit for a structure or use of more than five (5) days must give written notice to the owners and occupants of lots within two hundred and fifty (250) feet of the property lines of the lot for which the application has been filed, to be delivered by hand or by mail in accordance with the notice requirements of Section 30-4.3 (Notice). 
(5)  The Zoning Administrator may require an applicant to give written notice for a structure or activity that will continue for five (5) days or less when the Zoning Administrator reasonably determines that the proposed structure or activity is of such scope or magnitude that it will impact the surrounding neighborhood due to temporarily increased traffic, parking, noise, artificial sound or lighting, or other effects warranting prior notice to affected properties. 
(6)  In issuing a temporary use or structure permit, the Zoning Administrator or Village Board, as applicable, may attach additional conditions to the issuance of the permit as are deemed appropriate and necessary to achieve the purposes of this Ordinance. 
(b)  Temporary Uses and Structures Subject to Administrative Approval. The Zoning Administrator may issue a temporary use or structure permit for the following temporary uses and structures: 
(1)  A temporary use that is conducted entirely indoors for no more than five (5) days, upon finding that the temporary use complies with all other Village ordinances and will not be noticeable outside of the structure in which it is conducted. 
(2)  A temporary construction trailer or an equipment storage shed, provided that: 
(A)  The trailer or shed is accessory to the construction of a building or other development. 
(B)  The trailer or shed is located on the same lot as the building or development. 
(C)  The trailer or shed remains on the property no longer than the time of the construction but not longer than six (6) months. 
(D)  The trailer or shed will be located no closer than twenty (20) feet from any other property located in a residential district. 
(E)  The trailer or shed will be located no closer than three (3) feet from any lot line. 
(3)  Commercial film production, conducted in accordance with the Village Code. 
(4)  Any temporary use or structure substantially similar to any temporary use or structure under [section] 20-13.6.(c) that has been approved by the Village Board a minimum of three (3) times consecutively in the immediate past ten (10) years that such a request has been made. Such requests that require public notice under Section 30-4.3.(b)(4) may be approved by the Zoning Administrator without notice provided they have been previously approved by the Village Board as described above. Such administrative approval is at the discretion of the Zoning Administrator. 
(c)  Temporary Uses and Structures Subject to Village Board Approval. The Village Board may issue a temporary use or structure permit for the following temporary uses, and any other temporary uses and structures not otherwise specified in this section: 
(1)  Any temporary use or structure that continues for more than five (5) days. 
(2)  Construction trailers and equipment storage sheds that do not comply with one (1) or more requirements of section 30-13.6.(b) above. 
(3)  Christmas tree sales lots, provided that: 
(A)  The use is located on a lot that fronts a collector or arterial street. 
(B)  The use is located on a vacant lot or parking area. 
(C)  The trees are located at least fifty (50) feet from any structure on another lot. 
(D)  Trees remaining on hand after December 25 must be removed from the premises no later than December 31 of the same year. 
(E)  A refundable bond, in an amount established by the Village, is posted with the Village. 
(4)  Carnivals/circuses, provided that: 
(A)  Trailers and other equipment do not block driveways or other points of emergency vehicular access to any property. 
(B)  Trailers and other equipment do not block a public street, alley or sidewalk. 
(C)  The operation will be located entirely on private property. 
(5)  The following temporary retail uses: 
(A)  Vendors' carts and stalls, based on the adequacy of traffic access and the absence of undue adverse impact on other properties. 
(B)  Art, craft, book, and produce/farmers markets. 
(C)  Sidewalk sales. 
(D)  Garage and yard sales not to exceed a total of five (5) days per calendar year. 
(6)  Tents used for public assembly, display or sales in excess of five (5) days. 
(Code 1993, § 20-13.6; Ord. No. 2015-O-13, 4-14-2015) 
Sec. 30-13.7. - Environmental performance standards. 
    All uses and activities must comply with the environmental performance standards established in this section unless any federal, state, county or local law, ordinance or regulation establishes a more restrictive standard, in which case, the more restrictive standard applies. 
(a)  Noise. 
(1)  No activity may generate a level of sound on another property greater than that allowed under the Noise Regulations of the State of Illinois, adopted by the State Pollution Control Board pursuant to the Environmental Protection Act, as amended. 
(2)  No activity may generate a level of sound on another property that violates any applicable provision of Chapter 16 (Nuisances) of the Village Code. 
(3)  No activity, other than those specified in Paragraph (4) below, may be conducted in such a manner that it generates a level of sound on another property which is greater than the A-weighted sound level set forth in Table 13-3: A-Weighted Sound Limits. 
VILLAGE OF WILMETTE, ILLINOIS

TABLE 13-3: A-WEIGHTED SOUND LIMITS DISTRICT CLASSIFICATION OF

RECEIVING PROPERTY TIME OF DAY MAXIMUM A-WEIGHTED SOUND LEVEL RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. 
7:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. 50 dB(A)45 dB(A) NON-RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. 
7:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. 60 dB(A)55 dB(A)  
(4)  The limits set forth in Table 13-3 do not apply to the following: 
(A)  Noises not directly under the control of the owner or occupant of the property. 
(B)  Noises emanating from construction, repair and maintenance activities pursuant to the Village Code. 
(C)  Noises emanating from safety signals, warning devices, and emergency pressure relief valves. 
(D)  Transient noises emanating from moving sources, such as trucks, automobiles, airplanes and railroads. 
(E)  Noises emanating from heating, ventilation, or air conditioning equipment provided the size of the equipment does not exceed five (5) tons. 
(F)  Noises emanating from permanently installed stand-by generators conducting weekly testing in accordance with this Ordinance and operating in normal mode during a power outage. 
(b)  Glare and Heat. 
(1)  No activity may be conducted so that direct or indirect illumination from a source of light causes illumination in excess of one-half (0.5) footcandles, as measured at the receiving lot line of any district. 
(2)  However, when street lighting produces illumination in excess of one (1) footcandle at a particular point in a residential zoning district, the contribution by light sources from any property in a non-residential zoning district, as measured at the same point, must not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the street lighting. 
(3)  Flickering or intense sources of light must be controlled or shielded so as not to cross lot lines. 
(4)  No heat from any operations of any use may be detectable at any point off the zoning lot on which the use is located. 
(c)  Vibration. No earthborn vibration from any operations of any use may be detectable at any point off the zoning lot on which the use is located. 
(d)  Air Pollution and Odor. 
(1)  Any activity that involves the emission of smoke, particulate matter or other air pollutants must comply with all applicable standards set forth by state and federal statutes and regulations regarding the emission of air pollutants. Any such land use or other activity must also obtain and maintain all necessary licenses and permits from the appropriate state and federal agencies, such as the United States Environmental Protection Agency and the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency. 
(2)  No activity may be conducted in such a manner that it generates any odor that violates Chapter 16 (Nuisances) of the Village Code. 
(e)  Electromagnetic Interference. Electromagnetic interference from any operations of any activity must not adversely affect the operation of any equipment located off the zoning lot. 
(f)  Fire and Explosive Hazards. 
(1)  All flammable solid, liquid and gaseous substances must be stored and used in accordance with all applicable federal, state, and local statutes and regulations. 
(2)  The storage or use of solid materials or products ranging from incombustible to moderate burning is permitted in non-residential districts only. 
(3)  The storage or use of solid materials or products ranging from free or active burning to intense burning is permitted in non-residential districts only, provided that either one (1) of the following two (2) conditions is met: 
(A)  Solid materials or products must be stored and used within completely enclosed buildings having no less than two (2) hour fire resistant exterior walls and protected with an automatic fire extinguishing system. 
(B)  Solid materials or products stored outdoors must be a minimum of fifty (50) feet from the nearest lot line. 
(4)  The storage or use of flammable liquids is permitted in conjunction with any non-residential use up to the amounts set forth in Table 13-4: Total Capacity of Flammable Materials, exclusive of storage of finished products in original sealed containers, which is unrestricted. When flammable gases are stored or used, and measured in cubic feet, the quantity in cubic feet at standard temperature and pressure must not exceed thirty (30) times the quantities listed in Table 13-4. 
VILLAGE OF WILMETTE, ILLINOIS

TABLE 13-4: TOTAL CAPACITY OF FLAMMABLE MATERIALS CLOSED CUP FLASH POINT RANGE

FOR MATERIAL ABOVE GROUND UNDERGROUND 188 TO 300°F 5,000 Gallons 20,000 Gallons 105 TO 187°F 2,500 Gallons 15,000 Gallons LESS THAN 105°F 1,000 Gallons 10,000 Gallons  
(5)  Storage tanks for flammable liquids and gasses must be a minimum of fifty (50) feet from any lot line. 
(6)  Any activity involving the storage or use of materials or products that decompose by detonation is prohibited in any district, unless specifically licensed by the Village. Such materials include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(A)  All primary explosives, such as lead azide, lead styphnate, fulminates, and tetracene. 
(B)  All high explosives, such as TNT, RDX, HMX, PETN, and picric acid. 
(C)  Propellants, and the components thereof, such as nitrocellulose, black powder, boron hydrides, hydrazine and its derivatives. 
(D)  Pyrotechnics and fireworks, such as magnesium powder, potassium chlorate, and potassium nitrate. 
(E)  Blasting explosives, such as dynamite and nitroglycerine. 
(F)  Unstable organic compounds, such as acetylides, tetrazoles, and perchloric acid. 
(G)  Perchlorates. 
(H)  Chlorates. 
(I)  Hydrogen peroxide in concentrations greater than thirty-five percent (35%). 
(J)  Nuclear fuels, fissionable materials, and products and reactor elements, such as Uranium 235 and Plutonium 239. 
(g)  Special Hazards. Any activity that involves the use of toxic, hazardous or radioactive materials must comply with all applicable standards set forth in state and federal statutes and regulations regarding the use, storage, transportation, emission, and disposal of such materials. Any such activity must obtain and maintain all necessary licenses and permits from the appropriate State and Federal agencies, such as the United States Environmental Protection Agency, the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, and the Illinois Department of Nuclear Safety. 
(Code 1993, § 20-13.7) 
ARTICLE 30-14. - OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING 

Sec. 30-14.1. - Purpose. 
    The off-street parking and loading regulations of this Article are intended to provide accessible, attractive, secure and well-maintained off-street parking and loading areas with the appropriate number of spaces in proportion to the needs of the proposed use, increase public safety by reducing congestion of public streets, and encourage the use of alternative modes of transportation where appropriate. 
(Code 1993, § 20-14.1) 
Sec. 30-14.2. - General provisions. 
    The provisions of this Article apply as follows: 
(a)  Existing Facilities. 
(1)  The existing number of off-street parking and loading spaces must not be reduced below the requirements of this Article. If the number of such existing spaces is already less than the requirements of this Article, it cannot be further reduced. 
(2)  Existing off-street parking and loading areas that do not conform to the requirements of this Article, but were in conformance with the requirements of this Ordinance at the time the parking or loading facilities were established, are permitted to continue as a legal non-conforming structure. 
(3)  If a building permit for a structure was lawfully issued prior to the effective date of this Ordinance, and if construction has begun within one hundred eighty (180) days of the issuance of a permit, the number of off-street parking and loading spaces must be provided in the amount required for the issuance of said building permit, regardless of what may be required by this Article. 
(b)  Damage or Destruction. When a building is reconstructed or repaired after being damaged or destroyed, off-street parking and loading facilities must be restored or maintained in an amount equivalent to that at the time of such damage or destruction. However, it is not necessary to restore or maintain parking and loading facilities in excess of the applicable requirements of this Article. 
(c)  Change in Land Use. When the existing use of a structure or land is changed to a new use, parking and loading spaces must be provided as required for the new use. Additional parking or loading spaces are required in the amount by which the requirements for the new use exceed the requirements for the existing use. 
(d)  Change in Intensity of Use. 
(1)  When the intensity of use of any structure or land is increased, additional parking and loading spaces must be provided. The number of additional parking and loading spaces are based on the increase in the number of dwelling units, gross floor area, seating capacity, or other unit of measurement used to calculate the required number of parking or loading spaces. 
(2)  When the intensity of use of any structure or land is decreased, the number of parking and loading spaces may be reduced so long as the parking requirements of this Article are met for the entire structure or land as modified. 
(e)  Provision of Additional Spaces. Nothing in this Article prevents the voluntary establishment of additional off-street parking or loading facilities in all districts except for VC, provided that all regulations governing the location, design and control of such facilities are in accordance with this Article. 
(f)  Limitations on Use. Motor vehicle repair or cleaning of any kind is prohibited in any parking space, parking lot, or loading berth. 
(Code 1993, § 20-14.2) 
Sec. 30-14.3. - Computation. 
    The total number of required parking and loading spaces is based upon the requirements for the principal use of the lot. However, when more than one (1) use occupies the same lot, the number of required spaces is the sum of the separate requirements for each use. All off-street parking facilities must be completed before occupancy of the structure. In computing the number of off-street parking or loading spaces required by this Article, the following standards for computation apply: 
(a)  Space allocated to any off-street loading space does not satisfy the requirement for any off-street parking space or access aisle, or portion thereof. Conversely, the area allocated to any off-street parking space cannot be used to satisfy the replacement for any off-street loading space or portion thereof. 
(b)  A fraction of less than one-half (1/2) may be disregarded, and a fraction of one-half (1/2) or more is counted as one (1) parking or loading space. 
(c)  In places of assembly in which patrons or spectators occupy benches, pews or similar seating facilities, each twenty-four (24) inches of such seating facility is counted as one (1) seat for the purpose of determining the requirement for off-street parking facilities. Floor area of a prayer hall is counted as one (1) seat per marked prayer mat space or one (1) seat for every five (5) square feet in the prayer hall if prayer mat spaces are not marked. 
(d)  Except as otherwise specified, parking or loading spaces required on an employee basis is based on the maximum number of employees normally present on the premises at any one (1) time. When the determination of the number of parking spaces is based on the number of employees, the owner and/or manager is counted as an employee(s). 
(e)  For the purpose of determining off-street parking and loading requirements, floor area shall mean the sum of the gross horizontal floor area (GFA) of the several floors of a building measured from the interior faces of the exterior walls, excluding areas used for the storage of merchandise or materials, mechanical equipment rooms, rest rooms, and areas used for off-street parking and loading and related aisles, ramps, and maneuvering space. 
(f)  In the VC District, each non-residential use containing a total gross floor area (GFA) of two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet or less is exempt from all off-street parking requirements. Non-residential uses in excess of two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet floor area and all residential uses shall provide parking according to the requirements of Article 30-14 (Off-Street Parking and Loading). 
(g)  Any off-street parking space occupied by a vehicle for sale or lease or occupied by a fleet vehicle kept on a non-residential property by the owner or occupant of the property, shall not be counted toward the number of parking spaces required under this Article. 
(h)  Up to two (2) off-street parking spaces designated for the parking of car-sharing vehicles may be counted toward the number of parking spaces required under this Article. 
(Code 1993, § 20-14.3; Ord. No. 2015-O-13, 4-14-2015) 
Sec. 30-14.4. - Location of off-street parking spaces. 
(a)  Residential Uses. 
(1)  All required parking spaces for residential uses must be located on the same lot as the structure. 
(2)  A single-family dwelling existing as of the date of this Ordinance with two (2) or more enclosed parking spaces must maintain at least two (2) enclosed parking spaces. 
(3)  New single-family dwellings and two-unit dwellings must provide enclosed parking spaces for each required parking space within the principal building or in a detached garage. 
(4)  Open parking spaces are not permitted in a required front yard or side yard adjoining a street. Open spaces must maintain a minimum of five (5) feet from side and rear lot lines. 
(5)  The maximum number of open and enclosed parking spaces for a single-family dwelling are as follows: 
(A)  A lot area less than fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet: Four (4) spaces. 
(B)  A lot area of fifteen thousand (15,000) to nineteen thousand nine hundred ninety-nine (19,999) square feet: Six (6) spaces. 
(C)  A lot area of twenty thousand (20,000) to twenty-nine thousand nine hundred ninety-nine (29,999) s.f.: Eight (8) spaces. 
(D)  A lot area of thirty thousand (30,000) s.f. or more: Ten (10) spaces. 
(6)  Tandem parking is permitted for residential dwellings but both spaces must be allotted to the same dwelling unit and located on the same lot as the dwelling served. Tandem spaces shall not count as more than one (1) required parking space except for multi-family dwellings where the number of required spaces exceeds one (1) per dwelling unit. 
(7)  At least fifty percent (50%) of all parking spaces required for townhouse/stacked flat and multi-family dwellings must be enclosed within the principal building or within a detached garage on the subject property. 
(8)  In the NR-1 district, no parking lot or enclosed parking area located at or above grade may be located within twenty-five (25) feet of a lot line adjoining Fourth Street or Linden Avenue. 
(b)  Non-Residential Uses. 
(1)  All required off-street parking facilities for non-residential uses must be located on the same lot as the structure. However, off-street parking may be located within three hundred (300) feet walking distance of a use when the following conditions are met: 
(A)  The parking facility is located in a zoning district where allowed as a permitted use or special use. 
(B)  The parking facility is located on a lot owned by the same party as the use to be served or is secured by long term lease containing a twenty (20) year deed restriction upon the use of the facility limiting the use of the facility to parking for the purpose intended. 
(C)  A covenant running with the land and prohibiting any other use of the lot, naming the Village as a beneficiary of the covenant and subject to the review and approval of the Village, is recorded in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of Cook County for the lot on which the parking facility is located. A copy of the recorded covenant, certified by the Recorder of Deeds or Registrar of Titles, must be filed with the Zoning Administrator. 
(D)  The required covenant above will not be released until such time as one (1) of the following conditions occurs: 
(i)  The use served by the required off-street parking is terminated and/or the structure housing that use is removed. 
(ii)  The required off-street parking is provided on the same lot as the use served. 
(iii)  Another facility meeting all these requirements is used to provide the required parking. 
(2)  The use may provide valet service to a parking facility with no distance restriction. 
(3)  Off-street parking spaces are permitted within the rear, interior side or side yard adjoining a street and are subject to buffer yard standards of Section 30-15.10 (Buffer Yards) in all non-residential districts. Off-street parking spaces are permitted in the front yard only in the Planned Commercial Development Districts. 
(4)  An open off-street parking space serving a non-residential use must be located a minimum of five (5) feet from any lot line. 
(5)  In the NR-1 district, no parking lot or enclosed parking area located at or above grade may be located within twenty-five (25) feet of a lot line adjoining Fourth Street or Linden Avenue. 
(Code 1993, § 20-14.4; Ord. No. 2017-O-59, 10-10-2017) 
Sec. 30-14.5. - Design standards. 
    All off-street parking facilities must comply with the following standards: 
(a)  Dimensions. 
    Off-street parking spaces must be designed in accordance with Figure 14-1: Off-Street Parking Dimensions. All off-street parking spaces shall have a minimum width of eight and one-half (8 1/2) feet. All off-street parking spaces shall have a minimum depth of eighteen (18) feet. All parking spaces require a minimum vertical clearance of seven (7) feet. 
    The required eighteen (18)-foot length may include up to two (2) feet of abutting space in a vegetative buffer or landscaped area over which a parked vehicle may extend, provided that no parked vehicle will project over a sidewalk or other pedestrian walkway. 
(b)  Access. 
(1)  Each off-street space must open directly upon an aisle or driveway of such width to provide adequate means of vehicular access to the parking space. All off-street parking facilities must provide vehicular access in a manner that least interferes with traffic movement and allows the driver of the vehicle to proceed forward into traffic rather than back out. No off-street parking space may open directly onto a street or alley. 
(2)  All required off-street parking facilities must have vehicular access from a street, alley, driveway or cross-access connection. 
(3)  Within off-street parking facilities, all aisles must be designed in accordance with Figure 14-1: Off-Street Parking Dimensions. 
(4)  Section 30-10.8 includes additional requirements for on-site parking access and design in the VC district. 
(5)  Multi-Family, Townhouse/Stacked Flat and Non-Residential Driveways. 
(A)  Driveways, off-street parking areas and access aisles for multi-family residential and non-residential parking lots must be designed in accordance with Figure 14-1: Off-Street Parking Dimensions. 
(B)  Any driveway located in a non-residential district that provides direct vehicular access into a lot from an arterial street or collector must be located at least twenty-five (25) feet from any other driveway or curb-cut located on the same side of the street and at least sixty-five (65) feet from any street intersection, as measured along the edge of the pavement. 
(6)  Cross-Access Driveway Easements. See also Figure 10-20: Cross-Access Easements. 
(A)  Adjacent non-residential uses that possess dedicated parking areas are encouraged to provide a cross-access driveway to allow circulation between sites. If cross-access driveways are provided, the property owners must provide proof to the Village that adjacent property owners have been contacted in writing regarding the provision of cross-access. 
(B)  The easement shall be of a size to permit two-way travel. 
(C)  Bump-outs and other design features shall be provided to make it visually obvious that the abutting properties are tied together. 
(D)  Pursuant to this section, property owners who establish cross-access driveways must: 
(i)  Record an easement allowing cross-access to and from properties served by the cross-access driveway. 
(ii)  Record an easement that any pre-existing driveways will be closed and eliminated after construction of the joint-use driveway. 
(iii)  Record a joint maintenance agreement defining the maintenance responsibilities of each property owner. 
(iv)  All such easements and joint maintenance agreements shall be subject to the prior review and approval of the Village. 
FIGURE 14-1: OFF-STREET PARKING DIMENSIONS 


PARKING 

ANGLE STALL WIDTH (A) STALL DEPTH (B) SKEW WIDTH (C) AISLE WIDTH: TWO-WAY (D) AISLE WIDTH: ONE-WAY (E) 0 8'-6" 18' - 22' 12' 45 8'-6" 18'-8" 12' - 15' 60 8'-6" 20' 9'-10" - 18' 90 8'-6" 18' - 22' 20'  
;ol1; (c)\ Surfacing. All open off-street parking areas and driveways must be improved with a compacted macadam base no less than six (6) inches thick, or equal, and surfaced with no less than two (2) inches of asphaltic concrete or comparable hard-surfaced, all-weather, dustless material, as approved by the Village Engineer. Pervious paving may also be used, subject to the approval of the Village Engineer. 
(d)  Striping. Off-street parking areas of more than four (4) spaces must delineate parking spaces with paint or other permanent materials, which must be maintained in clearly visible condition. Parking spaces for handicapped persons must be identified with the appropriate sign and visible at all times of the year, regardless of snow cover, plant growth or similar conditions. 
(e)  Curbing and Bumper Stops. Off-street parking areas of more than four (4) spaces must provide concrete curbing no less than six (6) inches in height along the perimeter of the parking lot a minimum of five (5) feet from the street line in districts where a front yard is not required or from the property line when abutting a public sidewalk. 
(f)  Drainage and Grading. 
(1)  All parking spaces for single-family and two-unit dwellings may be constructed no more than three (3) feet below existing grade. However, for property that slopes downward towards a rear lot line, parking spaces accessed by a driveway, including the apron, constructed to follow the existing property contour is permitted. 
(2)  All open off-street parking areas containing more than four (4) parking spaces must have a storm water drainage system connected to a public sewer, as approved by the Village Engineer. No surface runoff is allowed to flow across any lot line. 
(g)  Lighting. Parking lot lighting must comply with Section 30-13.3 (Exterior Lighting). Illumination of an off-street parking area must be arranged so as to deflect light away from adjacent properties and streets. 
(h)  Landscaping and Screening. All parking lots must be landscaped in accordance with Section 30-15 (Landscaping and Screening). 
(Code 1993, § 20-14.5) 
Sec. 30-14.6. - Special regulations for the design of parking structures. 
    Parking structures shall be designed as follows: 
(a)  In the VC district, where parking structures are allowed along pedestrian frontages, at least sixty percent (60%) of the ground floor frontage shall be developed with non-residential uses. No more than one (1) curb cut is allowed along the pedestrian street frontage to accommodate vehicular access to the parking structure. (See Figure 14-2: Commercial Frontage on Parking Garage Ground Floor.) 
FIGURE 14-2: COMMERCIAL FRONTAGE ON PARKING GARAGE GROUND FLOOR 

(b)  On facades that front on public streets, the exterior articulation of interior vertical circulation, such as ramped portions of the structure used for access to higher levels of parking, shall be prohibited. In such a case where interior ramps front on public streets, facade design and screening shall be used to mask the interior ramps and create the illusion of horizontality. The design of the primary facade shall include horizontal design elements, such as knee walls and cornices, which reflect the design of other structures in the district. (See Figure 14-3 and Figure 14-4: Non-conforming Facade Design and Conforming Facade Design.) 
FIGURE 14.3: NON-CONFORMING FACADE DESIGN (TOP) AND CONFORMING FACADE DESIGN (BOTTOM) 

FIGURE 14-4: NON-CONFORMING FACADE DESIGN (LEFT) AND CONFORMING FACADE DESIGN (RIGHT) 

Non-Conforming Conforming 
(c)  Parking structures in the Village Center district shall conform to the facade articulation regulations of Section 30-10.7. 
(d)  A parking structure shall be constructed with materials and design elements that reflect the principal building that it serves. In the Village Center district, if the parking structure itself is the principal building, it shall conform to the building material regulations for the Village Center District. 
(e)  On portions of the ground floor facade where parking spaces are visible, a decorative screen shall be provided atop the knee wall to screen traffic and pedestrians in the public right-of-way from headlight glare. The total height of the knee wall and decorative screen shall be a minimum of four (4) feet. (See Figure 14-5: Parking Structure Ground Floor Decorative Screening.) 
FIGURE 14-5: PARKING STRUCTURE GROUND FLOOR DECORATIVE SCREENING 

(f)  For parking structures with rooftop open-air parking, the parapet of the facade shall be extended such that a seven (7)-foot tall vehicle is not visible from the curb of the public sidewalk across the street from the facade along which parking is designated. (See Figure 14-6: Extended Parapet Vehicular Screen.) 
FIGURE 14-6: EXTENDED PARAPET VEHICULAR SCREEN 

(g)  A vehicular clear sight zone shall be included at vehicular exit areas that includes a triangular sight area on each side of the exit defined by the following requirements (See Figure 14-7: Plan and 3-Dimensional Diagram of the Vehicular Clear Sight Zone.): 
(1)  The facade of vehicular exit areas shall be setback from the public sidewalk a minimum of eight (8) feet setback for the portion of the facade that includes the vehicle exit area and eight (8) linear feet on each side of the exit opening. 
(2)  A sight triangle shall be defined by drawing a line from the edge of the vehicular exit area to a point on the property line abutting the public sidewalk eight (8) feet to the side of the exit lane. 
(3)  In the sight triangle (bound by the parking structure wall, public sidewalk and vehicular exit lane), ground cover, landscaping, or decorative wall shall be used to act as a buffer between the exit aisle and the public sidewalk. Landscaping or a decorative wall shall not exceed three (3) feet in height in order to maintain driver peripheral sightlines to the public sidewalk. 
FIGURE 14-7: PLAN AND 3-DIMENSIONAL DIAGRAM OF THE VEHICULAR CLEAR SIGHT ZONE 

(4)  The upper story facade(s) of the parking structure may be built to the property line. 
(Code 1993, § 20-14.6) 
Sec. 30-14.7. - Accessible parking. 
(a)  Required Spaces. With the exception of single-family, two-family, and townhouse dwellings, in all off-street parking facilities where parking is provided for employees, visitors or both, parking spaces for disabled persons must be provided. The number of accessible parking spaces is included in the total number of required parking spaces and must meet the requirements of the Illinois State Accessibility Code, as amended from time to time, and all additional governing codes and applicable laws. 
(b)  Dimensions and Design. Such spaces must comply with the design standards presented in the State of Illinois Accessibility Code. 
(Code 1993, § 20-14.7) 
Sec. 30-14.8. - Stacking spaces for drive-through facilities. 
(a)  Design. Every drive-through facility must provide a minimum of four (4) stacking spaces per bay, unless otherwise required by Table 14-1: Required Off-Street Parking of this Ordinance. Stacking spaces provided for drive-through uses must meet the following: 
(1)  A minimum of nine (9) feet in width, as measured from the outermost point of any service window to the edge of the driveway, and eighteen (18) feet in length. 
(2)  Placed in a single line behind the drive-through facility. 
(3)  Located so that, when in use, they do not obstruct ingress or egress to the site and do not obstruct access to required parking or loading spaces or the garbage enclosure(s). 
(4)  Stacking spaces begin behind the vehicle parked at a last point of service, such as a window or car wash bay. 
(Code 1993, § 20-14.8) 
Sec. 30-14.9. - Required off-street parking spaces. 
(a)  For multi-tenant commercial developments, parking requirements shall be calculated as three (3) required spaces per one thousand (1,000) square feet of gross leasable area, and not by individual uses. 
(b)  Table 14-1: Off-Street Parking Requirements and Table 14-2: Off-Street Parking Requirements for the Village Center list the minimum number of off-street parking spaces to be provided for a use when [section] 20-14.9.(a) above does not apply. In some cases, uses that are considered part of a generic use category are listed with specific parking requirements. Certain uses listed within the districts do not have parking requirements and are not listed in Table 14-1 or Table 14-2. 
(c)  In the VC and NR-1 Districts, uses located in structures erected prior to the effective date of this Ordinance are exempt from the parking requirements of Table 14-1 and Table 14-2, with the exception of any large medical clinics and residential dwellings. However, where there are existing parking spaces in the VC and NR-1 Districts, such spaces must be maintained unless the same number of spaces is provided elsewhere in accordance with all requirements of this Article. 
(d)  In the VC and NR-1 Districts, on-street parking spaces located along the front or side property line may be counted toward required off-street parking spaces for commercial uses. At least fifty percent (50%) of the width of an on-street parking space must be located along the property line of the property under consideration in order to count toward off-street parking requirements. In a multi-tenant structure, all commercial tenants may utilize this provision. 
(e)  In the VC District, in no case shall the provided off-street vehicular parking exceed ten percent (10%) more than the required minimum, except in the case of residential uses. 
(f)  Public Parking Credit. For all non-residential uses, public off-street parking spaces located within five hundred (500) feet of any property line may be credited against the parking requirement at a rate of one (1) credit for every three (3) public parking spaces. Public commuter parking spaces are excluded from this credit. 
VILLAGE OF WILMETTE, ILLINOIS

TABLE 14-1: OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS USE PARKING REQUIREMENT RESIDENTIAL USES Accessory Living Unit 1 per dwelling unit Dwelling, Above the Ground Floor 1.5 per dwelling unit Dwelling, Single-Family 2 per dwelling unit Dwelling, Two-Unit 2 per dwelling unit Dwelling, Townhouse/Stacked Flat 2 per dwelling unit Dwelling, Multi-Family 2 per dwelling unit Adaptive Reuse Senior Housing/55+ 1 per dwelling unit Group Home 0.25 per resident + 1 per employee Residential Care Facility 1 per 2 employees plus 0.5 per dwelling unit INSTITUTIONAL USES Cultural Facility 2 per 1,000 s.f. GFA Day Care Center, Adult or Child 3 per 1,000 s.f. GFA Educational Facility, College 1 per 2 students (based on maximum enrollment) + 1 per classroom Educational Facility, Primary 1 per classroom Educational Facility, Secondary 1 per 5 students (based on maximum enrollment) + 1 per classroom Educational Facility, Vocational 1 per 2 students (based on maximum enrollment) + 1 per classroom Government Facility 3 per 1,000 s.f. GFA Golf Course 10 per hole + 1/tee for driving range Place of Worship 1 per 4 seats + 2 per 1,000 s.f. of residential living area if convent or rectory attached Engineering and Public Works/Safety Facility 2 per 1,000 s.f. GFA Recreation Center 1 per 75 s.f. of water area of a swimming pool, 2 per racquet court, 1 per 3 seats of a theater, 3 per 1,000 s.f. of other indoor space Social Club or Lodge 2 per 1,000 s.f. GFA COMMERCIAL USES Animal Hospital 5 per 1,000 s.f. GFA Art Gallery 1 per 1,000 s.f. GFA Art Studio 1 per 1,000 s.f. GFA Brew Pub 3 per 1,000 s.f. GFA Broadcast Studio 2 per 1,000 s.f. GFA Car Wash 2 per bay Convenience Mart 6 per 1,000 s.f. GFA Craft Brewery/Distillery 0.5 per employee + 3 per 1,000 s.f. of tasting room Financial Institution 3 per 1,000 s.f. GFA Funeral Home 5 per 1,000 s.f. GFA Garden Center 2 per 1,000 s.f. GFA + 2 per 1,000 s.f. of outdoor display and sales area Gas Station 2 per station + 2 per service bay Heavy Retail, Rental and Service 2 per 1,000 s.f. Health Club 3 per 1,000 s.f. GFA Hotel/Motel 1.25 per room Indoor Amusement Facility 5 per 1,000 s.f. GFA Movie Theater 1 per 3 seats Bowling Alley 4 per lane Kennel 1 per 2 dogs boarded (based on maximum boarding capacity) Live Performance Venue 1 per 3 seats Manufacturing, General 2 per 1,000 s.f. of office + 1 per 20,000 s.f. GFA of warehouse space Medical Cannabis Dispensing Organization 5 per 1,000 s.f. GFA Medical Cannabis Cultivation Centers 2 per 1,000 s.f. GFA Medical/Dental Clinic - Small 4 per 1,000 s.f. GFA Medical/Dental Clinic - Large 4 per 1,000 s.f. GFA Motor Vehicle Dealership 2 per 1,000 s.f. of enclosed sales or service area Motor Vehicle Operations Facility 1 per 1,000 s.f. GFA Motor Vehicle Rental Establishment 2 per 1,000 s.f. of enclosed sales or service area Motor Vehicle Service and Repair, Major or Minor 2 per service bay + 2 per 1,000 s.f. of office, waiting, or retail area Office 3 per 1,000 s.f. GFA Pawn Shop 3 per 1,000 s.f. GFA Personal Services Establishment 3 per 1,000 s.f. GFA Pet Day Care Facility 2 per 1,000 s.f. GFA Printing and Photocopying Establishment 3 per 1,000 s.f. GFA Research and Development Facility 2 per 1,000 s.f. GFA Restaurant, Carry-Out/Delivery 3 per 1,000 s.f. GFA Restaurant, Full Service 5 per 1,000 s.f. GFA Restaurant, Limited Service 8 per 1,000 s.f. GFA Restaurant, Specialty 3 per 1,000 s.f. GFA Retail Goods Establishment 3 per 1,000 s.f. GFA Warehouse/Distribution 1 per 20,000 s.f. GFA of warehouse space + 1 per 1,000 s.f. of office space  
VILLAGE OF WILMETTE, ILLINOIS

TABLE 14-2: OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS IN THE VILLAGE CENTER ZONING DISTRICT USE PARKING REQUIREMENT RESIDENTIAL USES Dwelling, Townhouse/Stacked Flat 2 per dwelling unit Dwelling, Above the Ground Floor 1 per unit, 1.5 per unit >2 bedrooms Dwelling, Multi-Family 1 per unit, 1.5 per unit >2 bedrooms Residential Care Facility 0.5 per dwelling unit INSTITUTIONAL USES Cultural Facility 2 per 1,000 s.f. GFA Day Care Center, Adult or Child 3 per 1,000 s.f. GFA Educational Facility, Vocational 1 per 6 students (based on maximum enrollment) + 1 per classroom + 5 per 1,000 s.f. of office Government Facility 2 per 1,000 s.f. GFA Place of Worship 1 per 5 seats Recreation Center 1 per 75 s.f. of water area (swimming pool), 2 per racquet court, 1 per 3 seats (theater), 3 per 1,000 s.f. of other indoor space Social Club or Lodge 2 per 1,000 s.f. GFA COMMERCIAL USES Animal Hospital 4 per 1,000 s.f. GFA Art Gallery 1 per 1,000 s.f. GFA Art Studio 1 per 1,000 s.f. GFA Brew Pub 3 per 1,000 s.f. GFA Broadcast Studio 2 per 1,000 s.f. GFA Convenience Mart 6 per 1,000 s.f. GFA Craft Brewery/Distillery 0.5 per employee + 3 per 1,000 s.f. of tasting room Financial Institution 3 per 1,000 s.f. GFA Funeral Home 5 per 1,000 s.f. GFA Gas Station 2 per station + 2 per service bay Health Club 4 per 1,000 s.f. GFA Hotel 1.25 per room Indoor Amusement Facility 4 per 1,000 s.f. GFA Kennel 1 per 2 dogs boarded (based on maximum boarding capacity) Live Performance Venue 1 per 4 seats Medical/Dental Clinic - Small 4 per 1,000 s.f. GFA Medical/Dental Clinic - Large 4 per 1,000 s.f. GFA Motor Vehicle Dealership 2 per 1,000 s.f. GFA Motor Vehicle Rental Establishment 2 per 1,000 s.f. GFA Motor Vehicle Service and Repair, Minor 2 per service bay + 2 per 1,000 s.f. of office, waiting, or retail area Movie Theater 1 per 4 seats Office 3 per 1,000 s.f. GFA Personal Services Establishment 3 per 1,000 s.f. GFA Pet Day Care Facility 2 per 1,000 s.f. GFA Printing and Photocopying Establishment 3 per 1,000 s.f. GFA Restaurant, Carry-Out/Delivery 3 per 1,000 s.f. GFA Restaurant, Full Service 5 per 1,000 s.f. GFA Restaurant, Limited Service 8 per 1,000 s.f. GFA Restaurant, Specialty 3 per 1,000 s.f. GFA Retail Goods Establishment 2 per 1,000 s.f. GFA  
(g)  No more than two (2) required parking spaces may be dedicated to car-sharing services. 
(Code 1993, § 20-14.9; Ord. No. 2014-O-65, 11-11-2014; Ord. No. 2015-O-13, 4-14-2015) 
Sec. 30-14.10. - Permitted parking alternatives. 
(a)  Collective Parking. Off-street parking spaces for separate uses may be provided collectively if the aggregate number of spaces provided is no less than the sum of the spaces required in Table 14-3: Collective Parking Calculation. Table 14-3 is applied in the following manner: 
(1)  The required number of spaces for each use is calculated according to Table 14-3. 
(2)  The required number of spaces for each use is then applied to the percentages for each time, according to the appropriate land use category, in Table 14-3 to determine the number of required spaces. This is done for each time category. 
(3)  The numbers are the sum of all land uses within each timeframe and the highest sum total in a timeframe is the required number of spaces. 
VILLAGE OF WILMETTE, ILLINOIS

TABLE 14-3: COLLECTIVE PARKING CALCULATION LAND USE WEEKDAY WEEKEND Mid-7am 7am-6pm 6pm-Mid Mid-7am 7am-6pm 6pm-Mid RESIDENTIAL 100% 55% 85% 100% 65% 75% COMMERCIAL RETAIL AND SERVICE 0% 100% 80% 0% 100% 60% RESTAURANT 50% 70% 100% 45% 70% 100% MOVIE THEATER AND 
LIVE PERFORMANCE VENUE 0% 70% 100% 5% 70% 100% OFFICE 5% 100% 5% 0% 60% 10%  
(b)  Alternating Parking. An off-street parking facility may be alternated between two (2) or more uses, provided that use of such facility by each user does not occur at the same time. Alternating parking arrangements must meet the following conditions: 
(1)  Approval is obtained from the Zoning Administrator that confirms that the use of such facility by each user does not take place at the same hours and/or days of the week. 
(2)  The users of the alternating parking arrangement must record an agreement to share parking facilities, subject to approval by the Zoning Administrator. A copy of the recorded agreement must be submitted to the Zoning Administrator. 
(3)  The number of spaces provided meets the minimum requirement for each use. 
(4)  The off-site parking facilities are located on or within three hundred (300) feet of the lot line of the use. 
Any subsequent change in use must require proof that the minimum parking requirements, per this Ordinance, have been met for each use. The owner of an existing building or use has one hundred eighty (180) days within which to accommodate required off-street parking or to apply for a variance. If the owner is unable to accommodate the parking or fails to apply for a variance, then the occupancy permit is revoked with respect to the use for which the separate parking was required. The occupancy permit will be reinstated when all applicable provisions of this Ordinance are complied with. As an alternative to a variance, a new alternating parking agreement may be arranged in accordance with this section. 
(c)  Fee-In-Lieu of Parking. 
(1)  A reduction in the required number of off-street parking spaces for non-residential uses in the VC district may be granted by the Village Board conditioned upon payment, by the owner, of a fee-in-lieu of providing the required parking spaces, such fee established from time to time by resolution of the Village Board. Such payment must be placed into a Village fund to be used by the Village for the acquisition, construction and maintenance of public off-street parking facilities to serve that area. 
(2)  Upon payment, the property granted the modification in the number of required off-street spaces must be credited permanently by ordinance with the number of spaces for which payment was received by the Village. 
(3)  The parking fee-in-lieu of provision is only applicable for new construction or where additional floor area in excess of five hundred (500) square feet is added to an existing building. Changes in use within existing buildings do not require payment of a fee-in-lieu. 
(Code 1993, § 20-14.10) 
Sec. 30-14.11. - Outdoor storage of trucks, trailers, boats and recreational vehicles. 
    Only travel trailers, recreational vehicles, commercial or industrial trailers and boats that meet the standards of this section may be stored in any residential district. However, a trailer may be used as a temporary office or storage space incidental to construction when granted a temporary use approval. 
(a)  A travel trailer must not be used as a dwelling, storage, or accessory structure. However, a travel trailer may be parked or occupied for lodging purposes on a vacant lot or on the same lot as a dwelling for no more than seventy-two (72) hours in any consecutive thirty (30)-day period. 
(b)  A travel trailer or boat must not be stored in connection with a business conducted at the location. 
(c)  A stored travel trailer or boat must be maintained in mobile condition. No major construction or repair of a stored travel trailer or boat may be performed on a residential lot. 
(d)  The parking of trucks is limited to vehicles with a state license classification of "B" or smaller and having an overall height of no more than ninety (90) inches, except for pick-up and delivery service during normal business hours. 
(e)  The State license plates, display title, and Village vehicle sticker, where required, must be current and properly displayed. The lot owner must have, and display upon request to authorized Village officials, proof of ownership of any stored travel trailer or boat. 
(f)  The owner of a boat, boat trailer, or travel trailer must not park or store such boat, boat trailer, or travel trailer in such manner as to create a dangerous or unsafe condition on the lot where parked or stored, this includes parking or storage where the boat, boat trailer, or travel trailer, whether loaded or not, may readily tip or roll or the storage of flammable liquids aboard in portable containers. 
(g)  No travel trailer or boat stored in a residential district may exceed ten (10) feet in height as parked, including trailer cradle or mount but excluding mast, twenty-six (26) feet in body length, excluding trailer hitch, tongue and bumper, and eight (8) feet in body width, excluding hardware. 
(h)  A travel trailer or boat stored in a residential district is permitted only in the rear yard and must be a minimum of six (6) feet from any principal building and three (3) feet from any lot line. 
(i)  No animal transport trailer may be stored in any residential district. 
(Code 1993, § 20-14.11) 
Sec. 30-14.12. - Required bicycle parking. 
    As of the effective date of this Ordinance, all new construction must provide bicycle parking when indicated in Table 14-4: Required Bicycle Parking. 
(a)  Design. 
(1)  Required bicycle spaces must have a minimum dimension of two (2) feet in width by six (6) feet in length, with a minimum overhead vertical clearance of seven (7) feet. A minimum five (5) feet wide aisle shall be provided behind bicycle parking facilities to allow maneuvering. 
(2)  Bicycle parking facilities must provide lockable enclosed lockers or racks, or equivalent structures, in or upon which the bicycle may be locked by the user. Structures that require a user-supplied locking device must be designed to accommodate U-shaped locking devices. All lockers and racks must be securely anchored to the ground or the building structure to prevent the racks and lockers from being removed from the location. 
(3)  If required bicycle parking facilities are not visible from the street, signs must be posted indicating their location. 
(4)  Areas used for required bicycle parking must be paved and drained to be reasonably free of mud, dust, and standing water, and must be well-lighted. 
(5)  Alternate designs for bicycle parking may be approved by the Zoning Administrator if necessary. 
(b)  Location. 
(1)  All required bicycle spaces must be located on the same lot as the use served. However, required bicycle spaces may be constructed in the public right-of-way, subject to approval by the Site Plan Review Committee. 
(2)  Required bicycle parking for residents of dwellings must be provided in garages, storage rooms and other resident-accessible and indoor secure areas. Space within dwelling units or on balconies are not counted toward satisfying bicycle parking requirements. Visitor bicycle parking may be provided outdoors and must be accessible to non-residents. 
(c)  Required Number of Bicycle Spaces. 
(1)  Where off-street parking facilities are provided, the number of bicycle parking spaces must be provided as indicated in Table 14-4: Required Bicycle Parking. 
VILLAGE OF WILMETTE

TABLE 14-4: REQUIRED BICYCLE PARKING USE REQUIRED BICYCLE PARKING (1) Multi-Family Dwelling and Dwelling Units Above the Ground Floor 1 per 10 dwelling units reserved for residents + 1 per 20 dwelling units for visitors Retail Goods Establishment, Personal Services Establishment or Office over 10,000 s.f. in GFA 1 per 10 parking spaces Indoor Amusement Facility 1 per 20 parking spaces Educational Facility, Primary or Secondary 1 per 10 parking spaces Educational Facility, College/University, or Educational Facility, Vocational 1 per 10 parking spaces Place of Worship 1 per 20 parking spaces Parking Lot or Structure (Principal Use) 1 per 25 parking spaces  
NOTES: 
(1)  Wherever bicycle parking is required, a minimum of two (2) spaces shall be provided. 
(2)  In all cases where bicycle parking is required, a minimum of two (2) spaces are required. 
(3)  After the first fifty (50) bicycle parking spaces are provided, additional bicycle parking spaces required are one-half (1/2) space per unit listed. 
(4)  A non-residential use may use up to two (2) required vehicle parking spaces as space for providing bicycle parking. 
(Code 1993, § 20-14.12) 
Sec. 30-14.13. - Required off-street loading spaces. 
    Off-street loading spaces must be provided for each use which requires the receipt or distribution of materials or merchandise by trucks or other vehicles in accordance with Table 14-5: Off-Street Loading Requirements. No loading space may be used to satisfy the off-street parking requirements. All uses located in structures erected prior to the effective date of this Ordinance within the VC District are exempt from loading requirements; however, new construction in the VC District must provide loading spaces. 
VILLAGE OF WILMETTE, ILLINOIS

TABLE 14-5: OFF-STREET LOADING REQUIREMENTS USE GROSS FLOOR AREA (SQ. FT.) LOADING SPACES REQUIRED GENERAL COMMERCIAL/RETAIL Less than 5,000 None 5,000 to 20,000 1 20,001 or more 2 OFFICE Less than 10,000 None 10,001 to 30,000 1 30,001 to 50,000 2 50,001 to 75,000 3 75,001 or more 4 RESTAURANT Less than 5,000 None 5,001 to 10,000 1 10,001 or more 2 INSTITUTIONAL 10,000 or more 1 RESIDENTIAL 50,000 or more 1  
(Code 1993, § 20-14.13) 
Sec. 30-14.14. - Design of off-street loading spaces. 
(a)  Location. 
(1)  All required off-street loading spaces must be located on the same lot as the use to be served so that no portion of a vehicle projects onto the public right-of-way, including alleys. 
(2)  No loading space is permitted in a front or side yard adjoining a street. Every loading space must be located at the rear or side of the building and must have direct access to a service entry through the rear or side of the building. 
(3)  All loading spaces must be designed with appropriate means of vehicular access to a street or alley in a manner that will least interfere with traffic movements. The location of loading spaces must be approved by the Village Engineer. 
(b)  Dimensions. All loading spaces shall have a minimum width of ten (10) feet, minimum depth of twenty-five (25) feet and minimum vertical clearance of twelve (12) feet. 
(c)  Surfacing. All loading spaces must be improved with a compacted macadam base no less than eight (8) inches thick and surfaced with no less than two (2) inches of asphaltic concrete or comparable hard-surfaced, all-weather, dustless material, as approved by the Village Engineer. 
(d)  Lighting. Loading facility lighting must be in accordance with Section 30-13.3 (Exterior Lighting). Illumination of an off-street loading facility must be arranged so as to deflect the direct rays of light away from adjacent properties and streets. 
(e)  Landscaping and Screening. All loading facilities must be landscaped and screened in accordance with Article 30-15 (Landscaping and Screening). 
(f)  Shared or Central Loading Facilities. Shared or central loading facilities are permitted if the following conditions are met: 
(1)  Each zoning lot served shall have direct access to the central loading area without crossing streets or alleys. 
(2)  Total off-street loading spaces provided shall meet the minimum requirements herein specified, based on the sum of the several types of uses served unless reviewed and approved by the Zoning Administrator through site plan review. 
(3)  No zoning lot served shall be more than five hundred (500) feet from the central loading area. 
(4)  Shared or Central Loading Facility Agreement. An agreement approved by the Village Attorney providing for cooperative use of shared or central loading facilities, executed by the parties involved, shall be reviewed by the Zoning Administrator as part of the site plan review process. If the agreement is no longer in force, then a loading facility must be provided as otherwise required in this section. The agreement must state that if required loading can no longer be provided per the approved agreement, that the owner will be required to provide the loading facility on-site. 
(Code 1993, § 20-14.14; Ord. No. 2014-O-65, 11-11-2014) 
ARTICLE 30-15. - LANDSCAPING AND SCREENING 

Sec. 30-15.1. - Purpose. 
    The landscaping and screening requirements established by this Article are intended to preserve and enhance the appearance, public health, safety and welfare of the Village by fostering aesthetically pleasing development. Proper landscape contributes to the Village in many ways: enhancing its character and scenic beauty, providing clean air, reducing noise, preventing erosion of topsoil, reducing the rate of storm water runoff, providing nesting areas for birds and habitat for other wildlife, conserving energy, and providing shade and windbreaks. These regulations are also intended to increase the compatibility of adjacent uses, and minimize the adverse impact of noise, dust, motor vehicle headlight glare or other artificial light intrusions, and other objectionable activities or impacts conducted on, or created by, adjoining or neighboring uses. 
(Code 1993, § 20-15.1) 
Sec. 30-15.2. - Enforcement of landscaping provisions. 
    The provisions of this Article shall not apply to single-family and two-unit dwellings. 
(a)  No building permit or certificate of occupancy will be issued for any lot or use subject to the requirements of this Article unless all the requirements of this Article have been fulfilled. Failure to implement the landscape plan, or to maintain the lot or use in substantial conformance with the landscape plan, is cause for revocation of the certificate of occupancy and/or the application of fines and penalties, as established in this Ordinance. In addition, all landscape is subject to periodic inspection. 
(b)  If weather prohibits the installation of landscape at the time an occupancy permit is applied for, the applicant must provide the Village with a deposit in the amount required to complete landscape installation as determined by the Zoning Administrator in order to receive a certificate of occupancy, the deposit to be returned upon completion of required landscape. 
(c)  Any relief from these landscaping requirements is granted by the Appearance Review Commission as justified by its review findings. 
(Code 1993, § 20-15.2) 
Sec. 30-15.3. - Landscape plan. 
(a)  Landscape Plan Required. A detailed landscape plan must be submitted to the Village as part of any planned unit development or site plan review application for townhouse/stacked flat, multi-family, non-residential or mixed-use development, and must be approved prior to the issuance of a building permit. 
(b)  Content of Landscape Plan. New landscaping or modifications to existing landscaping require landscape plans that contain the information described below. Minor changes including, but not limited to replacement of species, or seasonal landscaping may provide less information as determined by the Zoning Administrator. 
(1)  The location and dimensions of all existing and proposed structures, property lines, easements, parking lots and drives, roadways and rights-of-way, sidewalks, signs, refuse disposal and recycling areas, sidewalks, bicycle paths and parking facilities, fences, electrical equipment, recreational facilities, drainage facilities, and other free standing structures, as determined necessary by the Zoning Administrator. 
(2)  The location, quantity, size, name and condition, both botanical and common, of all existing plant materials, including trees and other material in the right-of-way, and indicating plant material to be retained and removed. 
(3)  The location, quantity, size and name, both botanical and common, of all proposed plant material including, but not limited to, shade and evergreen trees, shrubs, groundcover, annuals/perennials and turf. 
(4)  The existing and proposed grading of the site indicating contours at one (1)-foot intervals. Proposed berming shall be indicated using one (1)-foot contour intervals. 
(5)  Elevations of all proposed fences, steps, stairs and retaining walls. 
(6)  Elevations, cross-sections and other details as determined necessary by the Zoning Administrator. 
(c)  Changes to Approved Landscape Plans. Once approved, minor changes to the landscape plan that do not result in a reduction in the net amount of plant material as specified on the approved landscape plan may be approved by the Zoning Administrator. Changes to the amount of plant materials of an approved landscape plan are not considered a minor change. Major changes must be approved by the body granting approval of the landscape plan initially. 
(Code 1993, § 20-15.3) 
Sec. 30-15.4. - Selection, installation and maintenance of plant materials. 
(a)  Selection. All planting materials used must be of good quality and meet American Association of Nurserymen (AAN) standards for minimum acceptable form, quality and size for species selected, and capable of being able to withstand the seasonal temperature variations of northeastern Illinois, as well as the individual site microclimates. The use of species native to northeastern Illinois is encouraged. Size and density of plant material, both at the time of planting and at maturity, are additional criteria that will be considered when selecting plant material. Where appropriate, the use of drought and salt tolerant plant material is preferred. 
(b)  Installation. All landscape materials must be installed in accordance with the current planting procedures established by the AAN. All plant materials must be free of disease and shall be installed so that soil of sufficient volume, composition and nutrient balance are available to sustain healthy growth. 
(c)  Required Element. Landscape materials depicted on approved landscape plans must be considered to be required site plan elements in the same manner as structures, parking and other improvements. As such, the owner of record, or in some instances the homeowner's association, shall be responsible for the maintenance, repair and replacement of all landscape materials, and fences, steps, retaining walls and similar landscape elements over the entire life of the development. 
(d)  Maintenance. All landscape materials must be maintained in good condition, present a healthy, neat and orderly appearance, and kept free of refuse and debris. Any dead, unhealthy or missing plants must be replaced within six (6) months of notification by the Village or the next reasonable available growing/planting season. All fences, steps, retaining walls and similar elements required within the landscape plan must be maintained in good repair. The owner of the premises shall be responsible for the maintenance, repair and replacement of all landscape materials, fences, steps, retaining walls and similar elements, and refuse disposal areas. Irrigation systems, when provided, must be maintained in good operating condition to promote the health of the plant material and the conservation of water over the entire life of the development. 
(Code 1993, § 20-15.4) 
Sec. 30-15.5. - Landscape design standards. 
    Landscape plans, as described above, must be prepared by a licensed landscape architect, registered in the State of Illinois, and evaluated and approved based on the following design criteria. 
(a)  Scale and Nature of Landscape Material. The scale and nature of landscape materials must be appropriate to the size of the site and related structures. 
(b)  Selection of Plant Material. Plant material must be selected for its form, texture, color, pattern of growth and suitability to local conditions. The use of invasive species is prohibited. Invasive species shall be those included in the "Chicago Botanic Garden" list of "Invasive Plants in the Chicago Region." 
(c)  Shade Trees. All deciduous shade trees must have a minimum trunk size of four (4) inches in caliper at planting, unless otherwise specified. 
(d)  Evergreen Trees. Evergreens trees must have a minimum height of six (6) feet at planting and shall be incorporated into the landscape treatment of a site, particularly in those areas where year-round screening and buffering is required. 
(e)  Ornamental Trees. Single stem ornamental trees must have a minimum trunk size of three (3) inches in caliper at planting, unless otherwise specified. Multiple stem ornamental trees must have a minimum height of eight (8) feet at planting, unless otherwise specified. 
(f)  Shrubs. 
    Unless otherwise specified, all large deciduous and evergreen shrubs must have minimum height of three (3) feet at installation, and all small deciduous and evergreen shrubs must have a minimum height of eighteen (18) inches at installation. 
    Large shrubs are those shrubs that reach five (5) or more feet in height at maturity. Small shrubs are those shrubs that can grow up to five (5) feet in height if left unmaintained, but generally kept at heights of eighteen (18) to thirty (30) inches. 
(g)  Softening of Walls and Fences. Plant material must be placed intermittently against long expanses of building walls, fences and other barriers to create a softening effect and to help break up long expanses of blank walls with little architectural detail. 
(h)  Planting Beds. Planting beds may be mulched with shredded hardwood, granite mulch, river rock, feather rocks or similar materials. Lava rock is prohibited. 
(i)  Irrigation. Landscape design pursuant to the requirements of this Article recognizes the need for irrigation and water conservation. Sprinkler irrigation systems may be required for certain landscaped areas, as determined by a landscape architect. The need for sprinkler irrigation systems will be determined by the type of plant material and the condition/growing medium that they are installed in. All irrigation systems must be designed to minimize the use of water. 
(j)  Energy Conservation. Plant material placement should be designed to reduce the energy consumption needs of the development. In addition, landscape designs must take into account and make an effort to implement sustainable design standards, where appropriate. 
(1)  Deciduous trees should be placed on the south and west sides of buildings to provide shade from the summer sun. 
(2)  Evergreens and other plant materials should be concentrated on the north and west sides of buildings to dissipate the effect of winter winds. 
(k)  Species Diversity. Diversity among required plant material is required not only for visual interest, but to reduce the risk of losing a large population of plants due to disease. Table 15-1: Diversity Requirements indicates the percentage of diversity required based on the total quantity of species being used. For instance, if a development requires forty-five (45) shade trees, no more than eighteen (18) trees nor less than five (5) trees can be of one (1) species, and there must be a minimum of five (5) different species within the forty-five (45) trees. 
VILLAGE OF WILMETTE

TABLE 15-1: DIVERSITY REQUIREMENTS TOTAL NUMBER OF PLANTS

PER PLANT TYPE DIVERSITY REQUIREMENTS MINIMUM
NUMBER OF
SPECIES MAXIMUM OF
ANY SPECIES MINIMUM OF ANY SPECIES 1-4 100% Not Applicable 1 5-10 60% 40% 2 11-15 45% 20% 3 16-75 40% 10% 5 76-500 25% 5% 8 500-1,000 30% 5% 10 1,000+ 15% 4% 15  
(l)  Berming. Earthen berms and existing topographic features may be incorporated into the landscape treatment of a site where there is sufficient space and, in particular, when berms and existing topographic features can be combined with plant material to facilitate effective screening. Minimum unretained berm side slopes must be maintained at no less than a 4:1 ratio to prevent erosion and be properly and safely maintained. Retained slopes may be implemented with the appropriate terracing necessary to reduce the need for safety railing. Berming is subject to approval of the Village Engineer. 
(Code 1993, § 20-15.5) 
Sec. 30-15.6. - Building foundation landscape. 
(a)  If a multi-family residential, mixed-use or non-residential development maintains a front yard or side yard adjoining a street of ten (10) feet or more, building foundation landscape is required. 
(b)  Foundation plantings must work in concert with buffer yard plantings to frame important views, while visually softening long expanses of walls, particularly those that lack windows and/or other architectural details. Foundation plantings must respond to the materials and the form of a building. 
(c)  Foundation plantings must be installed across sixty percent (60%) of the length of the facade of the building, except where walkways and driveways are located. 
(d)  Foundation plantings may consist of a mix of trees, shrubs and perennials. 
(Code 1993, § 20-15.6) 
Sec. 30-15.7. - Parking lot landscape. 
(a)  Parking Lot Landscape Requirements. Perimeter landscape is required for all parking lots of four (4) or more spaces and shall be established along the edge of the parking lot that abuts private property and the public right-of-way, excluding alleys. Interior parking lot landscape is required for those lots of twenty (20) or more spaces. Nothing in this Article prevents the applicant's voluntary installation of additional interior parking lot landscape, so long as parking space requirements and parking lot design requirements are complied with. 
(b)  Existing Parking Lots. 
(1)  For existing parking lots that currently do not comply with the required parking lot landscape, landscape must be installed when: 
(A)  A new principal building is constructed. 
(B)  Over fifty percent (50%) of the total area of an existing parking lot is reconstructed. Resealing or re-striping of an existing parking lot, which does not entail paving or resurfacing by replacement of the asphalt or concrete, is not subject to this requirement. 
(C)  When an existing parking lot under ten thousand (10,000) square feet in area is expanded by fifty percent (50%) or more in total surface area. 
(D)  When an existing parking lot over ten thousand (10,000) square feet in area is expanded by twenty-five percent (25%) or more in total surface area. 
(2)  When an existing parking lot is required by Paragraph (1) above to provide landscape, which would result in creating a parking area that no longer conforms to the parking regulations of this Ordinance, such existing parking lot is not required to install all or a portion of the required landscape. The applicant is required to show that landscape cannot be accommodated on the site. If only certain requirements are able to be accommodated on the site, those elements are required. The Zoning Administrator must make the determination that all or a portion of required landscape does not have to be installed. 
(Code 1993, § 20-15.7; Ord. No. 2015-O-13, 4-14-2015) 
Sec. 30-15.8. - Parking lot perimeter landscape yard. 
    Perimeter parking lot landscape provides for the enhancement and screening of parking lots by requiring pedestrian walls and/or landscape along public streets. Perimeter landscape is required for all parking lots of four (4) or more spaces and must be established along the edge of the parking lot that abuts the public right-of-way, excluding alleys. The landscape treatment must run the full length of the parking lot and must be located between the property line and the edge of the parking lot. All perimeter parking lot screening areas must be protected with raised concrete curbs. Landscape areas outside of shrub and tree masses must be planted in turf or other live groundcover. The landscape area must be improved as follows: 
(a)  One (1) shrub, measuring a minimum of eighteen (18) inches at planting and not to exceed three and one-half (3 1/2) feet at maturity, shall be planted for every three (3) feet of landscape area length, spaced linearly to adequately screen vehicle bumpers. Alternatively, a low pedestrian wall the height of which provides effective screening to a maximum height of three (3) feet may be used instead of shrubs. Where feasible, plant materials should be installed between the sidewalk and the wall to provide a softening effect on the fence or wall. 
(b)  The perimeter parking lot landscape area must be at least five (5) feet in width, as measured from the lot line to the back of curb, in order to accommodate vehicle bumper overhang and ensure planting areas that are adequate in size. 
FIGURE 15-1: PARKING LOT SCREENING 

(Code 1993, § 20-15.8) 
Sec. 30-15.9. - Interior parking lot landscape. 
    For parking lots consisting of twenty (20) or more spaces that are constructed after the effective date of this Ordinance, interior parking lot landscape is required. 
(a)  Amount. One (1) parking lot island must be provided between every twenty (20) contiguous parking spaces. As part of the landscape plan approval, parking lot island locations may be varied based on specific site requirements or design scheme, but the total number of islands shall be no less than the amount required one (1) island for every twenty (20) spaces. However, all rows of parking spaces must terminate in a parking lot island or landscape area. 
(b)  Size of Parking Lot Islands. Parking lot islands must be the same dimension as the parking stall. Double rows of parking must provide parking lot islands that are the same dimension as the double row. 
(c)  Design of Planting Areas. Parking lot islands or landscape areas must be at least one hundred forty-four (144) square feet in area and designed specifically for the absorption of storm water. Such islands and landscape areas must be properly drained and irrigated as appropriate to the site conditions to ensure survivability. 
(d)  Type of Landscape Material. Shade trees must be the primary plant materials used in parking lot islands and landscape areas. Ornamental trees, shrubs, hedges and other plant materials may be used to supplement the shade tree plantings but must not create visibility concerns for automobiles and pedestrians. 
(e)  Quantity of Landscape Material. A minimum of one (1) shade tree is required for every parking lot island or landscape area. If the island extends the width of a double row, then two (2) shade trees are required. 
(f)  Groundcover. A minimum of seventy-five percent (75%) of every parking lot island must be planted in turf or other live groundcover, perennials or ornamental grasses. 
(Code 1993, § 20-15.9; Ord. No. 2015-O-13, 4-14-2015) 
Sec. 30-15.10. - Buffer yards. 
(a)  This Article establishes standards for the dimensions and improvement requirements of buffer yards between land uses and/or zoning districts within the rear or interior side yard. Nothing in this Article prevents the applicant's voluntary installation of buffer yards to these design specifications where they are not required. 
(b)  Buffer yards are required in the following situations: 
(1)  Where an R2, R3 or R4 District abuts an R or R1 District. 
(2)  Where a non-residential district abuts a residential district. 
(3)  Where a non-residential use is located within a residential district. However, a buffer yard is not required where the rear wall of a commercial building is located on the rear property line or where an alley is located between a non-residential use and a residential use. 
(c)  Buffer yards must be provided in interior side and rear yards. Buffer yards may be located within required setbacks, and are reserved for the planting of material and installation of screening as required by this Article. No parking, driveways, sidewalks, accessory buildings or other impervious surfaces are permitted within the buffer yard area. 
(d)  All plantings in the buffer yard must be in accordance with the design standards of this Article. The minimum size and improvement of buffer yards is as follows: 
(1)  A buffer yard within must be a minimum of ten (10) feet in width. 
(2)  Shade trees must be planted on an average of one (1) tree for every twenty-five (25) linear feet of yard length. As part of the landscape plan approval, trees may be spaced at various intervals based on specific site requirements or design scheme, but the total number of trees planted must be no less than the amount required by a linear planting spaced twenty-five (25) feet apart. 
(3)  An opaque masonry wall (stone, stucco or brick), solid screen fence or dense evergreen hedge no less than five (5) feet and no more than six (6) feet in height, must be erected along one hundred percent (100%) of the yard length. 
(4)  Shrubs must be planted on an average of one (1) shrub for every three (3) feet of yard length. As part of the landscape plan approval, shrubs may be spaced at various intervals based on specific site requirements or design scheme, but the total number of shrubs planted will be no less than the amount required by a linear planting spaced three (3) feet apart. 
(5)  Areas not planted with trees or shrubs must be maintained as live groundcover. 
(Code 1993, § 20-15.10) 
Sec. 30-15.11. - Screening requirements. 
(a)  Refuse Disposal Dumpsters and Refuse Storage Areas. All refuse containers must be fully enclosed on three (3) sides by a solid wood or simulated wood screen fence or opaque masonry wall (stone, stucco or brick) no less than five (5) feet and no more than six (6) feet in height or principal structure wall no less than five (5) feet in height and the enclosure shall be gated. The materials used for screening, including the enclosure, must complement the architecture of the principal structure. An extension of an exterior principal structure wall may be used as one (1) of the screening walls for a refuse container, provided that such wall meets the minimum five (5)-foot height requirement and is of the same building materials as the principal structure. Such wall may not be the gated enclosure. This requirement shall not apply to townhouse/stacked flat dwellings where the refuse containers serve the needs of only one (1) family. 
(b)  Loading Berths. Where feasible, loading berths must be located and oriented so as not to be visible from the street and adjacent properties, while still allowing access to the use it is serving. In addition, loading berths in all zoning districts must be screened as much as possible, unless such screening is determined unnecessary by the body approving the landscape plan. Such screening must consist of an opaque masonry wall (stone, stucco or brick), a solid wood or simulated wood screen fence, or dense evergreen hedge no less than five (5) feet and no more than six (6) feet in height. 
(c)  Outdoor Display and Sales Areas. 
(1)  Outdoor Storage Areas. All outdoor storage areas must be completely screened by an opaque masonry wall (stone, stucco or brick) or a solid wood or simulated wood screen fence no less than five (5) feet and no more than six (6) feet in height. Where feasible, plant materials should be installed along the fence or wall located along the public right-of-way to provide a softening effect. No materials stored outdoors may be of a greater height than that of the required fence or wall. 
(2)  Outdoor Display and Sales Areas. 
(A)  When the rear or interior side yard of an outdoor display area abuts a residential district, or the rear yard is separated from a residential district by an alley, the outdoor display area must be effectively screened from view by an opaque masonry wall (stone, stucco or brick), a solid wood or simulated wood screen fence or dense evergreen hedge no less than five (5) feet and no more than six (6) feet in height. 
(B)  All outdoor display areas must be designed with a landscape yard along the public right-of-way, excluding alleys, a minimum of ten (10) feet in width and planted with shade or evergreen trees at a rate of one (1) tree per twenty-five (25) feet, and supplemented with shrubs and perennials to enhance the view from the public right-of-way. These screening requirements are not intended to prohibit openings reasonably necessary for access drives and walkways. 
(C)  Motor vehicle dealerships or rental establishments with outdoor sales and display lots must be designed with screening of small shrubs and/or a low pedestrian wall of a minimum of three (3) feet in height to optimize the view of motor vehicles for sale. 
(D)  Growing areas for nursery stock located in the front yard or side yard adjoining a street are considered to meet screening requirements. 
(d)  Drive-Through Facility. Drive aisles of drive-through facilities must be effectively screened from view along the public right-of-way and at the edges of sites adjacent to residential properties in order to minimize the impact of exterior site lighting, headlight glare and any menu intercom displays. Such screening must be approved during the site plan review process and must consist of an opaque masonry wall (stone, stucco or brick), a solid wood or simulated wood screen fence or dense evergreen hedge no less than five (5) feet and no more than six (6) feet in height. Plant materials must be installed along the fence or wall to provide a softening effect. 
(Code 1993, § 20-15.11) 
ARTICLE 30-16. - SIGNS 

Sec. 30-16.1. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this Article is to establish a framework for a comprehensive system of sign controls governing the display, design, construction, installation and maintenance of signs that will: 
(a)  Promote and protect the health, safety and welfare of the Village by ensuring the compatibility of signs with surrounding architecture and land uses. 
(b)  Create a more attractive business and economic climate in the commercial and industrial areas of the Village by enhancing and protecting the orderly and effective display of signs. 
(c)  Discourage an excessive number of signs and unsightly, dissimilar and inappropriate signs. 
(d)  Protect the public from hazardous conditions that result from the indiscriminate use and placement of signs, structurally unsafe signs, signs which obscure the vision of pedestrians or motorists, and signs which compete or conflict with necessary traffic signals and warning signs. 
(Code 1993, § 20-16.1) 
Sec. 30-16.2. - Sign permit and variation. 
    Unless specifically permitted as exempt from sign permit requirements by this Article, it is unlawful for any person to erect, relocate or structurally alter any sign without first obtaining a sign permit from the Village in accordance with Section 30-5.13 (Sign Permit). The Zoning Administrator may revoke any sign permit where there has been a violation of the provisions of this Ordinance or misrepresentation of fact on the sign permit application. An Appearance Review Certificate must be issued by the Appearance Review Commission before a sign permit may be issued. 
(Code 1993, § 20-16.2) 
Sec. 30-16.3. - Obsolete signs. 
    Any sign, awning or canopy which advertises a business no longer being conducted, or a product no longer being sold, in or from the premises to which the sign relates shall be taken down and removed by the owner, agent or person having the beneficial use of the building, structure or premises upon which such sign is found. Removal shall be effected within twenty (20) days after written notice from the Zoning Administrator. If such a sign is not removed after such twenty (20) day period, the Zoning Administrator is authorized to cause the sign to be removed. Any expense incident thereto shall be paid by the owner, agent or person having the beneficial use of the building, structure or premises on which such sign is found. 
(Code 1993, § 20-16.3) 
Sec. 30-16.4. - Location. 
(a)  Installation of Signs. 
(1)  The placement of signs on public property is controlled by the following provisions of the Village Code: Sections 24-165, 14-205, 20-58, 20-90, and 20-91. 
(2)  No signs may be placed on any private property without prior consent of the owner thereof and, where applicable, the issuance of a sign permit. 
(3)  No sign mounted on the exterior of a structure may cover any windows, doors or architectural features other than doorway transoms. 
(b)  Required Sign Orientation. 
(1)  An awning or canopy sign must be oriented to the street which is most nearly parallel to the face of the sign, or where a use has frontage on two (2) streets that intersect, a sign may be oriented half to one (1) street and half to the other street. 
(2)  A ground sign must be oriented to the street on which the activity has frontage and from which the information displayed on such sign may readily be seen. 
(3)  A projecting sign must be oriented to the street that is most nearly perpendicular to the face of the sign; or where a use has frontage on two (2) streets that intersect, a sign may be oriented half to one (1) street and half to the other street. 
(4)  A wall or window sign must be oriented to the street which is most nearly parallel to the face of the sign. 
(5)  If an activity has no public street frontage, the entrance intended for use by the general public determines sign orientation. 
(6)  A public parking lot or shopping center plaza is considered a street for the sake of this section. 
(Code 1993, § 20-16.4) 
Sec. 30-16.5. - Sign dimension computations. 
(a)  Computation of Sign Area. 
(1)  For signs on a background, the entire area of the background is calculated as sign area, including any material or color forming the sign face and the background used to differentiate the sign from the structure against which it is mounted. Sign area does not include any supports or bracing. (See Figure 16-1: Computation of Sign Area.) 
(2)  For signs consisting of free standing letters or logos, the sign area is calculated as the area of the smallest rectangle that encompasses all letters, numerals and logos. Sign area does not include any supports or bracing. (See Figure 16-1: Computation of Sign Area.) 
(3)  The sign area of a three-dimensional, free-form, or sculptural (non-planar) sign is calculated as fifty percent (50%) of the sum of the area of the four (4) vertical sides of the smallest cube that will encompass the sign. (See Figure 16-1: Computation of Sign Area.) 
(4)  If the interior angle between two (2) sign faces is forty-five degrees (45°) or less, the sign area is computed as the area of one (1) face only. If the angle between two (2) sign faces is greater than forty-five degrees (45°), the sign area is computed as the sum of the areas of the two (2) faces. (See Figure 16-2: Angle of Sign Face.) 
FIGURE 16-1: COMPUTATION OF SIGN AREA 

FIGURE 16-2: ANGLE OF SIGN FACE 

(b)  Sign Height. 
(1)  Pole type ground sign height is measured from the sidewalk along the lot line where the sign will be installed to the uppermost point of the sign. (See Figure 16-3: Monument Signs and Pole Signs.) 
(2)  Monument type ground sign height is measured from average abutting grade to the uppermost point of a sign. (See Figure 16-3: Monument Signs and Pole Signs.) 
FIGURE 16-3: MONUMENT SIGNS AND POLE SIGNS 

(Code 1993, § 20-16.5) 
Sec. 30-16.6. - General sign standards. 
(a)  Construction. 
(1)  All signs constructed, erected, modified or altered must comply with the provisions of this Article and the requirements of the Village Code. 
(2)  All signs with a display area of greater than eighteen (18) square feet must be constructed of fire retardant wood, metal or other non-combustible material. 
(3)  All signs constructed on, over or within five (5) feet of a public right-of-way must have no nails, tacks, wires or other hazardous projections from their surface. 
(b)  Sign Structure and Installation. Supports and braces must be an integral part of the sign design. Supports or braces must be hidden from public view to the extent technically feasible. All signs attached to a building must be installed and maintained so that wall penetrations are watertight and the structure does not exceed allowable stresses of supporting materials. 
(c)  Wind Pressure and Direct Load Requirements. All signs must be designed and constructed to withstand a wind pressure of no less than thirty (30) pounds per square foot of net surface area. All signs must comply with Village Code requirements (Section 1609.3 of 2006 International Building Code). 
(d)  Electrical Components. All electrical fixtures, devices, circuits, conduits, raceways or apparatus used to illuminate, move or project any sign must be installed and maintained as required in the Village Code. All signs with electrical wiring and connections must have a plate, affixed to the sign, showing the voltage of the electrical apparatus used in connection with the sign. 
(e)  Lettering. All letters, figures, characters or representations in cut-out or irregular form, maintained in conjunction with, attached to, or superimposed upon any sign must be safely and securely built or attached to the sign structure. 
(f)  Illumination. 
(1)  All sign illumination must be designed, located, shielded and directed so as to prevent the casting of glare or direct light upon adjacent publicly dedicated roadways and surrounding properties. 
(2)  In no case may the lighting intensity of any sign, whether from internal illumination or external illumination, exceed seventy-five (75) footcandles when measured with a standard light meter perpendicular to the face of the sign at a distance equal to the narrowest dimension of the sign. 
(3)  No sign may be illuminated between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) a.m. and six o'clock (6:00) a.m. unless the activity displaying the sign is open for business during those hours. The Zoning Administrator is authorized to grant an exemption from this provision to provide for the security and safety of the use on the property. 
(4)  Goose-neck reflectors and lights are permitted provided that they concentrate the illumination upon the area of the sign so as to prevent glare upon the street or adjacent property. Any device used to provide external illumination for a sign may project no more than eighteen (18) inches from the face of the sign. 
(g)  Limitation on Items of Information. 
(1)  Signs are limited to seven (7) items of information. 
(2)  Each piece of information on a sign is defined as an item of information. For example, each of the following is defined as one (1) item of information: establishment name, logo, telephone number, website address, or product or service. A street address number, if included in the sign copy, is not counted as an item of information. If a sign advertises products or services, each product or service, including multi-word, is considered one (1) item of information. 
(3)  The changeable copy portion of changeable copy signs, including gas prices, are counted as one (1) item of information. 
(4)  For a sign that contains a time and temperature component, the time and temperature component is not counted as an item of information. 
(5)  All signs on a lot must be related to goods and/or services sold or offered on the premises, with the exception of non-commercial messages or political signs. 
(6)  Directory signs, sidewalk signs and menu board signs are exempt from the items of information limitation. 
(h)  Maintenance. 
(1)  All signs, and the premises surrounding the sign, must be maintained in a clean, sanitary and inoffensive condition, and free and clear of all noxious substances, rubbish and weeds. All signs must be repainted or otherwise maintained periodically by the owner to prevent corrosion or deterioration caused by weather, age or other conditions. 
(2)  If the Village finds that any sign is unsafe or insecure, is a menace to the public, or has been constructed or erected in violation of the provisions of this Article, the Zoning Administrator must immediately be advised of such condition and give written notice to the property owner. If sign permit holder fails to remove or alter the structure so as to comply with the standards of this Article within twenty (20) days, such sign may be removed by [the] Village at the expense of the sign permit holder or the property owner where the sign is installed. The Village may cause any other sign or other advertising structure that is an immediate peril to persons or property to be removed summarily and without notice. 
(Code 1993, § 20-16.6) 
Sec. 30-16.7. - Local sign ordinances. 
(a)  Applicability. A multi-tenant commercial development, office building or association of merchants doing business within a specific area within the Village may establish specific sign regulations for such area. These regulations, called "Local Sign Ordinances," must be submitted to the Village Board for approval. If the Local Sign Ordinance is approved or approved with conditions by the Village Board, the Local Sign Ordinance will control in lieu of compliance with this Article. 
(b)  Conditions for Approval. No Local Sign Ordinance will be approved by the Village Board unless the regulations are binding upon all properties within the shopping center, office building or specific area within the Village to which the regulations apply. 
(c)  Approval Procedure. To obtain approval of a Local Sign Ordinance, an applicant must submit a complete set of sign regulations to the Zoning Administrator, together with any additional materials requested by the Zoning Administrator. The Zoning Administrator will review the regulations and transmit them with comments and recommendations to the Appearance Review Commission. The Appearance Review Commission will review the regulations and transmit them with comments and recommendations to the Village Board, who has final approval of the Local Sign Ordinance. The Village Board may approve, approve with conditions, or deny Local Sign Ordinances. 
(d)  Private Sign Agreements. Nothing in this section or Ordinance prevents any property owner or association of merchants from establishing, by lease or other form of agreement, sign regulations that are more stringent than in this Article. 
(e)  Exemption from Appearance Review Certificate. Signs that conform to the approved Local Sign Ordinance are exempt from the Appearance Review Certificate requirements. The Zoning Administrator, upon review of the sign permit application, may issue a sign permit if all signs are in compliance with the approved Local Sign Ordinance. 
(f)  Adopted Local Sign Ordinances. The following Local Sign Ordinances are incorporated into this Ordinance as the following appendices. 
(1)  Appendix A. Plaza del Lago Local Sign Ordinance. 
(2)  Appendix B. Edens Plaza Local Sign Ordinance. 
(3)  Appendix C. West Lake Shopping Plaza Local Sign Ordinance. 
(Code 1993, § 20-16.7) 
Sec. 30-16.8. - Prohibited signs. 
    It is unlawful to erect or maintain the following signs: 
(a)  Animated Signs. Animated signs are prohibited, including electronic display screens and electronic message signs. This does not include time and temperature components or order display screens on menu board signs. 
(b)  Attention-Getting Devices. Attention-getting devices are prohibited, including strobe lights, spotlights and floodlights. 
(c)  Box Signs. Box signs are prohibited. This does not apply to West Lake Plaza. 
(d)  Flashing Signs. Flashing signs, defined as those signs with blinking, traveling/chasing or flashing lights, illuminating devices that change light intensity, brightness or color and rotating beacons, are prohibited. Time and temperature signs are not considered flashing signs. 
(e)  Moving Signs. Signs with moving, revolving or rotating parts or visible mechanical movement of any kind, including pennants, streamers and all other signs that flutter, undulate, swing, rotate, oscillate or otherwise move by natural or artificial means, are prohibited. Clocks with movable hands are permitted. 
(f)  Obscene Signs. A sign that displays any matter where the dominant theme of the material, taken as a whole, appeals to a prurient interest in sex or is patently offensive because it affronts contemporary community standards relating to the description or representation of sexual matters, and is utterly without redeeming social value is prohibited. 
(g)  Off-Premise Signs. Off-premise signs are prohibited, unless specifically permitted by this Ordinance. 
(h)  Painted and Illegally Affixed Signs. Signs painted directly on an exterior wall, roof, fascia, parapet or chimney of a building or on a fence are prohibited. 
(i)  Portable Signs. Portable signs are prohibited. Sidewalk signs are not considered portable signs. 
(j)  Roof Signs. Roof signs are prohibited. 
(k)  Signs that Interfere with Ingress and Egress. Signs that prevent free ingress to or egress from any door, window or fire escape, or are attached to any fire escape or standpipe are prohibited. 
(l)  Signs that Interfere with Traffic. A sign that interferes with traffic is prohibited. Such prohibited signs: 
(1)  Obstruct free and clear vision at any street, intersection, parking lot entrance or exit, or driveway. 
(2)  Interfere with, obstruct the view of, or be confused with any authorized traffic sign, signal or device because of its position, shape or color. 
(3)  Make use of the words STOP, LOOK, DETOUR, DANGER or any other word, phrase, symbol or character in a manner that misleads, interferes with, or confuses traffic unless specifically approved by the Zoning Administrator. 
(4)  Are illuminated in red, green or amber color, so as to resemble a traffic signal, when in the direct line of vision of a traffic signal. 
(m)  Vehicle Advertising Signs. Advertising signs placed on a parked vehicle, or trailer, for the purpose of advertising a product or directing viewers to a business or activity are prohibited. This does not apply to public transit vehicles. 
(n)  Neon Signs (Distance Restriction). Neon signs within a residential district or within sixty-six (66) feet of a residential district lot line. 
(Code 1993, § 20-16.8) 
Sec. 30-16.9. - Signs not requiring a permit. 
    The following signs, and sign alteration and maintenance activities, are exempt from the sign permit requirements of this Article. 
(a)  Alteration and Maintenance Operations. The following activities are exempt from sign permit requirements: 
(1)  Changing of the advertising copy or message on an existing changeable copy sign or similar approved sign, whether illuminated or non-illuminated. 
(2)  Painting, repainting, cleaning, changing permitted items of information, or other normal maintenance and repair of a sign, not involving changes to the appearance, location, size or structural changes or changes to the electrical components of a sign. 
(b)  Address Numbers and Nameplates. House numbers, as required by Section 30-16.13 of the Village Code, and house nameplates are exempt from sign permit requirements. Nameplates are limited to sixty (60) square inches in area. 
(c)  Banners. Banners are exempt from sign permit requirements subject to the following: 
(1)  Banners are permitted for any non-residential use. 
(2)  Banners are limited to thirty-two (32) square feet in area. 
(3)  Only one (1) banner is permitted per lot. 
(4)  No banner may be located higher than the roofline of the building to which it is attached or, if attached to a permanent sign, higher than the sign. There must be no encroachment into the public right-of-way. 
(5)  Banners are limited to a display period of thirty (30) days and must be removed within two (2) days after a specified event. Banners may be erected on a lot no more than four (4) times in a year. 
(d)  Construction Signs. A construction sign identifying the parties involved in the construction to occur or occurring on the lot or premises on which the sign is placed is permitted without a sign permit, subject to the following: 
(1)  Such temporary signs must be removed within seven (7) days after primary construction ceases for the project to which the sign pertains. 
(2)  Only one (1) construction sign per street frontage may be placed on the lot or premises to which it pertains. 
(3)  The sign area of each sign may not exceed: 
(A)  Twenty (20) square feet in sign area where the street frontage is less than one hundred (100) feet. 
(B)  Sixty-four (64) square feet in sign area where the street frontage is at least one hundred (100) feet. 
(4)  Illumination of temporary construction signs is prohibited. 
(e)  Directional Signs. The following directional signs are exempt from sign permit requirements: 
(1)  Directional or instructional signs accessory to parking and driveway areas, subject to the following regulations: 
(A)  One (1) single or double faced sign may be erected to designate each entrance to or exit from a parking or driveway area. Sign area is limited to seven and one-half (7 1/2) square feet. 
(B)  Signs designating the conditions of use of off-street parking spaces furnished by an activity may be placed in parking lots or alleys. Such signs may include the name of the activity furnishing the parking spaces but may not include any advertising. 
(2)  Signs that direct or guide persons to facilities intended to serve the public, including signs identifying rest rooms, public telephones, walkways, and similar facilities. Advertising matter is not permitted on such signs. 
(3)  In addition, an off-street parking facility that contains car sharing spaces may provide signs that in the aggregate total no more than two square feet in area identifying organizations that have car sharing vehicles available at such parking area. No such sign shall be located higher than seven feet above curb level. 
(f)  Event Sign. 
(1)  A sign announcing the opening or closing of a business, or a business founding anniversary at a location is permitted without a sign permit. Such a sign may not be displayed for more than eight (8) weeks from the date on which the activity commences or concludes. Signs announcing a sale related to the closing of a business or a stock liquidation may be displayed only two (2) times within a calendar year. 
(2)  An event sign announcing a campaign, drive or event of a civic, philanthropic, educational or religious organization is permitted without a sign permit. Such signs must be removed within two (2) days after a specified event. 
(3)  The sign area of an event sign may not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet. 
(g)  Flags. Flags bearing the official design of a nation, state or political subdivision of a state are exempt from sign permit requirements. 
(h)  Garage or Yard Sale Signs. A garage sale or house sale sign which announces the sale of tangible personal property by the property owner by means of the activity commonly known as a "garage sale," "yard sale" or "house sale" is permitted without a sign permit. Such signs must be displayed on private property only and must be removed within three (3) days of the sale. A garage sale or house sale sign is limited to four (4) square feet. 
(i)  Government and Public Signs. The following government and public signs are exempt from sign permit requirements: 
(1)  Signs displayed or erected by a governmental body. 
(2)  Signs required or authorized for a public purpose by any law, statute or ordinance, to the extent that said signs are of the type, number, area, height, location or illumination as may be authorized by law, statute or ordinance. 
(j)  Holiday Decorations. Holiday decorations, signs or other material displayed in connection with civic, patriotic or religious holidays are permitted without a sign permit. 
(k)  Informational Matter. 
(1)  Informational matter appearing on gasoline pumps, newspaper vending boxes and other vending machines, automatic teller machines, or matter appearing on or adjacent to entry doors such as PUSH, PULL, OPEN and/or CLOSED, or matter appearing on display windows or doors denoting hours of operation, credit cards accepted, and similar information are exempt from sign permit requirements. 
(2)  An automobile service station may display one (1) sign, no larger than nine (9) square feet, above each pump island stating whether the area is a "self service" or "full service" area and the current price per gallon of gasoline sold at the station. No element of the cost to the customer of the gasoline may be omitted from the statement of the price. 
(l)  Memorial Plaques. Memorial plaques, including cornerstones, historical plaques and similar signs, displayed for non-commercial purposes are exempt from sign permit requirements. 
(m)  Political and Non-Commercial Message Signs. 
(1)  A sign or poster expressing the opinion of the owner or occupant of the property about a political, religious, social or similar issue of public concern is permitted without a sign permit, provided that no advertising of goods or services is included. 
(2)  Such signs must be posted on private property only, and only with the permission of the property owner. 
(n)  Property Management Signs. Property management signs are exempt from sign permit requirements. Such signs must be installed as wall signs and are limited to one (1) square foot in area. 
(o)  Real Estate Signs. 
(1)  A sign advertising the sale or lease of real estate is permitted without a sign permit and must be located on the lot where the sale or lease of real estate is offered. 
(2)  Real estate signs must be removed within seven (7) days after the buyer and seller are mutually bound to conclude the sale or lease of the real estate to which the sign pertains. 
(3)  Only one (1) real estate sign per street frontage may be placed on the lot or premises to which it pertains. 
(4)  The sign area of each sign may not exceed: 
(A)  Ten (10) square feet in sign area where the street frontage is less than sixty (60) feet. 
(B)  Twenty (20) square feet in sign area where the street frontage is at least (60) feet. 
(p)  Restaurant Menu Signs. Restaurant menu signs containing only the current menu or specials offered by the restaurant are exempt from sign permit requirements. Restaurant menu signs must be wall or window signs and are limited to four (4) square feet in sign area. This does not apply to menu board signs for drive-through uses. 
(q)  Theater Marquee. Information displayed on a theater marquee that indicates the names, showtimes and information on current movies or performances are exempt from sign permit requirements. 
(r)  Window Signs - Temporary. A business is allowed one (1) or more temporary window signs without a sign permit, provided the total area of the business' window signs does not exceed fifteen percent (15%) of the window area. Temporary window signs are limited to a display period of eight (8) weeks. Temporary window signs cannot display any off-premise advertising, with the exception of non-commercial messages. 
(Code 1993, § 20-16.9; Ord. No. 2015-O-13, 4-14-2015; Ord. No. 2017-O-44, 8-22-2017) 
Sec. 30-16.10. - Signs requiring a permit. 
(a)  General Restrictions. Table 16-1: Sign Types Permitted by District describes the sign types permitted within a district. In addition, the following restrictions also apply: 
(1)  All businesses fronting on public or private streets and having their principal operation on the ground floor of a building are allowed those sign types and quantities as listed in Table 16-1. Such signs must be located on that part of the building having street frontage and are subject to the following: 
(A)  Signs on an awning valance are always permitted but are limited to five (5) inches in height and no more than one (1) item of information. 
(B)  Commercial uses located in residential zoning districts may display one (1) wall or projecting sign per street frontage. No other sign types are permitted. 
(C)  Institutional uses located in residential zoning districts may display one (1) wall or ground sign per street frontage. No other sign types are permitted. 
(2)  Townhouse, stacked flat and multi-family dwellings located in residential districts may display a ground sign oriented to the street on which it fronts only if the development consists of at least twenty (20) dwelling units and has at least one hundred (100) feet of street frontage. 
(3)  Businesses lacking frontage on a public or private street may locate only one (1) sign in accordance with applicable sections of this Article on that face of the building which is designated by that business as its principal frontage, and contains the primary entry into the business. 
(4)  All signs must comply with the standards of this section. 
VILLAGE OF WILMETTE, ILLINOIS

TABLE 16-1: SIGN TYPES PERMITTED BY DISTRICT COMMERCIAL DISTRICT PRIMARY SIGN SECONDARY SIGN AWNING/WALL/ GROUND WINDOW PROJECTING VALANCE VILLAGE CENTER (VC) Awning, Wall or Ground One (1) One (1) One (1) per Awning LINDEN SQUARE (NR-1) Awning or Wall One (1) One (1) One (1) per Awning NEIGHBORHOOD RETAIL (NR)  NORTH GREEN BAY ROAD Awning, Wall or Ground One (1) One (1) One (1) per Awning  RIDGE ROAD Awning, Wall or Ground One (1) One (1) One (1) per Awning  SKOKE AND OLD GLENVIEW Awning, Wall or Ground One (1) One (1) per Awning  WILMETTE AND SKOKIE Awning, Wall or Ground One (1) One (1) per Awning  WEST LAKE AVENUE Awning, Wall or Ground One (1) One (1) per Awning GENERAL COMMERCIAL (GC-1) Awning, Wall or Ground One (1) One (1) One (1) per Awning GENERAL COMMERCIAL (GC-2) Awning, Wall or Ground One (1) One (1) per Awning OFFICE RESEARCH (OR) Awning, Wall or Ground One (1) One (1) per Awning  
(b)  Awnings. Awnings that are considered an architectural feature of a structure and are not used for identifying the premises or the goods and/or services sold are not considered a sign. Awnings used as signs are subject to the following regulations: 
(1)  No portion of an awning may extend beyond a point two (2) feet inside the curb line. When an awning extends over a Village right-of-way, the applicant must sign a hold harmless/indemnification agreement. 
(2)  An awning must maintain a minimum vertical clearance of eight (8) feet above the ground over which it projects. (See Figure 16-4: Awning Surface.) 
(3)  Awnings must be securely attached to and supported by a building. All frames and supports must be made of metal or similar rigid material. Frames and supports may not be made of wood or plastics. 
(4)  Printing on an awning sign is limited to twenty percent (20%) of the face of the awning not including sidewalls. (See Figure 16-4: Awning Surface.) 
(5)  Awning signs must be constructed out of canvas, canvas-like material, fabric or metal. Back-lit box and plastic awnings are prohibited. 
(6)  An awning sign may be externally illuminated. 
FIGURE 16-4: AWNING SURFACE 

(c)  Directory Signs. Multi-tenant non-residential uses shall be permitted a directory sign in addition to any other signs allowed. A multi-tenant building shall be permitted one (1) wall mounted directory sign of no more than six (6) square feet per building, or one (1) free standing ground sign of no more than sixteen (16) square feet per building. 
(d)  Ground Signs. 
(1)  Ground signs are permitted as follows: 
(A)  A non-residential use may display a ground sign oriented to any roadway if the use has at least one hundred (100) feet of street frontage. (See Figure 16-5: Ground Signs on Corner Lots.) 
(B)  A non-residential use which has in excess of three hundred (300) feet of street frontage may display one (1) additional ground sign for each three hundred (300) feet of frontage in excess of the first three hundred (300) feet of frontage. Such ground signs must be separated by a minimum of one hundred (100) feet. (See Figure 16-5: Ground Signs on Corner Lots.) 
(2)  The maximum sign area of a ground sign is as follows: 
(A)  Ten (10) square feet for townhouses and multi family uses in a residential zoning district. 
(B)  Ten (10) square feet for non-residential uses in a residential zoning district. 
(C)  Thirty (30) square feet for any non-residential use in a non-residential zoning district. 
(3)  The maximum height of a ground sign is as follows: 
(A)  Seven (7) feet for townhouses and multi family uses in a residential zoning district. 
(B)  Seven (7) feet for any use in the OR District. 
(C)  Seven (7) feet for non-residential uses in a residential zoning district. 
(D)  Ten (10) feet for any non-residential use in a non-residential zoning district if oriented to a street other than Green Bay Road, Lake Avenue or Skokie Boulevard. 
(E)  Fifteen (15) feet for any non-residential use in a non-residential zoning district if oriented to Green Bay Road, Lake Avenue or Skokie Boulevard. 
(4)  A ground sign is limited to support by no more than two (2) upright standards. 
(5)  A ground sign may be internally or externally illuminated in all non-residential districts, except the OR District. A ground sign may be externally illuminated in all residential zoning districts or the OR district. 
FIGURE 16-5: GROUND SIGNS ON CORNER LOTS 

(e)  Menu Board Signs. Drive-through facilities are permitted one (1) menu board sign, constructed as a monument sign, no more than forty (40) square feet in sign area, no more than seven (7) feet in height, and no less than fifteen (15) feet from any lot line. Menu boards shall not face or be located adjacent to residential properties. Menu boards shall not be internally illuminated, but may be externally illuminated using a shielded bulb. The use of audio components is limited to communications between the driver and the establishment. (See Figure 16-6: Menu Board Signs.) 
FIGURE 16-6: MENU BOARD SIGNS 

(f)  Marquees. 
(1)  Marquees are only permitted for indoor amusement facilities and live performance venues. 
(2)  Marquees are restricted to a position over the main entrance into a building. Marquees are limited to the width of the entrance or entrances of the building plus five (5) feet on each side thereof. 
(3)  No portion of a marquee may extend beyond a point one (1) foot inside the curb line. When a marquee extends over a Village right-of-way, the applicant must sign a hold harmless/indemnification agreement. 
(4)  Marquees must maintain a vertical clearance of ten (10) feet above the sidewalk over which it extends. 
(5)  Marquees must be supported solely by the building to which they are attached, and no columns or posts are permitted as supports. All marquees, including anchors, bolts, supports, rods and braces, must be constructed of incombustible or approved combustible materials, designed by a structural engineer and approved by the Village Engineer. 
(6)  No marquee is permitted on any building of wood frame construction. 
(7)  The roof of all marquees must be properly guttered and connected by downspouts to a storm sewer or other drainage acceptable to the Zoning Administrator so that water will not flow onto public property. 
(8)  The roof of any marquee must be designed and constructed to support a live load of no less than forty (40) pounds per square foot. 
(9)  The roof of all marquees must be used for no other purpose than to form and constitute a roof, and must be constructed of incombustible materials. 
(10)  No temporary sign may be attached to or hung from a marquee. 
(11)  A changeable copy sign affixed or illuminated directly upon the vertical hanging fascia of the marquee is permitted. 
(g)  Projecting Signs. 
(1)  Projecting signs are limited to six (6) square feet in sign area. (See Figure 16-7: Projecting Signs.) 
(2)  A projecting sign must maintain a vertical clearance of eight (8) feet above the ground over which it projects. No projecting sign affixed to a building may project higher than the building height, including the sign support structure. When a projecting sign extends over a Village right-of-way, the applicant must sign a hold harmless/indemnification agreement. (See Figure 16-7: Projecting Signs.) 
(3)  Projecting signs, including frames, braces, and supports must be designed by a licensed structural engineer or manufacturer. No projecting sign may be secured with wire, chains, strips of wood or nails nor may any projecting sign be hung or secured to any other sign. Any movable part of a projecting sign, such as the cover of a service opening, must be securely fastened by chains or hinges. 
(4)  Projecting signs are limited to four (4) feet of projection from the face of the building to which they are attached, including the area between the sign and the face of the building. (See Figure 16-7: Projecting Signs.) 
(5)  A permitted projecting sign may only be externally illuminated. 
FIGURE 16-7: PROJECTING SIGNS 

(h)  Sidewalk Signs. 
(1)  Restricted Information. 
(A)  Off-premise advertising is prohibited. 
(B)  Information on the sale of alcoholic beverages or price for alcoholic beverages is prohibited. 
(2)  Design Standards. 
(A)  Sidewalk signs must be constructed of weather-resistant materials, such as wood, plastic or metal. Sidewalk signs constructed of impermanent materials, such as cardboard and paper, are prohibited. 
(B)  Foil, mirrors, bare metal or other reflective materials that could create hazardous conditions to motorists, bicyclists or pedestrians are prohibited. 
(C)  Illumination of sidewalk signs is prohibited. 
(D)  Sidewalk signs must be sufficiently weighted or constructed to keep sign in approved location. 
(3)  Size and Number of Sidewalk Signs Allowed. 
(A)  The maximum signable area is limited to six (6) square feet per sign face, with a maximum of two (2) sign faces per sidewalk sign. 
(B)  Maximum overall height of a sidewalk sign is limited to forty-two (42) inches above the sidewalk upon which it is placed. 
(C)  A maximum of one (1) sidewalk sign per business is permitted, including businesses having more than one (1) street frontage. 
(4)  Permitted Location. 
(A)  Sidewalk signs are allowed in non-residential districts only. 
(B)  In the case of a sidewalk sign on the public sidewalk, a sidewalk sign may be placed only along the street level frontage of the business whose sign is being displayed. In the case of a sidewalk sign on a private sidewalk, a sidewalk sign may only be displayed in front of the building with frontage on that private sidewalk where the business is located. No sidewalk sign may be displayed in front of any other business. 
(C)  No sidewalk sign is permitted for a home occupation or for any use within a residential zoning district. 
(D)  Sidewalk signs must be placed in so that there is a continuous unobstructed width of a sidewalk or walkway of at least five (5) feet. 
(E)  Sidewalk sign placement may not obstruct ingress/egress to a building, steps or driveway access, or other similar feature, or be placed within five (5) feet of a wheelchair ramp or curb cut. 
(F)  Each sidewalk sign must be at least fifteen (15) feet from any other sidewalk sign. 
(G)  Sidewalk signs are prohibited in streets, roadways and alleys. 
(H)  Sidewalk signs must be free standing, and cannot be attached to any other structures, such as parking meters, trees and utility poles. 
(I)  Sidewalk sign placement must not create a visual obstruction so as to create a safety hazard. 
(5)  Display Period. 
(A)  Sidewalk signs may be displayed only during the hours the business is open. 
(B)  Owners are responsible for the removal of their sidewalk signs following business hours and during periods of strong winds and snow accumulation. 
(6)  Sidewalk Sign Permit Required. 
(A)  A sign permit is required for any sidewalk sign. A sign permit for a sidewalk sign may only be issued for period of validity up to one (1) year. Every sign permit for a sidewalk sign expires December 31st of each year. 
(B)  An applicant for a sidewalk sign permit must sign a statement that the applicant agrees to adhere to the standards and requirements of this regulation, and if not, the sign may be removed by the Village and/or the sign permit revoked. 
(C)  An applicant wishing to obtain a permit for a sidewalk sign is required to sign a hold harmless/indemnification agreement or provide evidence that the applicant maintains liability insurance in an amount as required by the Zoning Administrator naming the Village of Wilmette as an additional insured. Such coverage may not be canceled or modified without thirty (30) days prior written notice to the Zoning Administrator. Failure to maintain such insurance coverage will result in revocation of the permit. 
(D)  A copy of the approved permit must be legibly attached to the underside of the sign at all times. 
(E)  Failure to comply with any of the above standards at any time may result in the Village removing said sidewalk sign without prior notice. If the Village removes a sidewalk sign, written notice of the sign's removal will be mailed to the business owner at the address listed on the sign permit application via U.S. Postal Service regular mail. The notice must state with particularity the reason for removal. The confiscated sidewalk sign will be stored for thirty (30) calendar days after the mailing of such notice. 
(F)  An owner of a sidewalk sign that has been removed by the Village may retrieve said sidewalk sign upon payment of an impoundment fee, payable to the Village of Wilmette, no later than thirty (30) days after the date of the notice of impoundment. The impoundment fee is as follows: 
(i)  First Offense: Seventy-five dollars ($75.00). 
(ii)  Second Offense: One hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). 
(iii)  Third Offense and thereafter: Two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per occurrence. 
(G)  Alternatively, said owner within the same thirty (30) day period may submit a written protest to the Zoning Administrator stating with particularity why the sidewalk sign in question should not have been confiscated, and the Zoning Administrator must respond in writing to such protest within ten (10) business days. Any sidewalk sign not retrieved by the owner within thirty (30) calendar days after the date of the notice of impound, or within thirty (30) days after the Zoning Administrator has mailed a response to such written protest as may have been filed, may be destroyed by the Village. 
(i)  Time and Temperature Signs. A time and temperature sign may not include any advertising or convey any news information. The sign display may not change more frequently than one (1) change per three (3) seconds. 
(j)  Wall Signs. 
(1)  Non-residential uses are permitted one (1) wall sign per street frontage. 
(2)  Wall signs must be safely and securely attached to the building wall no less than eight (8) feet above the ground and affixed flat against the building wall. 
(3)  Wall signs are limited to a maximum projection of twelve (12) inches from the building wall. 
(4)  No wall sign affixed to a building, including sign support structure, may project beyond the ends or top of the wall to which it is attached. On existing buildings, a parapet wall may not be constructed for the sole purpose of increasing the allowable height of a wall sign. For new buildings, when a sign is to be mounted on a parapet wall, that parapet wall must be consistent with the architectural design of the building, including building materials. Wall signs may not be attached to un-reinforced masonry parapets. Wall signs must not cover windows, doors or architectural features. 
(5)  Wall signs must be constructed of wood, plastic/acrylic or metal. 
(6)  A permitted wall sign may be externally or internally illuminated, except that a non-conforming use in a residential zoning district may not be internally illuminated. 
(7)  The permitted sign area for a wall sign is as follows: 
(A)  Wall signs are limited to the signable area of a building, and must cover no more than thirty percent (30%) of the signable area. The signable area for a building is established by filing with the Zoning Administrator a written description or sketch defining or showing the signable area. 
(B)  The responsibility for filing the description or sketch of the signable area is with the building owner and the building occupant or occupants. Such persons may file the description or sketch prior to or within twenty (20) days after being requested to do so by the Zoning Administrator. If the building owner and building occupant or occupants fail to establish the signable area for the building within twenty (20) days after being requested to do so by the Zoning Administrator, the signable area for the building will be established by the Zoning Administrator. 
(k)  Window Signs - Permanent. 
(1)  The combined total area of a permanent window sign and temporary window signs is limited to a maximum of twenty percent (20%) of the window area. Window panels separated only by mullions are considered one (1) continuous window area in the computation of window surface area. 
(2)  The total area of a permanent window sign is limited to a maximum of ten percent (10%) of the window area. However, if no wall or awning sign is displayed, businesses are permitted up to twenty percent (20%) of window coverage with permanent window signs. 
(Code 1993, § 20-16.10) 
Sec. 30-16.11. - Non-conforming signs. 
    See Section 30-17.6 (Non-conforming Signs) for the provisions for non-conforming signs. 
(Code 1993, § 20-16.11) 
ARTICLE 30-17. - NON-CONFORMITIES 

Sec. 30-17.1. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this Article is to provide for the regulation of non-conforming uses, structures and lots, and to specify those circumstances and conditions under which non-conforming structures and uses must be eliminated. 
(Code 1993, § 20-17.1) 
Sec. 30-17.2. - General standards of applicability. 
(a)  Authority to Continue. Any use, structure or lot that existed as a lawful non-conformity at the time of the adoption of this Ordinance, and any use, structure or lot that has been made non-conforming because of the terms of this Ordinance, or any subsequent amendments, may continue subject to the provisions of this Article so long as it remains otherwise lawful. A structure or use that is illegal at the time of the adoption of this Ordinance, remains illegal if it does not conform with each and every requirement of this Ordinance. 
(b)  Burden on Property Owner to Establish Legality. In all cases, the burden of establishing the legality of a non-conformity under the provisions of this Ordinance are upon the property owner of the non-conforming use, structure or lot. 
(c)  Safety Regulations. All police power regulations enacted to promote public health, safety and welfare including, but not limited to, all building, fire and health codes apply to non-conforming structures. 
(Code 1993, § 20-17.2) 
Sec. 30-17.3. - Non-conforming use. 
(a)  Definition of Non-conforming Use. A non-conforming use is the use of land or a structure that, as of the effective date of this Ordinance, is used for purposes not allowed in the zoning district in which it is located. 
(b)  Ordinary Repairs and Maintenance. Normal maintenance and incidental repair may be performed on any structure that is devoted in whole or in part to a non-conforming use, provided it will not create any new non-conformity, increase the degree of non-conformity or increase the bulk of the structure in any manner. 
(c)  Structural Alterations. No structural alterations may be performed on any structure devoted to a non-conforming use, except in the following situations: 
(1)  When the alteration is required by law or is necessary to restore the structure to a safe condition upon the order of any official charged with protecting the public safety. 
(2)  When the alteration is for the purpose of bringing about a conforming use. 
(3)  When the alteration will not create any new non-conformity, increase the degree of any existing non-conformity or increase the bulk of the structure in any manner. 
(d)  Expansion of Use. A non-conforming use of land or a structure may not be expanded, extended, enlarged or increased in intensity. Prohibited activity includes, without limitation: 
(1)  Expansion of any structure devoted entirely to a non-conforming use. 
(2)  An expansion, extension or relocation of a use or its accessory uses to any land area or structure not currently occupied by such non-conforming use. 
(3)  An expansion, extension or relocation of such use, including its accessory uses, within a structure, to any portion of the floor area that was not occupied by such non-conforming use. 
(e)  Relocation. A non-conforming use of land or a structure may not be relocated, in whole or in part, to any other location on the same lot or parcel. The non-conforming use may only be relocated to another lot or parcel if the use conforms to all regulations of the zoning district in which it is relocated, including all use regulations. 
(f)  Change of Use. A non-conforming use may not be changed to any use other than one allowed within the zoning district in which it is located, except that a non-conforming use may be changed to another non-conforming use when reviewed by the Zoning Board of Appeals and approved by the Village Board under the special use provisions of Article 30-5. When such a non-conforming use has been changed, in whole or in part, to an allowed use, the whole or part which has been made to conform may not be changed back to a use that is prohibited. A change of use occurs when an existing non-conforming use has been terminated and another use has commenced. Any change in use in violation of this Ordinance is deemed an abandonment of the previously existing lawful non-conforming use. 
(g)  Discontinuation or Abandonment. 
(1)  If a non-conforming use is discontinued, or the structure that it occupies becomes vacant and remains unoccupied for a continuous period of one hundred eighty (180) days, such use is deemed to be abandoned and may not be reestablished or resumed regardless of the intent to resume or to continue the use. Any subsequent use must comply with all regulations of the zoning district in which such land or structure is located. 
(2)  The period of such discontinuance caused by government action or acts of God are not included in calculating the length of discontinuance for this section. 
(3)  If a non-conforming use is offered for sale or lease but continues to remain occupied and functioning during this period, that period is not included in calculating the length of discontinuance for this section. 
(h)  Damage or Destruction. 
(1)  In the event that any structure that is devoted in whole or in part to a non-conforming use is damaged or destroyed to the extent of fifty percent (50%) or more of its replacement value at that time, then the non-conforming use may not be reestablished or resumed regardless of the intent to resume or to continue the use. Any subsequent use must comply with all regulations of the zoning district in which such land or structure is located. 
(2)  In the event that any structure that is devoted in whole or in part to a non-conforming use is damaged or destroyed to the extent of less than fifty percent (50%) of the replacement value at that time, the structure may be repaired, reconstructed or restored and the non-conforming use continued, provided that no new non-conformities are created and that the existing degree of non-conformity is not increased. A building permit must be obtained for such rebuilding, restoration, repair or reconstruction and construction begun within one hundred eighty (180) days. 
(3)  The replacement value of the structure, which is devoted in whole or in part to a non-conforming use, shall be determined by the use of: 1) construction cost data reports generally accepted in the construction or insurance industry such as that published by research firms concentrating in construction cost data, including but not limited to RS Means Company; 2) the report of a public adjuster estimating replacement and repair cost; or 3) such method as determined reliable by the Village. 
(Code 1993, § 20-17.3) 
Sec. 30-17.4. - Non-conforming structures. 
(a)  Definition of Non-conforming Structure. Structures which at one (1) time conformed to applicable zoning regulations, but because of subsequent amendments to the Ordinance no longer conform to applicable setback, height, lot coverage or other dimensional standards or do not meet other standards of this Ordinance, such as an insufficient number of parking spaces, are considered non-conforming structures. 
(b)  Ordinary Repairs and Maintenance. 
(1)  Normal maintenance and incidental repair may be performed on any non-conforming structure. No repairs or reconstruction are permitted that would create any new non-conformity, increase the degree of any previously existing non-conformity, or increase the bulk of the structure in any manner. 
(2)  A legal, non-conforming porch, stoop or steps attached to a dwelling may be repaired or replaced without obtaining a variation from the provisions of this Ordinance provided that the dimensions and location of the porch, landing or steps, as the case may be, remain unchanged. No variation is required in such case. 
(3)  Paved surfaces, such as driveways, aprons, parking pads, sidewalks and patios, that are non-conforming for impervious surface coverage, may be repaired or replaced without obtaining a variation from the provisions of this Ordinance provided that the dimensions and location of the non-conforming paved surfaces remain unchanged. 
(c)  Structural Alterations. No structural alterations may be performed on any non-conforming structure, except in the following situations: 
(1)  When the alteration is required by law or is necessary to restore the structure to a safe condition upon the order of any official charged with protecting the public safety. 
(2)  When the alteration will result in eliminating or decreasing the nonconformity. 
(3)  When the alteration will not create any new non-conformity or increase the degree of any existing non-conformity. 
(d)  Additions and Enlargements. 
(1)  A structure that is non-conforming with respect to its bulk may not be added to or enlarged with the exception of the following non-conforming structures in Paragraph (2) below. 
(2)  A structure that is non-conforming due to either minimum yard or building height requirements may be added to or enlarged, as qualified in this Paragraph. 
(A)  The structure is one (1) of the following: 
(i)  Single-family dwelling; 
(ii)  Two-unit dwelling; 
(iii)  Structure owned, operated or occupied by the Village; or 
(iv)  Structure owned, operated or occupied by a public school district, public library district or public park district governed by an elected board or commission. 
(B)  The enlargement or alteration meets the following: 
(i)  The enlargement or alteration conforms to the standards of this Ordinance; 
(ii)  The total structure as enlarged or altered does not diminish the total required yard area for the applicable zoning district; and 
(iii)  The property owner or developer secures a building permit for the enlargement or addition. 
(e)  Relocation. A non-conforming structure may not be relocated, in whole or in part, to any other location on the same zoning lot. A non-conforming structure may be relocated to another zoning lot if the structure conforms to all regulations of the zoning district in which it is relocated. 
(f)  Damage or Destruction. 
(1)  In the event that any non-conforming structure is damaged or destroyed to the extent of fifty percent (50%) or more of its replacement value at that time, then the structure may not be restored or rebuilt unless the structure conforms to all regulations of the zoning district in which it is located. 
(2)  When such a structure is damaged or destroyed to the extent of less than fifty percent (50%) of the replacement value at that time, it may be repaired and reconstructed provided that no new non-conformities are created and that the existing degree of non-conformity is not increased. A building permit must be obtained for such rebuilding, restoration, repair or reconstruction and construction begun within one hundred eighty (180) days. 
(3)  The replacement value of the non-conforming structure shall be determined by the use of: 1) construction cost data reports generally accepted in the construction or insurance industry such as that published by research firms concentrating in construction cost data, including but not limited to RS Means Company LLC; 2) the report of a public adjuster estimating replacement and repair cost; or 3) such method as determined reliable by the Village. 
(g)  Intentional Demolition. When a non-conforming structure is to be intentionally demolished and is determined to be new construction as defined in chapter 8, section 8-110(a), definitions, of the Village Code, the structure must conform to all regulations of the Zoning Ordinance. 
(Code 1993, § 20-17.4; Ord. No. 2017-O-59, 10-10-2017) 
Sec. 30-17.5. - Non-conforming lots of record. 
(a)  Individual Lots of Record in Residential Districts. In residential districts, notwithstanding limitations imposed by other provisions of this Ordinance, a single-family dwelling may be erected on a single lot of record that is non-conforming in terms of lot width, lot area or lot depth provided that it meets the following conditions: 
(1)  The owner of that lot, or a related party of the owner of that lot, owns or controls no other contiguous lots. 
(2)  The lot meets all other zoning district bulk requirements. 
(b)  Lots of Record in Residential Districts Owned by Related Parties. If two (2) or more contiguous lots of record are held in common ownership or are owned or controlled by related parties and one (1) or more of the lots does not meet the requirements for lot area or lot width as established by this Ordinance, then the lots of record are considered to be a single undivided parcel for purposes of this Ordinance. No portion of the parcel may be used, transferred or conveyed which does not meet the lot width and lot area requirements established by this Ordinance. No division of the parcel may be made which leaves the remaining lot(s) with lot width or lot area below the requirements of this Ordinance. No building permit will be issued for the use of any lot, or portion of a lot, transferred or conveyed in violation of this Article. 
(c)  Variations. No variation from these restrictions shall be granted unless the property owner can demonstrate that one (1) of the following standards have been met, in addition to the general standards for granting a variation: 
(1)  The lot met the lot area and lot width requirements of the zoning ordinance in effect at the time the owner acquired the lot. 
(2)  Over fifty percent (50%) of the lots within five hundred (500) feet of the lot in question have been developed as individual building sites, containing one (1) principal building or structure each, which do not meet the lot width or lot area requirement for the district in which they are located. 
(3)  The owners of abutting lots refuse to sell or convey, at a fair market price, portions of those lots that could be added to the lot in order to make it meet the area and width requirements without reducing the lot area, lot width, and yards required by this Ordinance for any such abutting lot. 
(Code 1993, § 20-17.5) 
Sec. 30-17.6. - Non-conforming signs. 
(a)  No non-conforming sign may be relocated wholly or in part to any other location on the same or any other lot, unless the entire sign thereafter conforms to all regulations of the zoning district in which the sign is relocated. 
(b)  No non-conforming sign may be altered or enlarged in a way that increases the non-conformity of the sign. This does not include normal maintenance and cleaning or changing of copy on a changeable copy sign. 
(c)  In the event that any non-conforming sign is damaged or destroyed to the extent of more than fifty percent (50%) of the fair market value of the sign immediately prior to the damage, the sign may not be restored or repaired unless it thereafter conforms to all applicable regulations for the district. 
(Code 1993, § 20-17.6) 
Sec. 30-17.7. - Non-conforming fences. 
(a)  No non-conforming fence may be repaired or replaced unless the entire fence thereafter conforms to all regulations of this Ordinance. The replacement of one (1) or more posts, one (1) or more sections, and/or the replacement of more than fifty percent (50%) of the slats within a section of fencing shall constitute a structural repair. 
(Code 1993, § 20-17.7) 
ARTICLE 30-18. - ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 30-18.1. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Enforcement. This Ordinance is enforced by the Zoning Administrator. The Zoning Administrator may secure the assistance of the Village Attorney to seek an injunction, abatement or other appropriate actions to enjoin, abate, or stop any violation of this Ordinance. At times, the aid of the Police Department may be sought to enforce this Ordinance. The property owner charged with the violation may be held responsible for any legal expenses incurred by the Village. 
(b)  Penalties. Any person, firm or corporation, who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with, or who resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of this Ordinance, upon conviction, will be fined for each offense. Each day that a violation continues constitutes a separate offense for the purposes of the penalties and remedies available to the Village. The accumulation of penalties for violations, but not the obligation for payment for violations already committed, will cease upon correction of the violation. 
(c)  Fines. Each violation, and each day that such violation continues, is subject to the minimum and maximum fines established by the State of Illinois. 
(Code 1993, § 20-17.8) 
APPENDIX A. - PLAZA DEL LAGO LOCAL SIGN ORDINANCE 
1.  RELATIONSHIP TO ARTICLE 30-16. 
    All provisions regulating signage as established by Article 30-16 of Chapter 20 [appendix A, Zoning Ordinance,] of this Code shall apply to Plaza del Lago except to the extent they are modified herein. 
2.  DEFINITIONS. 
    Arcade. Building C as depicted in Figure Appendix A-1: Plaza Del Lago Map, which is attached to and made a part of this ordinance. 
    Arch Sign. A wood sign suspended from the archway of Building D which is not illuminated and does not exceed seventy-two (72) inches in length or twenty (20) inches in height. 
    Development Signs. Ground, wall or arch signs which are erected by the Owner to identify the shopping center, or which direct persons to various businesses or parking areas within the shopping center. 
    Owner. Plaza del Lago, LLC, the owner of Plaza del Lago, or its successors in interest. 
3.  BUILDING IDENTIFICATION. 
    Sign regulations are herein established for activities in each building as depicted in Figure Appendix A-1 through Figure Appendix A-8, which are attached hereto and made a part of this Ordinance. 
4.  GENERAL ALLOWANCES. 
A.  All signs may be illuminated according to Article 30-16 of the Zoning Ordinance, unless otherwise noted in this appendix. 
B.  When a tenant space demising or consolidation effects the Local Sign Ordinance the owner shall be responsible for initiating an update to the Local Sign Ordinance within three (3) months of the action. 
C.  A tenant may display a projecting sign instead of a wall sign anywhere a wall sign is allowed per section [20-16.10.g] 16.10.G (Projecting Signs) of this article. 
5.  LIMITATION ON DISPLAY OF SIGNS. 
    Signs displayed by activities within Plaza del Lago are limited to the following: 
A.  Activities in Building A, may display one of the following signs per building frontage, where that frontage has storefront windows: 
1.  For all frontages except the frontage parallel to Sheridan Road, a wall sign may be display within the signable area, not to exceed one-and-one-half (1 1/2) feet by ten (10) feet in dimension or 60% coverage of the signable area, whichever is smaller. 
2.  An activity in space 1 with frontage parallel to Sheridan Road may display a projecting blade sign as follows: 
a.  12-square foot maximum surface area. 
b.  4-foot maximum projection from wall. 
c.  8-foot minimum clearance above grade. 
d.  Either externally illuminated or internally illuminated by an LED source with push-thru letters. 
e.  Preclude the use of awnings along the Sheridan Road frontage. 
3.  Activities in spaces 1 through 5 may display canopy or awning signs in accordance with Section [20-16.10.(b)] 16.10.B. (Awnings). Valance lettering on canopies and awnings may include a logo. 
B.  Activities in Building B, may display one (1) of the following signs per building frontage, where that frontage has storefront windows: 
1.  A wall sign erected within the signable area, not to exceed one-and-one-half (1 1/2) feet by ten (10) feet in dimension or sixty percent (60%) coverage of the signable area, whichever is smaller. Wall signs facing 10th Street shall not be illuminated. 
2.  Canopy or awning signs in accordance with Section 30-16.10.(b) (Awnings). Valance lettering on canopies and awnings may include a logo. 
C.  Activities located in Building C (Arcade) may not display any exterior signage. This limitation does not apply to Development Signs, which are regulated by Section 7 of these regulations. 
D.  Activities located in Building D may display the following signs: 
1.  Activities located in spaces 23 through 30 of Building D may display one (1) of the following: 
a.  A non-illuminated or illuminated arch sign not to exceed seventy-two (72) inches in length by twenty (20) inches in height as depicted in Figure Appendix A-9: Arch Sign or 
b.  A permanent window sign in accordance with the regulations of [Section] 20-16.10.(k) (Window Signs - Permanent). Such signs shall not be illuminated. 
c.  An activity located in space 31 of Building D may display an illuminated wall sign in accordance with Section 30-16.10.(j) (Wall Signs). 
d.  An activity located in space 31A of Building D may display an illuminated sign over the westerly most window of the north facade. The dimensions of the sign shall not exceed one hundred eighty (180) inches in length by forty (40) inches in height. In addition, the activity may display a non-illuminated arch sign in front of their entrance. 
e.  Wall signs facing Westerfield Drive and 10th Street are prohibited. 
E.  Activities in Building E may display wall signs in accordance with the following regulations: 
1.  An activity in space 32 may erect an illuminated wall sign five (5) feet tall by fourteen and one-half (14 1/2) feet wide with letters three and one-half (3 1/2) feet high within the white stucco area which is an architectural detail of the north facade as depicted in Figure Appendix A-10: Unit 32 Sign. 
2.  An activity in space 33 may erect a wall sign not to exceed three and one-half (3 1/2) feet in height and twelve (12) feet in length, or sixty percent (60%) of the signable area, whichever is less. 
3.  An activity in space 34 may erect a wall sign on the north and east facades of the building. Such signs shall not exceed one and one-half (1 1/2) feet in height and eight (8) feet in length, or sixty percent (60%) coverage of the signable area, whichever is less. 
4.  Wall signs facing Westerfield Drive and 10th Street are prohibited. 
F.  Activities in Building F may display wall signs in accordance with the following regulations: 
1.  An activity in space 35 may display one (1) wall sign on each of the east and north storefronts. Such signs shall not exceed three (3) feet in height by twelve (12) feet in length. 
2.  An activity in space 36 may display one (1) wall sign on the east storefront. Such sign shall not exceed thirty percent (30%) coverage of the signable area which shall be measured for Building F, space 36 without limitation by the existing medallions. 
3.  An activity in space 37 may display one (1) wall sign on each of the east and south storefronts. The east facing sign shall not exceed three (3) feet in height by sixteen (16) feet in length. The south facing sign shall not exceed twenty (20) square feet in area and lettering and logos shall not exceed twenty-four (24) inches in height. No sign facing Westerfield Drive shall be illuminated. 
G.  Activities in Building G may display wall and valance signs with the following regulations: 
1.  One (1) wall sign per building frontage not to exceed twenty (20) square feet in area and lettering and logos shall not exceed twenty-four (24) inches in height. No sign facing north or west shall be illuminated. 
2.  Lettering on valance signs shall not exceed five (5) inches in height. 
6.  TEMPORARY SIGNS. 
    Temporary windows signs may be erected after prior approval and at the sole discretion of the owner. However, the coverage of such signs is limited to thirty percent (30%) of the window area. 
7.  DEVELOPMENT SIGNS. 
    The owner may display the following development signs to identify Plaza del Lago and its tenants, and to direct persons through the parking area: 
A.  Identification Signage - Signs located at or near an entrance identifying the shopping center are permitted as follows: 
1.  A sign in accordance with the wall sign coverage limitations of Section 30-16.10.(j)(7) as depicted in Figure Appendix A-11: Identification Sign in lieu of the additional informational ground signs that would be permitted with sufficient frontage under Section 30-16.10.(d). 
2.  A halo-lit sign over the 10th Street entrance may be displayed. The sign shall be metal and installed upon a brick column on each side of the driveway. A minimum clearance of fourteen (14) feet is required from the driveway surface to the bottom of the sign. The sign lettering shall be no taller than eighteen (18) inches. 
3.  For all new Plaza identification signage, design drawings, and color and material samples shall be submitted to the Appearance Review Commission for approval. 
B.  Directional Signage - As many directional signs as needed to guide persons throughout the main parking area as well as to the parking areas along Westerfield, north parking lot and arcade shops, containing an arrow and messages similar to "Arcade Shops and Parking," provided the sign shall not exceed seven and one-half (7 1/2) square feet in area as depicted in Figure Appendix A-12: Directional Sign. 
C.  Directory Signage - Signs listing the tenants of Plaza del Lago and their location are permitted at various locations and sizes as follows: 
1.  Two (2) multi-tenant wall signs up to four-point-eight (4.8) square feet located at each end of the canopy of building D, as shown in Figure Appendix A-13: Building D Directory Sign. 
2.  One (1) multi-tenant wall sign up to fifty-five-point-five (55.5) Square feet located at the southeast corner of building B, as shown in Figure Appendix A-14: SE Corner of Building B. 
3.  Three (3) multi-tenant wall signs up to thirteen-point-eighty-eight (13.88) square feet located on buildings A, F, and G, as shown in Figure Appendix A-15: Building F Directory Sign. 
4.  One (1) multi-tenant wall sign up to eleven-point-twenty-three (11.23) square feet located on the north side of building C, as shown in Figure Appendix A-16: Building C Directory Sign. 
5.  One (1) multi-tenant wall sign up to three-point-sixty-eight (3.68) square feet located at each end of building C, as shown in Figure Appendix A-17: Building C Directory Sign. 
FIGURE APPENDIX A-1: PLAZA DEL LAGO MAP 

FIGURE APPENDIX A-2: BUILDING A 

FIGURE APPENDIX A-3: BUILDING B 

FIGURE APPENDIX A-4: BUILDING C 

FIGURE APPENDIX A-5: BUILDING D 

FIGURE APPENDIX A-6: BUILDING E 

FIGURE APPENDIX A-7: BUILDING F 

FIGURE APPENDIX A-8: BUILDING G 

FIGURE APPENDIX A-9: ARCH SIGN 

FIGURE APPENDIX A-10: UNIT 32 SIGN 

FIGURE APPENDIX A-11: IDENTIFICATION SIGN 

FIGURE APPENDIX A-12: DIRECTIONAL SIGN 

FIGURE APPENDIX A-13: BUILDING D DIRECTORY SIGN 

FIGURE APPENDIX A-14: SE CORNER OF BUILDING B 

FIGURE APPENDIX A-15: BUILDING F DIRECTORY SIGN 

FIGURE APPENDIX A-16: BUILDING C DIRECTORY SIGN 

FIGURE APPENDIX A-17: BUILDING C DIRECTORY SIGN 

(Code 1993, app. A; Ord. No. 2017-O-9, 2-14-2017) 
APPENDIX B. - EDENS PLAZA LOCAL SIGN ORDINANCE 
1.  RELATIONSHIP TO ARTICLE 30-16. 
    All provisions regulating signage as established by Article 30-16 of Chapter 20 [appendix A, Zoning Ordinance,] of this Code shall apply to Edens Plaza except to the extent they are modified herein. 
2.  ALLOWABLE SIGNAGE. 
    A tenant may erect the following signage based upon the square footage occupied. 
A.  100,000 square feet or more: 
1.  One (1) internally illuminated or backlit wall sign on each exterior wall of the premises in which the tenant is located; 
2.  The signable area on each exterior wall shall be as designated in Figure Appendix B-1: Tenant Occupying 100,000 Square Feet Or More; and 
3.  The surface area of all signs including individual letters and logos shall not exceed thirty percent (30%) of the signable area, the aggregate length of all letters shall not exceed sixty-five (65) feet in width, and each individual letter of a sign may not exceed eight (8) feet in height. 
B.  At least 17,500 square feet, but less than 100,000 square feet: 
1.  One (1) internally illuminated wall sign on each exterior wall of the premises in which the tenant is located; 
2.  The signable area on each exterior wall shall be as designated in Figure Appendix B-2: Tenant Occupying At Least 17,500 But Less Than 100,000 Square Feet; and 
3.  The surface area of all signs including individual letters and logos shall not exceed thirty percent (30%) of the signable area, the aggregate length of all letters shall not exceed fifty-eight (58) feet in width, and each individual letter of a sign may not exceed four (4) feet in height; 
4.  The sign shall be centered vertically within the signable area. 
C.  At least 6,000 square feet, but less than 17,500 square feet: 
1.  One (1) internally illuminated wall sign on each exterior wall of the premises in which the tenant is located; 
2.  The signable area on each exterior wall shall be as designated in Figure Appendix B-3: Tenant Occupying At Least 6,000 Square feet But Less Than 17,500 Square Feet; and 
3.  The surface area of all signs including individual letters and logos shall not exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the signable area, the aggregate length of all letters shall not exceed forty (40) feet in width, and each individual letter of a sign may not exceed thirty (30) inches in height; 
4.  The sign shall be centered vertically within the signable area. 
D.  At least 2,500 square feet, but less than 6,000 square feet: 
1.  One (1) internally illuminated wall sign on each exterior wall of the premises in which the tenant is located; 
2.  The signable area on each exterior wall shall be as designated in Figure Appendix B-4: Tenant Occupying At Least 2,500 Square Feet But Less Than 6,000 Square Feet; and 
3.  The surface area of all signs including individual letters and logos shall not exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the signable area, the aggregate length of all letters shall not exceed twenty (20) feet in width, and each individual letter of a sign may not exceed twenty-four (24) inches in height; 
4.  The sign shall be centered vertically within the signable area. 
E.  Less than 2,500 square feet: 
1.  One (1) internally illuminated wall sign on each exterior wall of the premises in which the tenant is located; 
2.  The signable area on each exterior wall shall be as designated in Figure Appendix B-5: Tenant Occupying Less Than 2,500 Square Feet; and 
3.  The surface area of all signs including individual letters and logos shall not exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the signable area, the aggregate length of all letters shall not exceed sixteen (16) feet in width, and each individual letter of a sign may not exceed eighteen (18) inches in height; 
4.  The sign shall be centered vertically within the signable area. 
3.  UNDER-CANOPY SIGN. 
Each tenant of the Plaza is required to purchase from and have installed by a landlord approved source, an under-canopy sign for each entranceway into its respective premises. All under-canopy signs shall be of uniform material, shape and dimension and in conformity to the design and specifications set forth in Figure Appendix B-6: Under-Canopy Sign. 
4.  AWNING SIGNS. 
A tenant occupying a storefront with an existing awning is permitted to display a valance sign on that awning with a maximum letter height of five (5) inches. Only the address, phone number, official business name or one (1) descriptive word shall be displayed. Awnings shall be black, or another single color consistent with the tenant's logo. 
FIGURE APPENDIX B-1: TENANT OCCUPYING 100,000 SQUARE FEET OR MORE 

FIGURE APPENDIX B-2: TENANT OCCUPYING AT LEAST 17,500 SQUARE FEET BUT LESS THAN LESS THAN 100,000 SQUARE FEET 

FIGURE APPENDIX B-3: TENANT OCCUPYING AT LEAST 6,000 SQUARE FEET BUT LESS THAN 17,500 SQUARE FEET 

FIGURE APPENDIX B-4: TENANT OCCUPYING AT LEAST 2,500 SQUARE FEET BUT LESS THAN 6,000 SQUARE FEET 

FIGURE APPENDIX B-5: TENANT OCCUPYING LESS THAN 2,500 SQUARE FEET 

FIGURE APPENDIX B-6: UNDER-CANOPY SIGN 

(Code 1993, app. B) 
APPENDIX C. - WEST LAKE PLAZA LOCAL SIGN ORDINANCE 
1.  RELATIONSHIP TO ARTICLE 30-16. 
    All provisions regulating signage as established by Article 30-16 of Chapter 20 [appendix A, Zoning Ordinance,] of this Code shall apply to West Lake Plaza except to the extent they are modified herein. 
2.  DEFINITION OF SIGNABLE AREA. 
    The signable area on the front facade of any tenant space in West Lake Plaza is the rectangular area bounded by the lighter colored fascia containing integrated raceways as depicted in Figure Appendix C-3: Signable Area. Signable areas shall be limited to the building faces having frontage on Lake Avenue, Skokie Boulevard, or the parking lot. There shall be no signable area on the building face having frontage facing south. 
3.  DISPLAY WITHIN SIGNABLE AREA. 
    All wall signs shall be internally illuminated channel lettering signs displayed within the signable area. The maximum letter height of any sign shall be eighteen (18) inches. Logos and other graphics shall have a maximum height of twenty-four (24) inches. Illuminated channel lettering signs shall be mounted on raceways which may extend to within eighteen (18) inches of the ends of the signable area. 
4.  COLOR OF SIGNS. 
    Wall signs shall have consistency in color and design. The standard color for the sign face shall be Lacryl Color 403-N (White-White). The face of each wall sign may display colors consistent with the brand of the business being advertised where those colors are part of an established identity program. The color of the return of each wall sign shall match the color STO Pearl Ash. 
5.  ILLUMINATION. 
    No sign shall be illuminated between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. unless and to the extent the activity displaying the sign is open for business during those hours. All signs within the PCD-3 district shall be installed with a photocell and a time clock set to be shut off at 11:00 p.m. 
6.  PLAZA SIGNAGE. 
    Plaza identification signage with the letters "W P" will be permitted on the north face of the east sign band of Building 1 and the northwest angled face of Building 2. 
7.  TENANT IDENTIFICATION SIGNAGE. 
    Tenant identification signage is permitted at the intersection of Lake Avenue and Skokie Boulevard (Type 1) and east of the curb cut along Lake Avenue (Type 2) as identified in Figure C-4. 
A.  Type 1 tenant identification signage includes the name of the shopping center and additional tenants. Sign panels will be internally illuminated through white acrylic lettering set behind a routed opaque face. 
1.  The maximum height of the sign shall not exceed 17 feet. 
2.  The masonry base shall be 10 feet in width, by 2' - 8" in depth, by 2' - 6" in height. 
3.  The size of each tenant panel will be as dimensioned in Figure C-1. The font type shall be Optima Bold. 
4.  Type A tenant panels shall have a maximum letter height of 7 inches. 
5.  Type B tenant panels shall have a maximum letter height of 5 inches. 
6.  Names shall be centered vertically and horizontally on panel with a minimum border of 2 inches from edge of text to edge of panel divider. 
B.  Type 2 tenant identification signage includes the name of the shopping center and additional tenants. Sign panels will be internally illuminated through white acrylic lettering set behind a routed opaque face. 
1.  The maximum height of the sign shall not exceed 12 feet. 
2.  The masonry base shall be 10 feet in width, by 2 feet in depth, by 2' - 6" in height. 
3.  The size of each tenant panel will be as dimensioned in Figure C-2. The font type shall be Optima Bold. 
4.  Type B tenant panels shall have a maximum letter height of 5 inches. 
5.  Type C tenant panels shall have a maximum letter height of 6 inches. 
6.  Names shall be centered vertically and horizontally on panel with a minimum border of 2 inches from edge of text to edge of panel divider. 
FIGURE APPENDIX C-1: SIGN TYPE 1 

FIGURE APPENDIX C-2: SIGN TYPE 2 

FIGURE APPENDIX C-3: SIGNABLE AREA 

FIGURE APPENDIX C- 4: SITE PLAN 

(Code 1993, app. C; Ord. No. 2017-O-76, 12-12-2017) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1993 CODE 
    This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1993 Code. Sections of the 1993 Code, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 
1993 Code 
Section Section 
this Code 1-1 1-1 1-2 1-2 1-3 1-3 1-4 1-4 1-5 1-5 1-6 1-6 1-7 1-7 1-8 1-8 1-9 1-9 1-10 1-10 1-11 1-11 1-12.1 1-31 1-12.2 1-32 1-12.3 1-33 1-12.4 1-34 1-12.5 1-35 2-1.1 2-37 2-1.2 2-38 2-1.3 2-39 2-1.4.1 2-40 2-1.4.2 2-41 2-2.1 2-71 2-2.2 2-72 2-2.4 2-73 2-2.5.1 2-105 2-2.5.2.1 2-126 2-2.5.2.2 2-127 2-2.5.2.3 2-128 2-2.5.2.4 2-129 2-2.5.2.5 2-130 2-2.5.4 2-131 2-2.5.5 2-132 2-2.5.6 2-133 2-2.5.7 2-134 2-3.1 2-154 2-3.3 2-163 2-3.2.1 2-155 2-3.2.2 2-156 2-3.2.3 2-157 2-3.2.4 2-158 2-3.2.5 2-159 2-3.2.6 2-160 2-3.2.7 2-161 2-3.2.8 2-162 2-4.1 2-182 2-4.2 2-183 2-4.3 2-184 2-4.4 2-185 2-4.5 2-186 2-4.6 2-187 2-4.7 2-188 2-4.8 2-189 2-4.9 2-190 2-5.1 2-251 2-5.3 2-257 2-5.2.1 2-252 2-5.2.2 2-253 2-5.2.3 2-254 2-5.2.4 2-255 2-5.2.5 2-256 2-7.1 2-278 2-7.2.1 2-279 2-7.2.2 2-280 2-7.2.3 2-281 2-7.2.4 2-282 2-7.2.5 2-283 2-7.2.6 2-284 2-7.2.7 2-285 2-7.2.8 2-286 2-8.1 2-306 2-8.2 2-307 2-8.3 2-308 2-9.1.1 2-335 2-9.1.2 2-336 2-9.1.3 2-337 2-9.2.1 2-363 2-9.2.2 2-364 2-9.2.3 2-365 2-10.1 2-389 2-10.2 2-390 2-10.3 2-391 2-11.1 2-411 2-11.2 2-412 2-11.3 2-413 2-12.1 2-440 2-12.2 2-441 2-12.3 2-442 2-13.1 2-468 2-13.2 2-469 2-13.3 2-470 2-14.1 2-1321 2-14.2 2-1322 2-14.3 2-1323 2-14.4 2-1324 2-14.5 2-1325 2-14.6 2-1326 2-14.7 2-1327 2-14.8 2-1328 2-14.9 2-1329 2-15.1.1 2-494 2-15.1.2 2-495 2-15.1.3 2-496 2-15.2.1 2-516 2-15.2.2 2-517 2-15.2.3 2-518 2-15.2.4 2-519 2-15.2.5 2-520 2-15.2.6 2-521 2-15.3.1 2-551 2-15.3.2 2-552 2-15.3.3 2-553 2-15.3.4 2-554 2-15.3.5 2-555 2-15.3.6 2-556 2-15.3.7 2-557 2-15.4.1 2-578 2-15.4.2 2-579 2-15.5.1 2-607 2-15.5.2 2-608 2-15.6.1 2-635 2-15.6.2 2-636 2-15.7.1 2-661 2-15.7.2 2-662 2-15.9.1 2-720 2-15.9.2 2-721 2-16.1.1 2-766 2-16.1.2 2-767 2-16.1.3 2-768 2.16.11.1 2-1067 2-16.11.2 2-1068 2-16.12.1 2-967 2-16.12.2 2-968 2-16.12.3 2-969 2-16.12.4 2-970 2-16.12.5 2-971 2-16.12.9 2-972 2-16.13.10 2-1011 2-16.13.11 2-1012 2-16.13.12 2-1013 2-16.13.13 2-1014 2-16.13.14 2-1015 2-16.13.15 2-1016 2-16.13.16 2-1017 2-16.13.1 2-1003 2-16.13.2 2-1004 2-16.13.3 2-1005 2-16.13.4 2-1006 2-16.13.5 2-1007 2-16.13.7 2-1008 2-16.13.8 2-1009 2-16.13.9 2-1010 2-16.17.1 2-1090 2-16.17.2 2-1091 2-16.2.1 2-790 2-16.2.2 2-791 2-16.2.3 2-792 2-16.2.4 2-793 2-16.3.1 2-825 2-16.3.2 2-826 2-16.3.3 2-827 2-16.3.4 2-828 2-16.3.5 2-829 2-16.3.9 2-830 2-16.4.1 2-854 2-16.4.2 2-855 2-16.4.3 2-856 2-16.4.4 2-857 2-16.5.1 2-878 2-16.5.2 2-879 2-16.5.3 2-880 2-16.5.4 2-881 2-16.5.5 2-882 2-16.5.9 2-883 2-16.6.1 2-915 2-16.6.2 2-916 2-16.6.3 2-917 2-16.7.1 2-1048 2-16.7.2 2-1049 2-16.8.1 2-938 2-16.8.2 2-939 2-17.1.1 2-1121 2-17.1.2 2-1122 2-17.1.3 2-1123 2-17.1.4 2-1124 2-17.1.5 2-1125 2-17.1.6 2-1126 2-17.1.7 2-1127 2-17.1.8 2-1128 2-17.1.9 2-1129 2-17.1.10 2-1130 2-17.1.11 2-1131 2-17.2.1 2-1156 2-17.2.2 2-1157 2-17.2.3 2-1158 2-17.2.4 2-1159 2-17.2.5 2-1160 2-17.2.6 2-1161 2-17.2.7 2-1162 2-17.2.8 2-1163 2-17.2.9 2-1164 2-17.2.10 2-1165 2-17.2.11 2-1166 2-17.2.12 2-1167 2-18.1 2-1198 2-18.2 2-1199 2-18.3 2-1200 2-18.4 2-1201 2-18.5 2-1202 2-18.6 2-1203 2-19.1 2-1225 2-19.2 2-1226 2-19.3 2-1227 2-19.4 2-1228 2-20 2-1229 2-21.1 2-1247 2-21.2 2-1248 2-21.3 2-1249 2-21.4 2-1250 2-21.5 2-1251 2-22.1 2-1276 2-22.2 2-1277 2-22.3 2-1278 2-22.4 2-1279 2-24.1 2-1302 2-24.2 2-1303 2-24.3 2-1304 2-24.4 2-1305 2-24.5 2-1306 2-24.6 2-1307 2-24.7 2-1308 2-24.8 2-1309 2-24.9 2-1310 2-24.10 2-1311 3-1 12-578 3-2 12-579 3-3 12-580 3-4 12-581 4-1.1 4-1 4-1.2 4-2 4-1.3 4-3 4-2.1 4-25 4-2.2 4-26 4-2.3 4-27 4-2.4 4-28 4-3.1 4-60 4-3.2 4-61 4-3.3 4-62 4-3.4 4-63 4-4.1 4-85 4-4.2 4-86 4-5.1 4-116 4-5.2 4-117 4-5.3 4-118 4-5.4 4-119 4-5.5 4-120 4-6.1 4-139 4-6.2 4-140 4-6.3 4-141 4-7.1 4-166 4-7.2 4-167 4-7.5 4-170 4-7.3 4-168 - 4-169 4-7.4 4-168 4-169 4-8.1 4-194 4-8.2 4-195 4-9.1 4-196 4-9.2 4-197 5-1.1 24-1 5-1.2 24-2 5-2.1 24-3 5-2.2 24-4 5-2.3 24-5 5-2.4 24-6 5-2.5 24-7 5-2.6 24-33 5-2.6.1 24-34 5-2.6.2 24-35 5-2.6.3 24-36 5-2.6.4 24-37 5-2.6.5 24-38 5-2.6.6 24-39 5-2.7.1 24-67 5-2.7.2 24-68 5-2.7.3 24-69 5-2.7.4 24-70 5-2.8.1 24-99 5-2.8.2 24-100 5-2.8.3 24-101 5-2.8.4 24-102 5-3 24-133 5-4.1 24-165 5-4.2 24-166 5-4.4 24-167 5-4.5 24-168 5-4.6 24-169 5-5.1 24-194 5-5.2 24-195 5-5.3 24-196 5-6.1 24-216 5-6.2 24-217 5-6.3 24-218 5-6.4 24-219 5-6.5 24-220 5-6.6 24-221 5-6.7 24-222 5-6.8 24-223 5-6.9 24-224 5-6.10 24-225 5-6.11 24-226 5-6.12 24-227 5-6.13 24-228 5-6.14 24-229 5-6.15 24-230 5-6.16 24-231 5-6.17 24-232 5-6.18 24-233 5-6.19 24-234 5-6.20 24-235 5-7 24-236 5-7.1 24-237 5-7.2 24-238 5-8.1 24-270 5-8.2 24-271 5-8.3 24-272 5-8.4 24-273 5-8.5 24-274 5-8.6 24-275 5-8.7 24-276 5-8.8 24-277 5-8.9 24-278 5-8.10 24-279 5-10.1 24-307 5-10.2 24-308 5-10.3 24-309 5-10.4 24-310 5-10.5 24-311 5-10.6 24-312 5-10.7 24-313 6-1 6-1 6-2.1 6-21 6-2.2 6-22 6-2.3 6-23 6-2.4 6-24 6-2.5 6-25 6-2.6 6-26 6-2.7 6-27 6-2.8 6-28 6-3 6-60 6-4.1 6-79 6-4.2 6-80 6-5.1 6-104 6-5.2 6-105 6-5.3 6-106 6-6.1 6-127 6-6.2 6-128 6-6.3 6-129 6-6.4 6-130 6-6.5 6-131 6-6.6 6-132 6-6.7 6-133 6-6 6-126 6-7.1 6-165 6-7.2 6-166 6-7.3 6-167 6-7.4 6-168 6-7.5 6-169 6-7.6 6-170 6-8.1 6-194 6-8.2 6-195 6-8.3 6-196 6-8.4 6-197 6-8.5 6-198 6-9.1.1 6-249 6-9.1.2 6-250 6-9.1.3 6-251 6-9.2.1 6-281 6-9.2.2 6-282 6-9.2.3 6-283 6-9 6-220 6-10.1.1 6-315 6-10.1.2 6-316 6-10.2.1 6-336 6-10.2.2 6-337 6-10.3.1 6-363 6-10.3.2 6-364 6-10.3.3 6-365 6-10.4.1 6-389 6-10.4.2 6-390 6-10.5.1 6-409 6-10.5.2 6-410 6-10.5.3 6-411 6-10.5.4 6-412 6-10.5.5 6-413 6-10.5.6 6-414 6-10.5.7 6-415 6-10.5.8 6-416 6-10.6.1 6-446 6-10.6.2 6-447 6-10.6.3 6-448 6-10.6.4 6-449 6-10.6.5 6-450 6-11.1 6-469 6-11.2 6-470 6-11.3 6-471 6-11.4 6-472 6-11.5 6-473 6-11.6 6-474 6-11.7 6-475 6-11.8 6-476 6-11.9 6-477 6-11.10 6-478 6-11.11 6-479 6-11.12 6-480 6-11.13 6-481 6-11.14 6-482 6-11.15 6-483 6-11.16 6-484 7-1 22-1 7-2.1 22-21 7-2.2 22-22 7-2.3 22-23 7-2.4 22-24 7-2.5 22-25 7-2.6 22-26 7-3.1 22-56 7-3.2 22-57 7-3.2.1 22-58 7-3.2.2 22-59 7-3.2.3 22-60 7-3.2.4 22-61 7-4 22-62 7-5.1 22-83 7-5.2 22-84 7-5.3 22-85 7-5.4 22-86 7-5.5 22-87 7-5.6 22-88 7-5.7 22-89 7-5.8 22-90 7-6.1 22-109 7-6.2 22-110 7-7.1 22-134 7-7.2 22-135 7-7.3 22-136 7-7.4 22-137 7-7.5 22-138 7-7.6 22-139 7-8.1 22-162 7-8.2 22-163 8-1.1 14-722 8-1.2 14-723 8-1 14-721 8-2 14-724 8-3 14-725 8-4 14-726 8-5 14-727 9-1.1 8-1 9-1.2 8-2 9-1.3 8-3 9-1.4 8-4 9-1.12.1 8-41 9-1.12.2 8-42 9-2.1 8-73 9-2.2 8-74 9-2.3 8-75 9-2.4 8-76 9-2.5 8-77 9-2.6 8-78 9-2.7 8-79 9-2.8 8-80 9-3.1 8-104 9-3.2 8-105 9-3.3 8-106 9-3.3.1 8-107 9-3.3.2 8-108 9-3.3.3 8-109 9-3.3.4 8-110 9-3.4.10 8-241 9-3.4.11 8-242 9-3.4.12 8-243 9-3.4.1 8-134 9-3.4.2.1 8-152 9-3.4.2.3 8-153 9-3.4.3.1 8-175 9-3.4.3.2 8-176 9-3.4.3.3 8-177 9-3.4.4.1 8-208 9-3.4.4.2 8-209 9-3.4.4.3 8-210 9-3.4.4.4 8-211 9-3.4.5 8-212 9-3.4.6 8-213 9-3.4.7 8-214 9-3.4.8 8-215 9-3.4.9.1 8-239 9-3.4.9.2 8-240 9-3.5.1 8-265 9-3.5.2 8-266 9-3.5.3.1 8-296 9-3.5.4.1 8-297 9-3.5.4.2 8-298 9-3.5.5.1 8-299 9-3.5.5.2 8-300 9-3.6.1 8-301 9-3.6.2 8-302 9-3.6.3 8-303 9-3.7.1 8-325 9-3.7.2 8-326 9-3.7.3 8-327 9-3.7.4 8-328 9-3.7.5 8-329 9-3.8.1 8-347 9-3.8.2 8-348 9-3.8.3 8-349 9-3.8.4 8-350 9-3.8.5 8-351 9-3.9.1 8-376 9-3.9.2 8-377 9-3.9.3 8-378 9-3.9.4 8-379 9-3.9.5 8-380 9-3.9.6 8-381 9-3.10 8-382 9-4.1 8-408 9-4.2 8-409 9-4.3 8-412 9-4.4 8-413 9-4.2.1 8-410 9-4.2.2 8-411 9-4.4.1 8-414 9-4.5.1 8-442 9-4.5.2 8-443 9-4.5.3 8-444 9-4.5.4 8-445 9-4.5.5 8-446 9-5, ¶1 8-476 9-5, ¶2 8-477 9-5.1 8-478 9-5.2 8-479 9-5.3 8-480 9-6.1 8-499 9-7.1 8-524 9-7.2 8-525 9-7.3 8-526 9-7.4 8-527 9-7.5 8-528 9-7.6 8-529 9-7.7 8-530 9-7.7.1 8-531 9-7.8 8-532 9-7.9 8-533 9-8.1 8-560 9-8.2 8-561 9-8.3 8-562 9-8.4 8-563 9-9.1 8-590 9-9.2 8-591 9-9.3 8-592 9-9.4 8-593 9-9.5 8-594 9-9.6 8-595 9-9.7 8-596 9-9.8 8-597 9-9.9 8-598 9-10.1 8-630 9-10.2 8-631 9-10.3 8-632 9-10.4 8-633 9-10.5 8-634 9-10.6 8-635 9-10.7 8-636 9-11.1 8-661 9-11.2 8-662 9-11.3 8-663 9-11.4 8-664 9-11.5 8-665 9-12.1 8-689 9-12.2 8-690 9-12.3 8-691 9-13.1 8-711 9-13.2 8-712 9-13.3 8-713 9-13.4 8-714 9-14.1 8-742 9-14.2 8-743 9-14.3 8-770 9-14.4 8-771 9-14.5 8-772 9-14.7 8-824 9-14.8 8-825 9-14.6.1 8-798 9-14.6.2 8-799 9-14.6.3.1 8-822 9-14.6.3.2 8-823 9-15.1 8-844 9-15.2 8-845 9-15.3 8-846 9-15.4 8-847 9-15.5 8-848 9-15.6 8-849 9-15.7 8-850 9-15.8 8-851 9-15.9 8-852 9-15.10 8-853 9-15.11 8-854 9-15.12 8-855 9-15.13 8-856 9-15.14 8-857 9-15.15 8-858 9-16 8-880 9-17 8-881 9-18 8-911 app. 9A, § 200.0 8-941 app. 9A, § 300.0 8-942 app. 9A, § 400.0 8-943 app. 9A, § 500.0 8-944 app. 9A, § 600.0 8-945 app. 9A, § 700.0 8-946 app. 9A, § 800.0 8-947 app. 9A, § 900.0 8-948 app. 9A, § 1000.0 8-949 app. 9A, § 1100.0 8-950 app. 9A, § 1200.0 8-951 app. 9A, § 1300.0 8-952 app. 9A, § 1400.0 8-953 app. 9A, § 1500.0 8-954 app. 9B, § 200.0 8-982 app. 9B, § 300.0 8-983 app. 9B, § 400.0 8-984 app. 9B, § 500.0 8-985 app. 9B, § 600.0 8-986 app. 9B, § 610.0 8-987 app. 9B, § 620.0 8-988 app. 9B, § 630.0 8-989 app. 9B, § 640.0 8-990 app. 9B, § 650.0 8-991 10-1 12-350 10-2.1 12-378 10-2.2 12-379 10-2.3 12-380 10-3 12-381 10-4 12-382 11-1 10-1 11-2 10-2 11-3 10-3 11-4 10-4 11-5 10-5 11-6 10-6 11-7 10-7 11-8 10-8 11-9 10-9 11-10 10-10 11-11 10-11 11-12 10-12 11-13 10-13 11-14 10-14 11-15 10-15 11-16 10-16 11-17 10-17 11-18 10-18 11-19 10-19 11-20 10-20 11-21 10-21 11-22 10-22 11-23 10-23 11-24 10-24 11-25.1 10-52 11-25.2 10-53 11-25.3 10-54 11-25.4 10-55 11-25.5 10-56 11-25.6 10-57 11-25.7 10-58 11-25.8 10-59 11-26 10-60 11-27 10-61 11-28 10-62 11-29 10-63 11-30 10-64 12-1 12-1 12-2 12-2 12-3.1 12-23 12-3.2 12-24 12-3.3 12-25 12-3.4 12-26 12-3.5 12-27 12-4.1 12-58 12-4.2 12-59 12-4.3 12-60 12-4.4 12-61 12-4.5 12-62 12-5.1 12-84 12-5.2 12-84 12-5.3 12-84 12-5.4 12-84 12-5.4.1 12-112 12-5.4.2 12-113 12-5.4.3 12-114 12-5.4.4 12-115 12-5.4.5 12-116 12-5.4.6 12-117 12-5.4.7 12-118 12-5.4.8 12-119 12-5.4.9 12-120 12-5.4.10 12-121 12-5 12-83 12-6 12-141 12-7 12-142 12-8 12-143 - 12-522 12-9 12-144 12-10 12-145 12-11.1 12-174 12-11.2 12-175 12-11.3 12-176 12-11.4 12-177 12-12.1 12-208 12-12.2 12-209 12-12.3 12-210 12-13.1 12-229 12-13.2.1 12-230 12-13.2.2 12-231 12-13.2.3 12-232 12-13.2.4 12-233 12-14 12-234 12-15.1 12-262 12-15.2 12-263 12-16.1 12-290 12-16.2 12-291 12-16.3 12-292 12-17.1 12-318 12-17.2 12-319 12-17.3 12-320 12-17.4 12-321 12-17.5 12-322 12-17.6 12-323 12-18.1 12-351 12-18.2 12-352 12-19.1 12-408 12-19.2 12-409 12-19.3 12-410 12-19.4 12-411 12-20.1 12-436 12-20.2 12-437 12-21.1 12-458 12-21.2 12-459 12-22.1 12-487 12-22.2 12-488 12-23.1 12-515 12-23.2 12-516 12-23.3 12-517 12-23.4 12-518 12-23.5 12-519 12-23.6 12-520 12-23.7 12-521 12-25 12-523 12-26.1 12-555 12-26.2 12-556 12-26.3 12-557 13-1.1 14-2 13-1 14-1 13-2.1 14-23 13-2.2 14-24 13-2.4 14-54 13-2.5 14-55 13-2.6 14-56 13-2.7 14-57 13-2.8 14-58 13-2.3.1 14-52 13-2.3.2 14-53 13-3.1 14-90 13-3.2 14-91 13-3.3 14-92 13-3.4.1 14-113 13-3.4.2 14-114 13-3.4.3 14-115 13-3.4.4 14-116 13-3.5 14-117 13-3.6 14-118 13-3.7 14-119 13-3.8 14-120 13-3.9 14-121 13-3.10 14-122 13-3.11 14-123 13-3.12 14-124 13-3.13 14-125 13-3.14 14-126 13-3.15 14-127 13-3.16 14-128 13-3.17 14-129 13-3.18 14-130 13-3.19 14-131 13-3.20 14-132 13-3.21 14-133 13-3.22 14-134 13-3.23 14-135 13-3.24 14-136 13-3.25 14-137 13-3.26 14-138 13-3.27 14-139 13-3.28 14-140 13-4.1 14-164 13-4.2 14-165 13-4.3 14-166 13-4.5 14-167 13-4.6 14-168 13-4.7 14-169 13-4.8 14-170 13-4.9 14-171 13-4.10 14-172 13-4.11 14-173 13-4.12 14-174 13-4.13 14-175 13-4.14 14-176 13-4.15 14-177 13-4.16 14-178 13-4.17 14-179 13-4.18 14-180 13-5.1 14-199 13-5.2 14-200 13-5.3 14-201 13-5.4 14-202 13-5.5 14-203 13-5.6 14-204 13-5.7 14-205 13-5.8 14-206 13-5.9 14-207 13-5.10 14-208 13-5.11 14-209 13-5.12 14-210 13-5.13 14-211 13-5.14 14-212 13-6.1 14-233 13-6.2 14-234 13-6.3 14-235 13-6.4 14-236 13-6.5 14-237 13-6.6 14-238 13-6.7 14-239 13-7.1 14-257 13-7.2 14-258 13-7.3 14-259 13-7.4 14-260 13-7.5 14-261 13-7.6 14-262 13-7.7 14-263 13-7.8 14-264 13-7.9 14-265 13-7.10 14-266 13-8.1 14-296 13-8.2 14-297 13-8.22 14-458 13-8.23 14-459 13-8.24 14-460 13-8.3 14-298 13-8.4 14-299 13-8.5 14-300 13-8.6 14-301 13-8.7 14-302 13-8.8 14-303 13-8.9 14-304 13-8.10.1 14-327 13-8.10.2 14-328 13-8.11 14-360 13-8.12 14-361 13-8.13 14-362 13-8.13.1 14-363 13-8.14 14-364 13-8.15 14-365 13-8.16 14-366 13-8.17 14-367 13-8.18 14-368 13-8.19 14-369 13-8.19.1 14-370 13-8.19.2 14-371 13-8.19.3 14-372 13-8.19.3.1.1 14-403 13-8.19.3.1.2 14-404 13-8.19.4 14-405 13-8.19.5 14-406 13-8.20.1 14-426 13-8.20.2 14-427 13-8.20.3 14-428 13-8.20.4 14-429 13-8.20.5 14-430 13-8.20.6 14-431 13-8.20.7 14-432 13-8.20.8 14-433 13-8.20.9 14-434 13-8.21.1 14-452 13-8.21.2 14-453 13-8.21.3 14-454 13-8.21.4 14-455 13-8.21.5 14-456 13-8.21.7 14-457 13-9.1 14-489 13-9.2 14-490 13-9.3 14-491 13-9.4 14-492 13-9.5 14-493 13-9.6 14-494 13-9.7 14-495 13-9.8 14-496 13-9.9 14-497 13-9.11 14-498 13-9.12.1. 14-520 13-9.12.2 14-521 13-10.1 14-551 13-10.2 14-552 13-10.3 14-553 13-10.4 14-554 13-10.5 14-555 13-10.6 14-556 13-10.7 14-557 13-10.8 14-558 13-10.9 14-559 13-10.10 14-560 13-10.11 14-561 13-10.12 14-562 13-10.13 14-563 13-11.1 14-590 13-11.2 14-591 13-11.3 14-592 13-11.4 14-593 13-11.5 14-594 13-12.1 14-622 13-12.2 14-623 13-12.3 14-624 13-13, ¶1 14-652 13-13, ¶2 14-653 13-14.1 14-680 13-14.2 14-681 13-14.3 14-682 13-14.3.1 14-683 13-14.3.2 14-684 13-14.3.3 14-685 13-14.4 14-686 13-14.5 14-687 13-14.6 14-688 13-14.7 14-689 13-14.8 14-690 13-14.9 14-691 13-14.10 14-692 13-14.11 14-693 13-14.12 14-694 13-14.13 14-695 13-14.14 14-696 14-1 16-1 14-2.1 16-21 14-2.2 16-22 14-3 16-23 14-4.1 16-50 14-4.2 16-51 14-4.3 16-52 14-4.4 16-53 14-4.5 16-54 14-4.6 16-55 14-4.7 16-56 14-5.1 16-86 14-5.2 16-87 14-5.3 16-88 14-5.4 16-89 14-6 16-90 14-6.1 16-91 14-6.2 16-111 14-6.3 16-112 14-6.4 16-113 14-6.5 16-114 14-6.6 16-115 14-6.7 16-116 14-6.8 16-117 14-7.1 16-148 14-7.2 16-149 14-7.3 16-150 14-7.4 16-151 15-1 18-1 15-2 18-2 15-2.1 18-3 15-2.2 18-4 15-2.3 18-5 15-2.4 18-6 15-2.5 18-7 15-2.5.1 18-8 15-2.5.2 18-9 15-2.6 18-10 15-2.7 18-11 15-2.8 18-12 15-2.9 18-13 15-2.10 18-14 15-2.11 18-15 15-2.12 18-16 16-1 20-1 16-1.1 20-2 16-1.2.1 20-23 16-1.2.2 20-24 16-2 20-52 16-3 20-53 16-4 20-54 16-5 20-55 16-6 20-56 16-7 20-57 16-8 20-58 16-9.1 20-90 16-9.2 20-91 16-9.2.1 20-92 16-9.2.2 20-93 16-9.2.3 20-94 16-9.2.4 20-95 16-9.3 20-96 16-9.3.1 20-97 16-9.3.2 20-98 16-9.3.3 20-99 16-9.4 20-100 16-9.5 20-101 16-9.6 20-102 16-9.7 20-103 16-9.8 20-104 16-10.1 20-122 16-10.2 20-123 16-10.3 20-124 16-10.4 20-125 16-10.5 20-126 16-10.6 20-127 16-10.6.1 20-128 16-10.6.2 20-129 16-10.7 20-130 16-10.8 20-131 16-11 20-132 16-12 20-133 16-12.1 20-134 16-12.2 20-135 16-13.1 20-154 16-13.2 20-155 16-14.1 20-179 16-14.2 20-180 16-15 20-182 16-16.1 20-203 16-16.2 20-204 16-16.3 20-205 16-16.4 20-206 16-16.5 20-207 16-16.6 20-208 16-16.7 20-209 16-16.8 20-210 16-16.9 20-211 16-16.10 20-212 16-16.11 20-213 16-16.12 20-214 16-16.13 20-215 16-16.14 20-216 16-16.15 20-217 16-16.16 20-218 16-16.17 20-219 16-16.18 20-220 16-16.19 20-221 16-16.20 20-222 16-16.21 20-223 16-16.22 20-224 16-16.23 20-225 17-1.1 28-1 17-1.2 28-2 17-1.3 28-3 17-1.4 28-4 17-1.5 28-5 17-1.6 28-6 17-1.7 28-7 17-1.8 28-8 17-2 28-9 17-3.1 28-37 17-3.2 28-38 17-3.3 28-39 17-3.4 28-40 17-3.5 28-41 17-3.6 28-42 17-4.1 28-73 17-4.2 28-74 17-4.3 28-75 17-4.4 28-76 17-4.5 28-77 17-5 28-98 17-5.1 28-125 17-5.1.1 28-126 17-5.1.2 28-127 17-5.1.3 28-128 17-5.1.4 28-129 17-5.1.5 28-130 17-5.1.6 28-131 17-5.1.7 28-132 17-5.1.8 28-133 17-5.3.1 28-165 17-5.3.2 28-166 17-5.3.3 28-167 17-5.3.4 28-168 17-5.3.5 28-169 18-1.1 26-19 18-1.2 26-20 18-1.3.1 26-44 18-1.3.2 26-45 18-1.3.3 26-46 18-1.3.4 26-47 18-2.1 26-68 18-2.2 26-69 18-2.3 26-70 18-2.4 26-71 18-2.5 26-72 18-3.1 26-103 18-3.2 26-104 18-3.3 26-105 18-3.4 26-106 18-3.5 26-107 18-3.6 26-108 18-3.7 26-109 18-3.8 26-110 18-3.9 26-111 18-3.10 26-112 18-4.1 26-138 18-4.2 26-139 18-4.3 26-140 18-4.4 26-141 18-4.5 26-142 18-4.6 26-143 18-4.7 26-144 18-4.8 26-145 18-4.9 26-146 18-4.10 26-147 18-4.11 26-148 18-5.1 26-180 18-5.2 26-181 18-5.3 26-182 18-5.4 26-183 18-5.5 26-184 18-5.6 26-185 18-6.1 26-209 18-6.2 26-210 18-6.3 26-211 18-6.4 26-212 18-6.5 26-213 18-6.6 26-214 18-6.7 26-215 18-7.1 26-239 18-7.2 26-240 18-7.3 26-241 18-7.4 26-242 18-7.5 26-243 18-7.6 26-244 18-7.7 26-245 18-7.8 26-246 18-7.9 26-247 18-7.10 26-248 18-7.11 26-249 18-7.12 26-250 18-7.13 26-251 18-7.14 26-252 18-7.15 26-253 18-7.16 26-254 18-7.17 26-255 18-7.18 26-256 18-7.19 26-257 18-7.20 26-258 18-7.21 26-259 18-7.22 26-260 18-7.23 26-261 18-7.24 26-262 18-7.25 26-263 18-7.26 26-264 18-7.27 26-265 18-7.28 26-266 18-7.29 26-267 18-7.30 26-268 18-7.31 26-269 18-7.32 26-270 18-8.1 26-289 18-8.2 26-290 18-8.3 26-291 18-8.4 26-292 18-8.5 26-293 18-8.6 26-294 18-8.7 26-295 18-8.8 26-296 18-8.9 26-297 18-8.10 26-298 18-8.11 26-299 18-9.1 26-317 18-9.2 26-318 18-9.3 26-319 18-9.4 26-320 20-1.1 30-1.1 20-1.2 30-1.2 20-1.3 30-1.3 20-1.4 30-1.4 20-1.5 30-1.5 20-1.6 30-1.6 20-1.7 30-1.7 20-1.8 30-1.8 20-2.1 30-2.1 20-2.2 30-2.2 20-2.3 30-2.3 20-2.4 30-2.4 20-2.5 30-2.5 20-3.1 30-3.1 20-3.2 30-3.2 20-3.3 30-3.3 20-3.4 30-3.4 20-3.5 30-3.5 20-3.6 30-3.6 20-4.1 30-4.1 20-4.3 30-4.3 20-4.4 30-4.4 20-5.1 30-5.1 20-5.2 30-4.2 - 30-5.2 20-5.3 30-5.3 20-5.4 30-5.4 20-5.5 30-5.5 20-5.6 30-5.6 20-5.7 30-5.7 20-5.8 30-5.8 20-5.9 30-5.9 20-5.10 30-5.10 20-5.11 30-5.11 20-5.12 30-5.12 20-5.13 30-5.13 20-5.14 30-5.14 20-5.15 30-5.15 20-5.16 30-5.16 20-6.1 30-6.1 20-6.2 30-6.2 20-6.3 30-6.3 20-6.4 30-6.4 20-6.5 30-6.5 20-6.6 30-6.6 20-6.7 30-6.7 20-6.8 30-6.8 20-6.9 30-6.9 20-6.10 30-6.10 20-6.11 30-6.11 20-7.1 30-7.1 20-7.2 30-7.2 20-7.3 30-7.3 20-7.4 30-7.4 20-7.5 30-7.5 20-8.1 30-8.1 20-8.2 30-8.2 20-8.3 30-8.3 20-8.4 30-8.4 20-9.1 30-9.1 20-9.2 30-9.2 20-9.3 30-9.3 20-9.4 30-9.4 20-10.1 30-10.1 20-10.2 30-10.2 20-10.3 30-10.3 20-10.4 30-10.4 20-10.5 30-10.5 20-10.6 30-10.6 20-10.7 30-10.7 20-10.8 30-10.8 20-10.9 30-10.9 20-10.10 30-10.10 20-11.1 30-11.1 20-11.2 30-11.2 20-11.3 30-11.3 20-11.4 30-11.4 20-12.1 30-12.1 20-12.2 30-12.2 20-12.3 30-12.3 20-13.1 30-13.1 20-13.2 30-13.2 20-13.3 30-13.3 20-13.4 30-13.4 20-13.5 30-13.5 20-13.6 30-13.6 20-13.7 30-13.7 20-14.1 30-14.1 20-14.2 30-14.2 20-14.3 30-14.3 20-14.4 30-14.4 20-14.5 30-14.5 20-14.6 30-14.6 20-14.7 30-14.7 20-14.8 30-14.8 20-14.9 30-14.9 20-14.10 30-14.10 20-14.11 30-14.11 20-14.12 30-14.12 20-14.13 30-14.13 20-14.14 30-14.14 20-15.1 30-15.1 20-15.2 30-15.2 20-15.3 30-15.3 20-15.4 30-15.4 20-15.5 30-15.5 20-15.6 30-15.6 20-15.7 30-15.7 20-15.8 30-15.8 20-15.9 30-15.9 20-15.10 30-15.10 20-15.11 30-15.11 20-16.1 30-16.1 20-16.2 30-16.2 20-16.3 30-16.3 20-16.4 30-16.4 20-16.5 30-16.5 20-16.6 30-16.6 20-16.7 30-16.7 20-16.8 30-16.8 20-16.9 30-16.9 20-16.10 30-16.10 20-16.11 30-16.11 20-17.1 30-17.1 20-17.2 30-17.2 20-17.3 30-17.3 20-17.4 30-17.4 20-17.5 30-17.5 20-17.6 30-17.6 20-17.7 30-17.7 20-17.8 30-18.1 22-1.1 24-345 22-1.2 24-346 22-1.3 24-347 22-1.4 24-348 22-1.5 24-349 22-1.6 24-350 22-1.7 24-351 22-1.8 24-352 22-1.9 24-353 22-1.10 24-354 22-2 24-355 app. 20-226  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - LEGISLATION 
    This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances which are included herein. Ordinances not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 
Legislation Date Section Section 
this Code Ord. No. 67-O-24 9-19-1967 8-2 Ord. No. 67-O-34 1-2-1968 8-478 Ord. No. 68-O-18 4-16-1968 8-528 - 8-591 - 8-598 - 18-1 Ord. No. 68-O-22 5-21-1968 16-1 Ord. No. 68-O-29 7-2-1968 8-825 Ord. No. 68 O-51 1-7-1969 22-24 Ord. No. 68-O-51 1-7-1969 22-110 Ord. No. 69-O-15 4-15-1969 18-10 Ord. No. 69-O-41 11-18-1969 12-580 Ord. No. 70-O-1 1-6-1970 20-94 Ord. No. 70-O-2 2-17-1970 2-39 - 2-134 - 2-190 - 2-251 - 2-257 - 2-306 - 2-440 - 2-442 - 2-468 - 2-470 Ord. No. 70-O-18 12-5-1970 12-292 Ord. No. 70-O-21 12-15-1970 20-58 Ord. No. 71-O-10 3-16-1971 14-372 - 14-405 Ord. No. 71-O-32 12-7-1971 8-480 Ord. No. 72-O-2 1-18-1972 2-391 - 8-591 Ord. No. 72-O-3 1-18-1972 8-73 - 8-528 - 8-598 - 18-1 Ord. No. 72-O-39 1-18-1972 2-766 - 2-767 Ord. No. 72-O-32 12-5-1972 2-154 - 2-163 Ord. No. 73-O-11 3-20-1973 8-477 Ord. No. 73-O-21 5-15-1973 8-596 Ord. No. 74-O-3 1-2-1974 14-202 Ord. No. 74-O-6 1-15-1974 14-653 Ord. No. 74-O-27 7-16-1974 10-64 Ord. No. 74-O-36 9-10-1974 2-766 Ord. No. 74-O-37 11-5-1974 10-7 Ord. No. 75-O-3 1-7-1975 10-2 - 10-9 - 10-11 - 10-21 Ord. No. 75-O-5 1-22-1975 10-9 - 10-21 Ord. No. 75-O-44 11-18-1975 14-58 Ord. No. 76-O-2 1-20-1976 10-11 Ord. No. 76-O-24 6-15-1976 26-110 Ord. No. 76-O-33 8-3-1976 10-9 Ord. No. 76-O-37 8-3-1976 10-9 Ord. No. 76-O-42 9-7-1976 14-498 Ord. No. 76-O-53 12-7-1976 12-23 - 12-24 Ord. No. 76-O-55 12-21-1976 20-131 Ord. No. 77-O-1 1-4-1977 12-144 Ord. No. 77-O-37 9-20-1977 14-1 - 14-489 - 14-490 - 14-492 - 14-498 9-24-1977 14-498 Ord. No. 78-O-12 3-7-1978 10-7 Ord. No. 78-O-15 3-21-1978 14-23 Ord. No. 78-O-38 7-18-1978 14-458 Ord. No. 78-O-26 8-1-1978 14-727 Ord. No. 78-O-27 8-1-1978 Ord. No. 78-O-29 8-1-1978 16-22 Ord. No. 78-O-32 8-15-1978 12-352 Ord. No. 78-O-15 1-2-1979 1-2 Ord. No. 78-O-51 1-2-1979 2-131 Ord. No. 79-O-1 1-16-1979 22-62 Ord. No. 79-O-5 2-20-1979 10-11 Ord. No. 79-O-4 3-6-1979 18-5 Ord. No. 79-O-15 4-3-1979 14-428 Ord. No. 79-O-17 4-3-1979 14-591 Ord. No. 79-O-11 4-3-1979 2-37 - 2-71 Ord. No. 79-O-23 6-5-1979 10-11 Ord. No. 79-O-57 11-16-1979 10-11 Ord. No. 79-O-65 12-18-1979 1-7 Ord. No. 81-O-5 1-6-1981 14-623 Ord. No. 81-O-10 3-17-1981 8-107 Ord. No. 81-O-40 12-1-1981 8-329 Ord. No. 81-O-47 12-15-1981 6-1 - 6-106 Ord. No. 82-O-38 0-7-1982 2-131 Ord. No. 82-O-15 4-6-1982 14-498 Ord. No. 82-O-28 6-15-1982 10-2 - 10-7 - 10-9 - 10-11 Ord. No. 82-O-36 9-7-1982 18-8 Ord. No. 82-O-39 9-7-1982 12-437 - 12-459 - 12-488 Ord. No. 82-O-47 9-21-1982 10-11 Ord. No. 82-O-57 10-5-1982 14-653 Ord. No. 82-O-60 11-2-1982 2-128 - 2-130 Ord. No. 82-O-68 12-21-1982 10-11 Ord. No. 83-O-7 3-15-1983 10-2 Ord. No. 83-O-16 4-19-1983 8-476 - 8-477 Ord. No. 83-O-33 7-5-1983 8-480 Ord. No. 83-O-37 7-19-1983 18-4 Ord. No. 83-O-50 9-6-1983 12-291 Ord. No. 83-O-51 9-6-1983 20-95 Ord. No. 83-O-67 11-1-1983 8-326 - 8-329 Ord. No. 83-O-69 12-6-1983 10-19 Ord. No. 83-O-70 11-15-1983 18-9 Ord. No. 83-O-71 11-15-1983 10-11 Ord. No. 83-O-74 10-11 Ord. No. 83-O-76 10-11 Ord. No. 84-O-6 3-6-1984 14-90 Ord. No. 84-O-4 3-20-1984 10-2 10-9 10-9 Ord. No. 84-O-35 9-18-1984 10-11 Ord. No. 84-O-41 10-16-1984 10-9 Ord. No. 85-O-5 3-5-1985 14-298 - 14-299 - 14-301 - 14-302 - 14-365 - 14-367 - 14-623 Ord. No. 85-O-7 4-16-1985 8-105 - 8-499 - 8-524 - 8-529 Ord. No. 85-O-29 7-2-1985 2-126 Ord. No. 85-O-31 7-2-1985 10-24 Ord. No. 85-O-41 9-17-1985 14-238 Ord. No. 85-O-50 11-19-1985 8-108 Ord. No. 85-O-53 1-21-1986 26-299 Ord. No. 86-O-13 3-18-1986 10-9 Ord. No. 86-O-34 6-24-1986 12-409 Ord. No. 86-O-41 7-1-1986 16-51 - 16-53 - 16-55 Ord. No. 86-O-33 7-15-1986 2-519 Ord. No. 86-O-51 9-16-1986 2-441 Ord. No. 86-O-52 9-22-1986 2-469 Ord. No. 86-O-59 10-21-1986 10-20 - 10-23 - 10-60 - 10-62 Ord. No. 86-O-65 11-18-1986 10-57 - 10-58 Ord. No. 87-O-5 1-20-1987 14-299 Ord. No. 87-O-6 2-3-1987 14-521 Ord. No. 87-O-29 6-2-1987 8-110 Ord. No. 87-O-39 8-4-1987 14-54 Ord. No. 87-O-40 8-4-1987 14-623 Ord. No. 87-O-58 11-3-1987 14-1 - 14-368 Ord. No. 88-O-1 1-19-1988 26-180 - 26-182 - 26-183 - 26-293 Ord. No. 88-O-6 2-2-1988 2-916 Ord. No. 88-O-12 3-1-1988 8-665 Ord. No. 88-O-19 5-17-1988 12-291 Ord. No. 88-O-35 8-2-1988 14-53 Ord. No. 88-O-37 8-2-1988 18-5 Ord. No. 88-O-34 9-6-1988 26-246 Ord. No. 88-O-50 12-6-1988 2-554 Ord. No. 89-O-1 1-17-1989 10-11 Ord. No. 89-O-11 3-7-1989 1-7 Ord. No. 89-O-19 4-18-1989 22-89 Ord. No. 89-O-31 7-1-1989 22-22 7-5-1989 22-21 Ord. No. 89-O-40 8-15-1989 14-453 - 14-454 - 14-455 Ord. No. 89-O-31 9-15-1989 22-23 Ord. No. 89-O-68 12-5-1989 8-772 Ord. No. 90-O-6 2-6-1990 10-11 Ord. No. 90-O-32 5-15-1990 26-320 Ord. No. 90-O-38 6-5-1990 22-1 - 22-109 - 22-110 - 22-139 Ord. No. 90-O-49 7-2-1990 10-11 Ord. No. 90-O-73 11-6-1990 16-22 Ord. No. 90-O-79 11-20-1990 16-117 Ord. No. 90-O-86 12-4-1990 8-105 - 8-476 - 8-499 - 8-524 - 8-529 - 8-530 - 8-532 Ord. No. 90-O-89 12-18-1990 14-53 Ord. No. 90-O-90 12-18-1990 26-180 - 26-181 - 26-182 Ord. No. 90-O-91 12-18-1990 10-11 Ord. No. 90-O-96 1-2-1991 8-106 - 8-110 Ord. No. 91-O-7 2-19-1991 10-11 Ord. No. 91-O-12 3-5-1991 2-553 Ord. No. 91-O-18 3-19-1991 2-791 - 2-1067 Ord. No. 91-O-30 4-16-1991 14-490 - 14-492 Ord. No. 91-O-37 5-21-1991 8-480 Ord. No. 91-O-39 6-18-1991 10-11 Ord. No. 91-O-48 7-16-1991 16-114 Ord. No. 91-O-53 8-6-1991 14-428 Ord. No. 91-O-74 11-5-1991 14-623 Ord. No. 91-O-73 11-5-1991 10-11 Ord. No. 91-O-74 11-5-1991 12-352 Ord. No. 92-O-3 1-21-1992 8-850 Ord. No. 92-O-7 1-21-1992 10-11 Ord. No. 92-O-17 3-3-1992 16-112 Ord. No. 92-O-16 3-3-1992 8-563 Ord. No. 92-O-46 5-19-1992 16-56 Ord. No. 92-O-46 5-19-1992 20-180 Ord. No. 92-O-41 6-16-1992 2-1167 Ord. No. 92-O-67 8-4-1992 2-915 - 2-916 - 2-917 Ord. No. 92-O-68 9-1-1992 2-791 Ord. No. 92-O-66 10-20-1992 10-2 - 10-2 - 10-59 - 10-64 Ord. No. 92-O-90 10-20-1992 26-215 Ord. No. 92-O-85 11-17-1992 12-318 - 12-319 - 12-323 Ord. No. 92-O-97 12-1-1992 1-33 Ord. No. 92-O-110 12-15-1992 2-105 Ord. No. 93-O-01 1-26-1993 18-4 - 18-16 Ord. No. 93-O-1 1-26-1993 8-106 Ord. No. 93-O-5 2-23-1993 2-337 - 22-24 - 22-86 Ord. No. 93-O-26 4-27-1993 8-691 Ord. No. 93-O-37 6-22-1993 2-551 - 2-552 - 2-555 Ord. No. 93-O-38 6-22-1993 2-516 - 2-517 - 2-520 Ord. No. 93-O-51 7-27-1993 14-114 Ord. No. 93-O-23 7-27-1993 24-354 - 24-355 Ord. No. 93-O-50 7-27-1993 26-290 Ord. No. 93-O-56 7-27-1993 14-723 Ord. No. 93-O-85 11-9-1993 14-622 Ord. No. 93-O-88 11-23-1993 18-5 Ord. No. 93-O-67 12-1-1993 26-291 Ord. No. 94-O-5 3-13-1994 24-1 - 24-2 - 24-4 - 24-5 - 24-6 - 24-7 - 24-133 - 24-165 - 24-166 - 24-167 - 24-168 - 24-169 - 24-194 - 24-195 - 24-196 Ord. No. 94-O-5 3-13-1994 24-3 Ord. No. 94-O-26 4-26-1994 14-53 Ord. No. 94-O-36 6-15-1994 2-554 Ord. No. 94-O-42 7-12-1994 14-453 - 14-454 - 14-455 Ord. No. 94-O-61 9-13-1994 10-9 - 10-9 - 10-9 Ord. No. 94-O-65 9-13-1994 1-31 - 10-54 - 12-523 - 14-367 Ord. No. 94-O-67 9-13-1994 1-2 Ord. No. 94-O-52 10-11-1994 12-521 Ord. No. 94-O-90 11-8-1994 8-772 Ord. No. 94-O-92 12-13-1994 10-19 Ord. No. 94-O-94 12-13-1994 8-106 Ord. No. 94-O-116 1-10-1995 2-105 Ord. No. 95-O-12 2-28-1995 10-9 - 10-11 Ord. No. 95-O-31 4-25-1995 10-11 Ord. No. 95-O-32 5-9-1995 10-11 Ord. No. 95-O-33 5-9-1995 14-54 Ord. No. 95-O-34 5-9-1995 2-133 Ord. No. 95-O-58 6-27-1995 24-39 Ord. No. 95-O-71 9-12-1995 26-291 Ord. No. 94-O-75 9-13-1995 12-121 Ord. No. 95-O-88 11-28-1995 8-105 - 8-476 - 8-499 - 8-524 - 8-529 - 8-530 Ord. No. 95-O-71 1-1-1996 26-292 Ord. No. 95-O-112 1-9-1996 2-554 Ord. No. 96-O-7 2-13-1996 2-188 Ord. No. 96-O-8 2-13-1996 22-1 - 22-1 - 22-1 - 22-1 - 22-162 - 22-163 Ord. No. 96-O-11 4-9-1996 8-110 - 8-824 - 10-23 - 10-57 - 10-60 - 12-320 - 12-352 - 12-411 - 12-437 - 12-459 - 12-488 - 12-520 - 14-90 - 14-91 - 14-264 - 14-430 - 14-727 - 16-56 - 16-117 - 20-94 - 22-139 - 24-195 - 24-355 - 26-269 Ord. No. 96-O-20 4-23-1996 26-246 Ord. No. 96-O-29 5-28-1996 12-291 Ord. No. 96-O-26 6-11-1996 8-771 - 8-825 Ord. No. 96-O-40 6-11-1996 24-37 Ord. No. 96-O-59 8-27-1996 10-5 - 10-60 Ord. No. 96-O-69 8-27-1996 16-116 - 16-117 Ord. No. 96-O-51 10-8-1996 8-108 - 8-302 - 8-326 - 20-2 - 20-52 - 20-58 - 20-104 - 20-123 - 20-133 - 20-134 - 20-135 - 20-179 - 20-180 - 20-182 Ord. No. 96-O-52 10-8-1996 26-70 - 26-71 - 26-72 - 26-106 - 26-107 - 26-183 - 26-291 - 26-292 Ord. No. 96-O-54 10-8-1996 10-9 - 10-9 Ord. No. 96-O-104 12-10-1996 10-11 Ord. No. 96-O-112 1-14-1997 2-105 - 2-1229 Ord. No. 97-O-1 2-11-1997 8-851 Ord. No. 97-O-9 2-25-1997 24-2 Ord. No. 97-O-10 2-25-1997 12-210 Ord. No. 97-O-12 2-25-1997 20-99 Ord. No. 97-O-2 3-18-1997 14-520 Ord. No. 97-O-46 6-24-1997 10-11 Ord. No. 97-O-66 9-9-1997 16-89 Ord. No. 97-O-70 9-23-1997 28-1 - 28-2 - 28-3 - 28-5 - 28-6 - 28-7 - 28-9 Ord. No. 97-O-27 10-14-1997 24-1 - 24-99 - 24-100 - 24-101 - 24-102 Ord. No. 97-O-75 10-14-1997 8-326 - 8-326 - 8-327 - 8-328 - 20-122 - 20-123 - 20-125 Ord. No. 97-O-80 10-14-1997 2-915 Ord. No. 97-O-87 10-28-1997 8-106 Ord. No. 97-O-100 11-11-1997 8-529 Ord. No. 97-O-99 11-11-1997 20-122 - 20-123 - 20-124 - 20-125 - 20-126 - 20-127 - 20-128 - 20-129 - 20-130 Ord. No. 98-O-22 4-28-1998 14-1 - 14-367 - 14-623 Ord. No. 98-O-32 4-28-1998 10-11 Ord. No. 98-O-33 4-28-1998 10-11 Ord. No. 98-O-35 5-12-1998 26-145 Ord. No. 98-O-36 5-12-1998 10-11 Ord. No. 98-O-38 5-26-1998 2-336 - 2-364 - 2-608 - 16-112 - 16-113 - 20-2 - 20-56 - 20-91 - 20-98 - 20-99 - 20-100 - 20-101 - 20-102 - 20-104 - 20-122 - 20-123 - 20-125 - 20-126 - 20-127 - 20-128 - 20-129 - 20-130 - 20-135 - 26-44 - 26-47 - 26-68 - 26-72 - 26-103 - 26-105 - 26-106 - 26-110 - 26-111 - 26-138 - 26-141 - 26-142 - 26-213 - 26-245 - 26-246 - 26-257 - 26-258 - 26-265 - 26-268 - 26-318 - 26-319 Ord. No. 98-O-49 6-23-1998 26-180 - 26-290 Ord. No. 98-O-64 7-28-1998 6-165 - 6-166 - 6-167 - 6-168 - 6-169 - 6-170 Ord. No. 98-O-68 8-25-1998 24-216 - 24-217 - 24-218 - 24-219 - 2-220 - 2-221 - 2-222 - 2-223 - 2-224 - 2-225 - 2-226 - 2-227 - 2-228 - 2-229 - 2-230 - 2-231 - 2-232 - 2-233 - 2-234 - 2-235 Ord. No. 98-O-102 12-8-1998 2-518 Ord. No. 98-O-99 12-8-1998 8-302 - 8-477 - 8-525 Ord. No. 99-O-6 2-9-1999 2-519 2-554 Ord. No. 99-O-14 3-9-1999 10-11 Ord. No. 99-O-15 3-9-1999 10-2 - 10-9 Ord. No. 99-O-17 3-23-1999 6-194 - 6-195 - 6-196 - 6-197 - 6-198 Ord. No. 99-O-22 3-23-1999 2-1198 - 2-1199 - 2-1200 - 2-1201 - 2-1202 - 2-1203 Ord. No. 99-O-34 4-27-1999 24-4 Ord. No. 99-O-50 6-8-1999 16-115 Ord. No. 99-O-51 6-22-1999 2-1225 - 2-1227 - 2-1228 Ord. No. 99-O-72 9-28-1999 14-328 Ord. No. 99-O-74 9-28-1999 14-180 - 14-623 Ord. No. 2000-O-1 1-25-2000 14-680 - 14-681 - 14-682 - 14-683 - 14-684 - 14-685 - 14-686 - 14-687 - 14-688 - 14-689 - 14-690 - 14-691 - 14-692 - 14-693 - 14-694 - 16-695 - 14-696 Ord. No. 2000-O-11 4-25-2000 8-499 Ord. No. 2000-O-18 3-28-2000 14-53 Ord. No. 2000-O-65 10-24-2000 8-880 8-941 - 8-942 - 8-943 - 8-944 - 8-945 - 8-946 - 8-947 - 8-948 - 8-949 - 8-950 - 8-951 - 8-952 - 8-953 - 8-954 Ord. No. 2000-O-76 11-14-2000 2-854 Ord. No. 2001-O-5 2-27-2001 8-104 Ord. No. 2001-O-6 2-27-2001 2-519 Ord. No. 2001-O-7 2-27-2001 10-5 - 10-61 Ord. No. 2001-O-8 2-27-2001 14-90 Ord. No. 2001-O-24 4-10-2001 6-469 - 6-470 - 6-471 - 6-472 - 6-473 - 6-474 - 6-475 - 6-476 - 6-477 - 6-478 - 6-479 - 6-480 - 6-481 - 6-482 - 6-483 - 6-484 - 8-856 Ord. No. 2001-O-40 6-12-2001 2-520 Ord. No. 2001-O-48 7-10-2001 10-10 Ord. No. 2001-O-59 9-11-2001 8-110 - 8-408 - 8-411 - 8-412 - 8-413 - 8-714 Ord. No. 2001-O-71 11-13-2001 10-11 Ord. No. 2001-O-72 11-13-2001 10-2 - 10-11 Ord. No. 2001-O-73 11-13-2001 10-2 - 10-9 - 10-11 Ord. No. 2001-O-80 12-11-2001 26-180 - 26-181 - 26-291 - 26-292 - 26-293 Ord. No. 2001-O-81 12-11-2001 6-220 - 6-249 - 6-250 - 6-251 - 6-281 - 6-282 - 6-283 Ord. No. 2001-O-88 12-11-2001 2-105 Ord. No. 2001-O-94 1-8-2002 26-290 Ord. No. 2002-O-9 2-12-2002 6-281 - 6-282 Ord. No. 2002-O-11 2-26-2002 6-196 Ord. No. 2002-O-31 5-14-2002 6-282 Ord. No. 2002-O-24 8-27-2002 2-306 - 2-307 - 2-308 - 2-661 - 2-662 - 6-104 - 6-126 - 6-127 - 6-128 - 6-129 - 6-130 - 6-131 - 6-132 - 6-133 Ord. No. 2002-O-41 8-27-2002 8-105 Ord. No. 2002-O-60 9-10-2002 14-428 Ord. No. 2002-O-61 9-10-2002 28-2 - 28-3 - 28-4 - 28-5 - 28-6 - 28-7 - 28-8 - 28-9 - 28-73 - 28-74 - 28-75 - 28-76 - 28-77 Ord. No. 2002-O-83 11-26-2002 10-11 Ord. No. 2002-O-99 12-10-2002 26-180 - 26-181 Ord. No. 2002-O-100 12-10-2002 1-34 - 6-282 - 8-106 - 8-107 - 8-302 - 8-480 - 8-563 - 8-592 - 8-632 - 14-53 - 14-327 - 14-328 - 14-623 - 14-623 - 20-2 22-135 - 24-2 - 26-107 Ord. No. 2002-O-101 12-10-2002 2-1090 - 2-1091 - 28-37 - 28-38 - 28-39 - 28-40 - 28-41 - 28-42 Ord. No. 2003-O-3 2-11-2003 10-11 Ord. No. 2003-O-4 2-11-2003 26-293 Ord. No. 2002-O-79 2-25-2003 10-61 24-1 - 24-99 - 24-100 - 24-101 - 24-102 Ord. No. 2003-O-16 3-11-2003 8-911 Ord. No. 2003-O-35 5-27-2003 6-315 - 6-316 - 6-336 - 6-337 - 6-363 - 6-364 - 6-635 Ord. No. 2003-O-55 9-9-2003 16-1 Ord. No. 2003-O-56 9-9-2003 6-196 Ord. No. 2003-O-63 10-14-2003 8-442 - 8-443 - 8-444 - 8-445 - 8-446 Ord. No. 2003-O-66 10-14-2003 14-1 - 14-433 Ord. No. 2003-O-72 10-14-2003 10-11 Ord. No. 2003-O-73 10-28-2003 8-524 - 8-529 Ord. No. 2003-O-75 11-11-2003 12-515 - 12-516 - 12-517 - 12-518 - 12-519 - 12-520 Ord. No. 2003-O-81 11-11-2003 8-134 - 8-153 - 8-175 - 8-176 - 8-177 - 8-208 - 8-209 - 8-210 - 8-211 - 8-212 - 8-213 - 8-214 - 8-215 - 8-239 - 8-240 - 8-241 - 8-242 - 8-243 Ord. No. 2003-O-86 11-24-2003 10-11 Ord. No. 2003-O-87 11-24-2003 10-11 Ord. No. 2003-O-89 11-24-2003 8-106 - 8-107 - 8-109 - 8-110 - 8-302 - 8-480 - 8-563 - 8-911 - 20-2 - 24-3 - 24-5 - 26-107 Ord. No. 2003-O-90 11-24-2003 6-282 Ord. No. 2003-O-92 11-24-2003 26-180 - 26-181 - 26-291 - 26-292 Ord. No. 2003-O-102 12-9-2003 26-253 Ord. No. 2004-O-20 2-24-2004 20-58 Ord. No. 2004-O-33 4-13-2004 14-403 - 14-404 Ord. No. 2004-O-38 4-27-2004 20-2 Ord. No. 2004-O-39 4-27-2004 12-23 - 12-24 - 12-25 - 12-26 - 12-27 Ord. No. 2004-O-04 5-11-2004 2-1228 Ord. No. 2004-O-48 5-11-2004 10-11 Ord. No. 2004-O-49 5-11-2004 2-1225 - 2-1226 - 2-1227 Ord. No. 2004-O-50 5-25-2004 8-110 Ord. No. 2004-O-55 5-25-2004 14-459 Ord. No. 2004-O-56 6-8-2004 2-1121 - 2-1122 - 2-1123 - 2-1124 - 2-1125 - 2-1126 - 2-1127 - 2-1128 - 2-1129 - 2-1130 - 2-1131 - 2-1156 - 2-1157 - 2-1158 - 2-1159 - 2-1160 - 2-1161 - 2-1162 - 2-1163 - 2-1164 - 2-1165 - 2-1166 - 2-1167 Ord. No. 2004-O-67 7-13-2004 10-11 Ord. No. 2004-O-83 8-24-2004 10-7 Ord. No. 2004-O-84 9-14-2004 6-389 - 6-390 Ord. No. 2004-O-97 11-9-2004 24-1 24-67 - 24-68 - 24-69 - 24-70 Ord. No. 2004-O-102 11-22-2004 6-282 Ord. No. 2004-O-103 11-22-2004 26-180 - 26-181 - 26-291 - 26-292 Ord. No. 2004-O-104 11-22-2004 6-250 - 8-106 - 8-107 - 8-109 - 8-212 - 8-213 - 8-302 8-480 - 8-563 - 8-592 - 8-632 8-911 - 14-53 - 20-2 - 26-107 Ord. No. 2004-O-109 11-22-2004 6-130 Ord. No. 2005-O-1 3-22-2005 8-41 - 8-42 Ord. No. 2005-O-5 2-22-2005 12-263 - 12-555 - 12-556 - 12-557 24-1 Ord. No. 2005-O-33 4-2-2005 8-984 - 8-985 - 8-986 - 8-987 - 8-988 - 8-989 - 8-990 - 8-991 4-12-2005 8-881 - 8-982 - 8-983 Ord. No. 2005-O-16 4-26-2005 24-1 Ord. No. 2005-O-29 4-26-2005 8-911 Ord. No. 2005-O-44 4-26-2005 14-428 Ord. No. 2005-O-45 4-26-2005 2-285 Ord. No. 2005-O-47 5-10-2005 10-9 Ord. No. 2005-O- 66 8-23-2005 10-11 Ord. No. 2005-O-71 9-13-2005 10-11 Ord. No. 2005-O-84 10-11-2005 10-9 - 10-11 Ord. No. 2005-O-85 10-1-2005 10-21 Ord. No. 2005-O-86 10-11-2005 1-2 Ord. No. 2005-O- 102 11-21-2005 26-180 Ord. No. 2005-O-101 11-21-2005 10-2 - 10-9 Ord. No. 2005-O-102 11-21-2005 26-181 - 26-183 - 26-291 - 26-292 Ord. No. 2005-O-104 11-21-2005 8-106 - 8-107 - 8-109 - 8-212 - 8-213 - 8-302 - 8-480 - 8-563 - 8-911 - 18-2 - 20-2 - 24-3 - 24-5 - 26-107 Ord. No. 2005-O-113 11-21-2005 6-282 Ord. No. 2005-O-112 12-13-2005 10-11 Ord. No. 2005-O-118 12-13-2005 8-347 - 8-348 - 8-349 - 8-350 - 8-351 - 24-1 Ord. No. 2005-O-119 12-13-2005 10-11 Ord. No. 2006-O-4 1-24-2006 8-743 Ord. No. 2006-O-5 1-24-2006 2-278 - 2-279 - 2-280 - 2-281 - 2-282 - 2-283 - 2-284 - 2-285 - 2-411 - 2-412 - 2-413 - 2-578 - 2-579 Ord. No. 2006-O-10 2-28-2006 26-209 - 26-215 Ord. No. 2006-O-15 3-14-2006 18-8 Ord. No. 2006-O-9 3-28-2006 10-1 - 10-2 - 10-3 - 10-4 - 10-5 - 10-6 - 10-7 - 10-8 - 10-9 - 10-11 - 10-12 - 10-13 - 10-15 - 10-16 - 10-17 - 10-18 - 10-19 - 10-20 - 10-21 - 10-22 - 10-23 - 10-24 - 10-52 - 10-53 - 10-54 - 10-55 - 10-56 - 10-57 - 10-58 - 10-59 - 10-60 - 10-61 - 10-62 - 10-63 - 10-64 Ord. No. 2006-O-29 4-11-2006 2-553 - 2-1067 - 2-1068 Ord. No. 2006-O-37 4-25-2006 10-9 - 10-21 Ord. No. 2006-O-40 5-23-2006 10-2 - 10-2 - 10-9 - 10-9 - 10-11 Ord. No. 2006-O-61 8-8-2006 10-11 Ord. No. 2006-O-62 8-8-2006 10-11 Ord. No. 2006-O-63 8-8-2006 18-5 Ord. No. 2006-O-75 9-26-2006 6-409 - 6-410 - 6-411 - 6-412 - 6-413 - 6-414 - 6-415 - 6-416 Ord. No. 2006-O-77 9-26-2006 14-52 - 14-53 Ord. No. 2006-O-79 10-10-2006 10-9 Ord. No. 2006-O-55 10-24-2006 16-115 Ord. No. 2006- O-85 11-14-2006 8-265 Ord. No. 2006-O- 85 11-14-2006 8-266 Ord. No. 2006-O-76 11-14-2006 20-2 - 20-23 - 20-24 Ord. No. 2006-O-85 11-14-2006 8-110 - 8-134 - 8-152 - 8-152 - 8-175 - 8-176 - 8-177 - 8-208 - 8-209 - 8-210 - 8-211 - 8-212 - 8-213 - 8-214 - 8-215 - 8-239 - 8-240 - 8-241 - 8-242 - 8-243 - 8-296 - 8-297 - 8-298 - 8-301 - 8-302 - 8-303 - 8-325 - 8-326 - 8-327 - 8-328 - 8-329 - 8-408 - 8-409 - 8-410 - 8-411 - 8-412 - 8-413 - 8-414 - 8-442 - 8-443 - 8-444 - 8-445 - 8-446 - 16-112 Ord. No. 2006-O-86 11-14-2006 18-8 Ord. No. 2006-O-76 11-28-2006 20-1 Ord. No. 2006-O-90 11-28-2006 10-9 - 10-11 Ord. No. 2006-O-94 11-28-2006 8-106 - 8-107 - 8-212 - 8-213 - 8-302 - 8-480 - 8-563 - 8-911 - 14-54 - 18-2 - 18-16 - 20-2 - 26-107 Ord. No. 2006-O-95 11-28-2006 6-282 Ord. No. 2006-O-96 11-28-2006 26-180 - 26-181 - 26-183 - 26-291 - 26-292 Ord. No. 2006-O-103 12-12-2006 10-9 Ord. No. 2006-O-109 1-9-2007 8-347 - 8-348 - 8-349 - 8-350 - 8-351 Ord. No. 2006-O-110 1-9-2007 8-299 - 8-300 Ord. No. 2007-O-10 2-13-2007 10-11 Ord. No. 2007-O-18 2-13-2007 8-524 Ord. No. 2007-O-3 2-27-2007 24-231 Ord. No. 2007-O-20 3-13-2007 14-453 Ord. No. 2007-O-33 4-24-2007 6-130 Ord. No. 2007-O-34 4-24-2007 8-175 - 8-176 - 8-177 - 8-208 - 8-209 - 8-210 - 8-211 - 8-212 Ord. No. 2007-O-42 8-28-2007 10-11 Ord. No. 2007-O-55 8-28-2007 24-270 - 24-271 - 24-272 - 24-273 - 24-274 - 24-275 - 24-276 - 24-277 - 24-278 - 24-279 Ord. No. 2007-O-61 9-11-2007 12-515 - 12-516 - 12-517 - 12-518 - 12-519 - 12-520 - 12-521 - 12-522 Ord. No. 2007-O-63 9-11-2007 10-9 Ord. No. 2007-O-73 10-23-2007 20-203 - 20-204 - 20-205 - 20-206 - 20-207 - 20-208 - 20-209 - 20-210 - 20-211 - 20-212 - 20-213 - 20-214 - 20-215 - 20-216 - 20-217 - 20-218 - 20-219 - 20-220 - 20-221 - 20-222 - 20-223 - 20-224 - 20-225 - 28-1 - 28-2 - 28-3 - 28-4 - 28-5 - 28-6 - 28-7 - 28-8 - 28-9 - 28-98 - 28-125 - 28-126 - 28-127 - 28-128 - 28-129 - 28-131 - 28-132 - 28-133 - 28-165 - 28-166 - 28-167 - 28-168 - 28-169 Ord. No. 2007-O-82 11-27-2007 14-52 - 14-53 Ord. No. 2007-O-85 11-27-2007 6-282 Ord. No. 2007-O-86 11-27-2007 26-180 - 26-181 - 26-291 - 26-292 Ord. No. 2007-O-87 11-27-2007 1-34 - 6-250 - 8-106 - 8-107 - 8-109 - 8-212 - 8-302 - 8-349 - 8-480 - 8-563 - 8-592 - 8-632 - 8-911 - 18-2 - 18-16 - 20-2 - 24-3 - 24-5 - 26-107 Ord. No. 2007-O-102 12-11-2007 24-99 Ord. No. 2007-O-89 12-11-2007 6-129 - 6-130 Ord. No. 2007-O-90 12-11-2007 8-477 Ord. No. 2007-O-94 12-11-2007 10-2 - 10-9 - 10-11 - 10-21 Ord. No. 2007-O-95 12-11-2007 10-9 - 10-11 Ord. No. 2008-O-1 1-22-2008 14-299 - 14-452 - 14-453 - 14-454 - 14-455 - 14-456 - 14-457 Ord. No. 2008-O-2 1-22-2008 26-183 Ord. No. 2008-O-22 4-22-2008 6-129 - 6-130 Ord. No. 2008-O-23 4-22-2008 10-11 Ord. No. 2008-O-41 7-22-2008 2-915 Ord. No. 2008-O-45 7-22-2008 8-942 8-945 Ord. No. 2008-O-47 7-22-2008 8-376 - 8-377 - 8-378 - 8-379 - 8-380 - 8-381 Ord. No. 2008-O-50 7-22-2008 8-382 Ord. No. 2008-O-52 8-26-2008 8-41 Ord. No. 2008-O-53 8-26-2008 8-210 Ord. No. 2008-O-54 8-26-2008 10-9 Ord. No. 2008-O-60 9-9-2008 6-282 - 22-56 - 22-57 - 22-58 - 22-59 - 22-60 - 22-61 Ord. No. 2008-O-70 10-28-2008 8-524 Ord. No. 2008-O-82 12-9-2008 10-11 Ord. No. 2008-O-88 12-9-2008 8-106 - 8-107 - 8-109 - 8-212 - 8-302 - 8-349 - 8-480 - 8-563 - 8-592 - 8-632 - 8-911 - 14-52 - 14-53 - 18-2 - 18-16 - 20-2 - 26-107 Ord. No. 2008-O-89 12-9-2008 26-180 - 26-181 - 26-291 - 26-292 Ord. No. 2008-O-90 12-9-2008 6-282 Ord. No. 2008-O-95 12-9-2008 2-285 Ord. No. 2009-O-1 1-27-2009 14-428 Ord. No. 2009-O-17 2-10-2009 10-11 Ord. No. 2009-O-19 3-10-2009 10-2 - 10-11 Ord. No. 2009-O-28 4-14-2009 10-11 Ord. No. 2009-O-31 4-28-2009 2-878 - 2-879 - 2-880 - 2-881 - 2-882 - 2-883 - 2-967 - 2-968 - 2-969 - 2-970 - 2-971 - 2-1003 - 2-1004 - 2-1005 - 2-1006 - 2-1007 - 2-1008 - 2-1009 - 2-1010 - 2-1011 - 2-1012 - 2-1013 - 2-1014 - 2-1015 - 2-1016 - 2-1017 Ord. No. 2009-O-49 7-14-2009 2-182 Ord. No. 2009-O-52 9-8-2009 10-11 Ord. No. 2009-O-53 9-8-2009 12-83 Ord. No. 2009-O-70 11-24-2009 6-282 Ord. No. 2009-O-71 11-24-2009 26-180 - 26-181 - 26-183 - 26-291 - 26-292 Ord. No. 2009-O-72 11-24-2009 6-250 - 8-106 - 8-107 - 8-109 - 8-212 - 8-213 - 8-302 - 8-349 - 8-378 - 8-480 - 8-563 - 8-592 - 8-632 - 8-911 - 14-54 - 14-459 - 14-622 - 14-623 - 18-2 - 18-16 - 20-2 - 24-3 - 24-5 - 26-107 Ord. No. 2009-O-75 11-24-2009 10-11 Ord. No. 2009-O-84 12-8-2009 24-236 - 24-237 - 24-238 - 24-270 - 24-271 - 24-272 - 24-273 - 24-274 - 24-275 - 24-276 - 24-277 - 24-279 Ord. No. 2010-O-3 1-12-2003 22-23 Ord. No. 2010- O-08 2-9-2010 26-253 Ord. No. 2010-O-08 2-9-2010 26-239 - 26-241 - 26-248 - 26-255 Ord. No. 2010-O-09 2-9-2010 12-578 - 12-579 - 12-580 - 12-581 Ord. No. 2010-O-12 2-9-2010 2-553 Ord. No. 2010-O-13 2-9-2010 1-10 - 2-1247 - 2-1248 - 2-1249 - 2-1250 - 2-1251 Ord. No. 2010-O-14 2-9-2010 14-1 - 14-138 Ord. No. 2010-O-23 4-27-2010 12-62 24-33 - 24-34 - 24-35 - 24-37 - 24-38 - 24-39 Ord. No. 2010-O- 27 5-11-2010 10-9 Ord. No. 2010-O-07 5-11-2010 8-104 - 8-105 - 8-107 - 8-110 - 8-476 - 8-477 - 8-499 - 8-563 - 8-592 - 8-632 Ord. No. 2010-O-11 5-11-2010 8-524 - 8-525 - 8-526 - 8-529 - 8-530 - 8-532 - 8-533 - 12-521 Ord. No. 2010-O-28 5-11-2010 10-9 Ord. No. 2010-O-7 5-11-2010 8-382 Ord. No. 2011-O-07 5-11-2010 8-408 Ord. No. 2010-O-30 5-25-2010 20-126 - 20-127 - 20-129 - 20-130 Ord. No. 2010-O-42 7-13-2010 14-139 - 20-140 Ord. No. 2010-O-18 7-27-2010 16-117 Ord. No. 2010-O-44 7-27-2010 10-11 Ord. No. 2010-O-40 8-24-2010 8-106 8-212 Ord. No. 2010-O-57 9-28-2010 10-9 - 10-11 - 10-21 Ord. No. 2010-O-69 11-23-2010 6-282 Ord. No. 2010-O-70 11-23-2010 26-180 - 26-181 - 26-291 - 26-292 Ord. No. 2010-O-71 11-23-2010 6-250 - 8-106 - 8-107 - 8-109 - 8-213 - 8-302 - 8-349 - 8-378 - 8-480 - 8-563 - 8-592 - 8-632 - 8-911 - 18-2 - 18-16 - 20-2 - 24-5 - 26-107 Ord. No. 2010-O-72 11-23-2010 10-11 Ord. No. 2010-O-89 12-14-2010 2-516 - 2-551 Ord. No. 2011-O-11 2-8-2011 2-878 - 2-881 - 2-882 Ord. No. 2011-O-14 3-8-2011 10-11 Ord. No. 2011-O-19 3-22-2011 2-825 - 2-826 - 2-827 - 2-828 - 2-829 - 2-830 - 2-916 - 2-967 - 2-968 - 2-969 - 2-970 - 2-971 - 2-972 Ord. No. 2011-O-20 4-12-2011 24-5 Ord. No. 2011-O-23 4-12-2011 20-126 Ord. No. 2011-O-24 4-26-2011 24-37 Ord. No. 2011-O-28 5-24-2011 10-11 Ord. No. 2011-O-32 5-10-2011 4-1 - 4-2 - 4-3 - 4-25 - 4-26 - 4-27 - 4-28 - 4-60 - 4-61 - 4-62 - 4-63 - 4-85 - 4-86 - 4-116 - 4-117 - 4-118 - 4-119 - 4-120 - 4-139 - 4-140 - 4-141 - 4-166 - 4-167 - 4-168 - 4-169 - 4-170 - 4-194 - 4-196 - 4-197 Ord. No. 2011-O-41 6-12-2011 8-177 Ord. No. 2011-O-29 6-14-2011 10-11 Ord. No. 2011-O-42 7-12-2011 14-139 - 14-140 Ord. No. 2011-O-49 9-27-2011 6-446 - 6-447 - 6-448 - 6-449 - 6-450 Ord. No. 2011-O- 73 11-22-2011 6-282 Ord. No. 2011-O- 74 11-22-2011 8-632 Ord. No. 2011-O-74 11-22-2011 8-106 - 8-107 - 8-109 - 8-213 - 8-302 - 8-349 - 8-378 - 8-480 - 8-531 - 8-563 - 8-592 - 8-911 - 18-2 - 18-16 - 20-2 - 20-127 - 26-107 Ord. No. 2011-O-87 1-10-2012 10-11 Ord. No. 2012-O-3 2-14-2012 10-11 Ord. No. 2012-O-2 4-10-2012 10-11 Ord. No. 2012-O-10 4-24-2012 10-11 Ord. No. 2012-O-14 4-24-2012 2-1276 - 2-1277 - 2-1278 - 2-1279 Ord. No. 2012-O-9 4-24-2012 10-11 Ord. No. 2012-O-32 7-24-2012 10-11 Ord. No. 2012-O-33 7-24-2012 10-9 - 10-11 Ord. No. 2012-O-40 7-24-2012 2-828 Ord. No. 2012-O-41 9-11-2012 10-11 Ord. No. 2012-O-50 9-11-2012 2-825 Ord. No. 2012-O-57 10-23-2012 10-9 - 10-11 Ord. No. 2012-O-56 11-13-2012 10-21 Ord. No. 2012-O- 63 11-27-2012 8-302 Ord. No. 2012-O-59 11-27-2012 10-11 Ord. No. 2012-O-62 11-27-2012 6-282 Ord. No. 2012-O-63 11-27-2012 8-106 - 8-107 - 8-109 - 8-213 - 8-349 - 8-378 - 8-480 - 8-531 - 8-563 - 8-592 - 8-632 - 8-911 - 18-2 - 18-16 - 20-2 - 20-127 - 26-107 Ord. No. 2012-O-69 11-27-2012 26-147 - 26-180 Ord. No. 2012-O-72 12-11-2012 12-231 - 12-232 - 12-233 Ord. No. 2013-O-2 2-12-2013 2-279 Ord. No. 2013-O-3 2-12-2013 10-11 Ord. No. 2013-O-4 2-12-2013 10-11 Ord. No. 2013-O-5 2-26-2013 10-11 Ord. No. 2013-O-11 3-12-2013 10-11 Ord. No. 2013-O-12 3-26-2013 10-11 Ord. No. 2013-O-17 4-23-2013 2-972 Ord. No. 2013-O-19 5-14-2013 12-231 - 12-232 Ord. No. 2013-O-22 5-28-2013 10-11 Ord. No. 2013-O-25 5-28-2013 10-21 Ord. No. 2013-O- 44 8-27-2013 10-21 Ord. No. 2013-O-42 9-24-2013 14-427 - 14-428 Ord. No. 2013-O-49 10-8-2013 10-11 Ord. No. 2013-O-50 10-8-2013 2-154 Ord. No. 2013-O-51 10-8-2013 10-2 - 10-9 - 10-11 Ord. No. 2013-O-66 10-22-2013 16-115 Ord. No. 2013-O-45 11-26-2013 24-1 Ord. No. 2013- O-71 11-26-2013 8-911 Ord. No. 2013-O-71 11-26-2013 8-106 - 8-107 - 8-109 - 8-213 - 8-302 - 8-349 - 8-378 - 8-480 - 8-531 - 8-563 - 8-592 - 8-632 - 18-2 - 18-16 - 20-2 - 20-127 - 26-107 Ord. No. 2013-O-72 11-26-2013 26-180 - 26-291 - 26-292 Ord. No. 2013-O-73 11-26-2013 6-282 Ord. No. 2013-O-87 11-26-2013 10-11 Ord. No. 2014-O-45 1-28-2014 30-1.8 Ord. No. 2014-O-6 2-11-2014 14-114 Ord. No. 2014-O-8 2-25-2014 10-9 - 10-11 Ord. No. 2014-O-14 4-8-2014 10-21 Ord. No. 2014-O-22 5-27-2014 10-9 - 10-11 Ord. No. 2014-O-23 5-27-2014 10-9 Ord. No. 2014-O-31 6-10-2014 14-427 Ord. No. 2014-O-33 6-24-2014 10-11 Ord. No. 2014-O-37 6-24-2014 10-11 Ord. No. 2014-O-49 9-9-2014 1 24-1 2 12-515 Ord. No. 2014-O-51 9-23-2014 6-389 - 6-390 Ord. No. 2014-O- 64 11-11-2014 6-28 Ord. No. 2014-O-58 11-11-2014 30-13.4 Ord. No. 2014-O-59 11-11-2014 30-6.4 - 30-6.5 - 30-6.6 Ord. No. 2014-O-64 11-11-2014 2-185 - 2-188 - 6-21 - 6-22 - 6-23 - 6-24 - 6-25 - 6-26 - 6-27 Ord. No. 2014-O-65 11-11-2014 30-2.4 - 30-2.5 - 30-4.3 - 30-5.4 - 30-8.3 - 30-13.4 - 30-13.5 - 30-14.14 - 30-14.9 Ord. No. 2014-O-66 11-25-2014 6-282 Ord. No. 2014-O-76 12-9-2014 10-11 Ord. No. 2015-O-5 3-10-2015 10-11 Ord. No. 2015-O- 13 4-14-2015 30-13.5 Ord. No. 2015-O-12 4-14-2015 2-938 - 2-939 - 2-1048 - 2-1049 Ord. No. 2015-O-13 4-14-2015 30-2.4 - 30-2.5 - 30-4.3 - 30-5.11 - 30-8.2 - 30-8.3 - 30-9.2 - 30-12.3 - 30-13.4 - 30-13.6 - 30-14.3 - 30-14.9 - 30-15.7 - 30-15.9 - 30-16.9 Ord. No. 2015-O-14 4-28-2015 10-11 Ord. No. 2015-O-30 7-28-2015 2-185 - 2-306 - 2-307 - 2-308 - 2-335 - 2-336 - 2-337 - 2-363 - 2-364 - 2-365 - 2-607 - 2-608 - 2-661 - 2-662 - 2-720 - 2-721 Ord. No. 2015-O-34 7-28-2015 8-104 Ord. No. 2015-O-39 7-28-2015 10-18 - 10-24 Ord. No. 2015-O-35 8-25-2015 10-2 - 10-9 - 10-11 Ord. No. 2015-O-46 9-8-2015 14-327 - 14-328 - 14-430 - 14-460 Ord. No. 2015-O-67 11-24-2015 8-106 - 20-24 - 24-3 Ord. No. 2015-O-68 11-24-2015 26-148 - 26-180 Ord. No. 2015-O-80 12-8-2015 10-11 Ord. No. 2015-O-81 1-12-2016 10-11 Ord. No. 2016-O-11 4-12-2016 30-8.2 - 30-8.3 - 30-12.3 Ord. No. 2016-O-16 4-26-2016 10-11 Ord. No. 2016-O-23 4-26-2016 10-11 Ord. No. 2016-O-24 5-10-2016 10-11 Ord. No. 2015-O-51 6-14-2016 8-499 - 26-239 - 26-270 - 26-317 - 26-318 Ord. No. 2016-O-31 6-28-2016 24-1 - 24-307 - 24-308 - 24-309 - 24-310 - 24-311 - 24-312 - 24-313 Ord. No. 2016-O-41 8-23-2016 10-9 - 10-21 Ord. No. 2016-O-25 12-13-2016 2 8-3 - 8-4 Ord. No. 2016-O-75 12-13-2016 8-110 Ord. No. 2017-O-10 2-28-2017 16-148 - 16-149 - 16-150 - 16-151 Ord. No. 2017-O-13 3-14-2017 10-11 Ord. No. 2017-O-17 4-11-2017 2 10-11 Ord. No. 2017-O-21 4-25-2017 18-5 Ord. No. 2017-O-43 8-22-2017 18-6 Ord. No. 2017-O-44 8-22-2017 30-16.9 Ord. No. 2017-O-48 9-12-2017 26-241 - 26-253 Ord. No. 2017-O-45 9-26-2017 2-185 Ord. No. 2017-O-51 9-26-2017 14-362 - 14-363 Ord. No. 2017-O- 59 10-10-2017 30-2.4 Ord. No. 2017-O-55 10-10-2017 10-21 Ord. No. 2017-O-59 10-10-2017 30-2.5 - 30-4.3 - 30-5.6 - 30-8.3 - 30-13.4 - 30-13.5 - 30-14.4 - 30-17.4 Ord. No. 2017-O-60 10-10-2017 1-35 Ord. No. 2017-O-62 10-24-2017 14-2 Ord. No. 2017-O-67 11-28-2017 2 6-130 Ord. No. 2017-O-77 12-12-2017 2-1302 - 2-1303 - 2-1304 - 2-1305 - 2-1306 - 2-1307 - 2-1308 - 2-1309 - 2-1310 - 2-1311 Ord. No. 2017-O-82 12-12-2017 6-282 - 26-180 Ord. No. 2017-O-90 1-9-2018 2 6-131 Ord. No. 2017-O-95 1-9-2018 2-1226 Ord. No. 2018-O-06 1-23-2018 2 26-181 3 6-282 Ord. No. 2018-O-07 2-13-2018 2 2-131 Ord. No. 2018-O-08 2-13-2018 2 8-500 Ord. No. 2018-O-17 3-13-2018 2 24-100 Ord. No. 2018-O-18 4-24-2018 8-1011 Ord. No. 2018-O-19 4-24-2018 2 (5-11.1) 24-384 2 (5-11.2) 24-385 2 (5-11.3) 24-386 2 (5-11.4) 24-387 2 (5-11.5) 24-388 2 (5-11.6) 24-389 2 (5-11.7) 24-390 2 (5-11.8) 24-391 2 (5-11.9) 24-392 3 (5-12.1) 24-425 3 (5-12.2) 24-426 3 (5-12.3) 24-427 3 (5-12.4) 24-428 3 (5-12.5) 24-429 3 (5-12.6) 24-430 3 (5-12.7) 24-431 3 (5-12.8) 24-432 3 (5-12.9) 24-433 3 (5-12.10) 24-434 3 (5-12.11) 24-435 4 2-1305 Ord. No. 2018-O-26 5-22-2018 2 1-31 3 2-1305 4 2-1308 5 2-1309 Ord. No. 2018-O-49 7-10-2018 2 10-11 Ord. No. 2018-O-50 7-10-2018 2 10-11 Ord. No. 2018-O-48 7-24-2018 2 (16-7.1) 20-246 2 (16-7.2) 20-247 2 (16-7.3) 20-248 2 (16-7.4) 20-249 2 (16-7.5) 20-250 2 (16-7.6) 20-251 2 (16-7.7) 20-252 3 30-8.2 5 30-10.5 6 30-12.3 Ord. No. 2018-O-58 9-25-2018 2 10-2 3 10-21 4 10-5 Ord. No. 2018-O-72 10-9-2018 2 6-129 3 6-130 Ord. No. 2018-O-57 10-25-2018 2 30-2.4 3 30-8.2 Ord. No. 2018-O-79 11-27-2018 2 10-11  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
    This table shows the location within this Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Illinois Compiled Statutes (ILCS). 
ILCS 
Chapter Section Section 
this Code 5 120/1 et seq. 2-1128 5 120/2.02 2-105 5 140/3.5 2-1247 5 275/1 et seq. 2-1163 5 275/3 2-1163 5 315/8 2-520 5 430/1-1 et seq. 2-1225 - 2-1226 5 430/10-10-10-40 2-1225 - 2-1226 5 430/5-15 2-1225 - 2-1226 5 430/5-65 2-1225 - 2-1226 5 430/50-5 2-1226 5 430/70-5 2-1226 5 430/70-5(a) 2-1226 20 1605/1 et seq. 12-84 20 3305/1 et seq. 2-1121 - 2-1156 - 2-1126 35 505/1.13 6-410 35 636/5-7 20-24 35 638/1 et seq. 28-38 40 5/3-128 2-1067 40 5/4-121 2-1068 50 45/1 et seq. 6-470 - 28-131 - 28-132 50 105/3 2-106 50 510/0.01 et seq. 6-105 50 750/0.01 et seq. 2-1091 50 750/0.01 et seq. 28-37 50 750/12.2(a) 28-38 50 750/12.2(d) 28-38 50 750/15.3(k) 28-41 50 750/2.12 28-38 50 750/2.13 28-38 65 5 6-105 65 5/1-2-1 8-941 65 5/1-2.1-1 et seq. 2-1302 65 5/3.1-55-10 2-106 65 5/8-2-9.2-65 5/8-2-9.10 ch. 6, art. II 65 5/8-11-2 6-105 - 6-166 65 5/10-2.1-17 2-520 65 5/11-10-1 6-363 - 6-364 - 6-365 65 5/11-10-2 2-553 - 6-365 65 5/11-12-12 8-941 65 5/11-30-2 8-941 65 5/11-30-8 8-941 65 5/11-31-2 8-941 65 5/8-11-1 6-389 65 5/8-11-2 28-38 65 5/8-11-5 6-390 65 5/8-11-7 6-315 65 5/8-11-8 6-336 - 6-337 220 5/1-101 et seq. 2-1203 - 6-195 220 5/3-105 6-195 220 5/16-104 6-166 220 5/21-401 20-204 220 5/21-801(b) 28-126 220 5/21-201(v) 20-204 220 5/21-301(c) 28-127 220 5/21-301(c) 28-128 220 5/21-401 28-2 220 5/21-401(b)(6) 28-127 220 5/21-801 28-126 220 5/21-801(b) 28-126 220 5/21-801(c)(1)(vi) 28-126 220 5/21-801(d) 28-126 220 5/22-501 et seq. 28-6 - 28-166 220 5/22-501(r)(1) 28-168 220 5/22-501(s) 28-169 220 50/1 et seq. 20-218 220 65/4 20-207 225 57/1 et seq. 24-1 - 24-70 225 57/25 24-67 225 330/1 et seq. 8-942 225 335/1 8-561 225 455/1 et seq. 8-770 230 15/0.01 et seq. 12-84 230 25/1 et seq. 12-84 230 30/1 et seq 12-84 235 5/6-11 10-5 235 5/6-21 10-6 235 5/6-28 10-24 235 5/6-28.5 10-24 410 130/1 et seq. 12-351 - 12-378 415 5 8-947 - 8-948 605 5/1-101 et seq. 20-204 615 5/5 et seq. 8-942 - 8-947 615 5/18g 8-941 625 14-622 625 5/1 et seq. 24-392 625 5/1-100 et seq. 14-622 625 5/1-102.1 14-58 625 5/6-306.5 2-1306 625 5/11-208.3 2-1302 - 2-1306 625 5/11-501 14-367 625 5/11-501.1 14-90 625 5/11-1301.1 14-433 625 5/15-102 14-139 625 5/15-103 14-139 625 5/15-107 14-139 625 5/15-111 14-139 625 5/15-111(f) 14-140 625 5/15-316 14-139 625 5/15-317 14-139 710 5/1 et seq. 2-520 720 5/24-1(a) 12-262 720 550/1 et seq. 12-350 720 570/101 et seq. 12-350 720 646/10 12-350 735 5/3-101 et seq. 2-1310 745 10/1-206 8-408 - 8-691 - 8-713 765 205/2 8-950  
