CODE OF ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF WEST CHICAGO, ILLINOIS 
____________ 
GENERAL ORDINANCES OF THE CITY 
____________ 
Adopted, March 21, 1977 
Effective, May 1, 1977 
____________ 
Published in 1977 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 
 
CURRENT OFFICIALS 
OF THE CITY 
OF WEST CHICAGO 
____________ 
Ruben Pineda (2021) 
Mayor 
____________ 
James Beifuss (2019) 
Heather Brown (2019) 
Lori Chassee (2021) 
Sandy Dimas (2021) 
Melissa Ferguson (2019) 
Michael D. Ferguson (2021) 
Bonnie A. Gagliardi (2021) 
George L. Garcia (2021) 
Alton Hallett (2019) 
Noreen Ligino-Kubinski (2019) 
Kurt Meissner (2019) 
Jayme Sheahan (2019) 
John C. Smith, Jr. (2021) 
Rebecca Stout (2019) 
Aldermen 
____________ 
Nancy Smith (2021) 
City Clerk 
____________ 
Lois Mastalar 
Deputy City Clerk 
____________ 
Bond, Dickson & Associates, P.C. 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Michael L. Guttman 
City Administrator 
OFFICIALS 
OF THE CITY 
OF WEST CHICAGO 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
Richard J. Truitt 
Mayor 
____________ 
James P. Engel 
Robert J. Hall 
John J. Kindermann 
Charles Cowden 
Christian D. Peterson 
Arthur Theriault 
Colin E. Perry 
Jean W. Sullivan 
Bernheardt C. Plautz 
Eugene M. Wind 
Aldermen
____________ 
A. Eugene Rennels 
City Treasurer 
____________ 
Arthur E. Giese 
City Clerk 
____________ 
Harold J. Spelman 
City Attorney 
____________ 
George R. Catalano 
City Administrator 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a complete codification of the ordinances of the City of West Chicago of a general and permanent nature. As expressed in the Adopting Ordinance, the Code supersedes all such ordinances not included herein or recognized as continuing in force by reference thereto. 
The source of each section is included in the history note which appears in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the Comparative Table appearing in the back of the volume, the reader can locate all laws and ordinances included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order and the various sections within each chapter have been appropriately catchlined to facilitate usage. Appropriate footnotes which tie related sections of the Code together and which also refer to relevant state laws have been included. 
Numbering System 
The numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and municipal codes. Each section number consists of two component parts separated by a dash, the figure before the dash referring to the chapter number and the figure after the dash referring to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the first section of Chapter 1 is numbered 1-1 and the fourth section of Chapter 2 is 2-4. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and, at the same time, new sections, or even whole chapters, can be inserted in their proper places, simply by using the decimal system for amendments. By way of illustration: If new material consisting of three sections that would logically come between Sections 2-3 and 2-4 is desired to be added, such new sections would be numbered 2-3.1, 2-3.2, 2-3.3, respectively. New chapters may be included in the same manner. If the new material is to be included between Chapters 10 and 11 it will be designated as Chapter 10.1. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject, the next successive number being assigned to the article or division. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this Code is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing for the Code. With this looseleaf system, the Code will be kept up-to-date periodically. Upon the final passage of amendatory ordinances, they will be properly edited and the page or pages affected will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to the holders of the Codes with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. Each such amendment, when incorporated into the Code, may be cited as a part thereof, as provided in Section 4 of the Adopting Ordinance. 
The successful maintenance of this Code up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the volume. As revised sheets are received it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publishers that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Index 
The general index of the Code has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of the headings being couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by city officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which he is interested. 
Acknowledgements 
The publication of this Code was under the direct supervision of George R. Langford, President, and Mr. Durward Caudill, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publishers are most grateful to the officials of the City for their cooperation and advice during the progress of the work on this Code. 
This Code is presented for the use and benefit of the citizens of the City of West Chicago. 
March, 1977 
MUNICIPAL CODE CORPORATION 
Tallahassee, Florida 
ORDINANCE NO. 1337 
An Ordinance Adopting and Enacting a New Code of Ordinances of the City of West Chicago, Illinois; Establishing the Same; Providing for the Repeal of Certain Ordinances not Included Therein, Except As Herein Expressly Provided; Providing for the Manner of Amending Such Code of Ordinances, and Providing When This Ordinance Shall Become Effective. 
BE, AND IT IS HEREBY ORDAINED by the City Council of the City of West Chicago, DuPage County, Illinois in regular session assembled: 
Section 1. That this ordinance consisting of Chapters 1 through 18, inclusive, is hereby adopted and enacted as the "Code of Ordinances of the City of West Chicago," shall be treated and considered as a new and original comprehensive ordinance which shall supersede all other ordinances passed by the City Council on or before September 2, 1975, except such as by reference herein are expressly saved from repeal or continued in force and effect for any purpose. 
Section 2. That all provisions of such Code shall be in full force and effect from and after the 1st day of May, 1977, and all ordinances passed on or before September 2, 1975, and not in such Code or recognized and continued in force by reference herein are hereby repealed from and after the effective date of such Code. 
Section 3. That the repeal provided for in Section 2 hereof shall not affect any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of such Code; nor shall such repeal affect any of the following: 
(1)  Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the City, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the City or any evidence of the City's indebtedness, or any contract or obligation assumed by the City; 
(2)  Any administrative order, ordinances or resolutions of the City Council not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of such Code; 
(3)  Any right or franchise granted by any ordinance of the City; 
(4)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening or vacating, any street or public way in the City; 
(5)  Any appropriation ordinances; 
(6)  Any ordinances levying or imposing taxes; 
(7)  Zoning Ordinance Number 717, and amendments thereto; 
(8)  Any ordinance establishing or prescribing grades in the City; 
(9)  Any ordinance providing for local improvements and making assessments therefor; 
(10)  Subdivision Ordinance Number 710, and amendments thereto; 
(11)  City of West Chicago 1954 Code, Chapter III; Articles II, III, IV and V; 
(12)  City of West Chicago 1954 Code, Chapter IV; Articles I, II, III, IV, V, VI and VII; 
(13)  Any ordinances regulating personnel, personnel rules and regulations of the City contained in Appendix D to this Code; 
(14)  Any ordinances relating to planning, development and redevelopment contained in Appendix E to this Code; 
(15)  Building Code Ordinance Number 1065, and amendments thereto; 
(16)  Such repeal shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance which is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4. That any and all additions or amendments to such Code, when passed in such forms as to indicate the intention of the City Council to make the same a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated in such Code so that reference to the "Code of Ordinances of the City of West Chicago, Illinois" shall be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments. 
Section 5. That a copy of such code shall be kept on file in the office of the City Clerk, City Hall, preserved in looseleaf form. It shall be the express duty of the City Clerk or someone authorized by him to insert in their designated places all amendments or ordinances which indicate the intention of the City Council to make the same a part of such Code when the same have been printed or reprinted in page form, and to extract from such Code all provisions which may from time to time be repealed by the City Council. This copy of such Code shall be available for all persons desiring to examine the same and shall be considered the official Code of Ordinances of the City of West Chicago, Illinois. 
Section 6. Whenever in said Code or in any ordinance of the City any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or a misdemeanor, or whenever in such Code or ordinance the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful or a misdemeanor, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any ordinance shall be punished by a fine of not less than Ten dollars nor more than Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00). Each day any violation of any provision of this Code shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
Section 7. That in case of the amendment of any section of such Code for which a penalty is not provided, the general penalty as provided in Section 1-8 of such Code shall apply to the section as amended or in case such amendment contains provisions for which a penalty, other than the aforementioned general penalty, is provided in another section in the same chapter, the penalty so provided in such other section shall be held to relate to the section so amended, unless such penalty is specifically repealed therein. 
Section 8. That it shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation in the City to change or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of such Code, or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the City of West Chicago to be misrepresented thereby. Any person, firm or corporation violating this section shall be punished as provided in Section 6 of this ordinance and Section 1-8 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of West Chicago, Illinois. 
Section 9. That all ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are, to the extent of such conflict, hereby repealed. 
Section 10. That this ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage, approval and publication according to law. 
PASSED, this 21st day of March, 1977. 
Alderman J. Engel, AYE 	Alderman A. Theriault, AYE 
Alderman C. Perry, AYE 	Alderman R. Hall, AYE 
Alderman J. Kindermann, ABSENT 	Alderwoman J. Sullivan, AYE 
Alderman C. Cowden, AYE 	Alderman B. Plautz, AYE 
Alderman C. Peterson, AYE 	Alderman E. Wind, AYE 
APPROVED as to form 	/s/ Harold J. Spelman 
City Attorney 
APPROVED this 21st day of March, 1977. 
	/s/ Richard J. Truitt 
Mayor 
 
ATTEST: 
/s/ Evelyn G. Marschinke 
Deputy City Clerk 
PUBLISHED: March 24, 1977 
(SEAL)  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 18-O-0017, § 1, adopted May 7, 2018, amended chapter 1 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former chapter 1, §§ 1-1—1-13, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 1640, § 1, 2-22-83; Ord. No. 4218, § 1, 9-7-99; Ord. No. 4280, § 1, 2-21-2000; Ord. No. 03-O-0085, §§ 1, 2, 10-6-2003; Ord. No. 04-O-0064, § 1, 8-2-2004; Ord. No. 06-O-0003, § 1, 2-6-2006; Ord. No. 06-O-0077, § 2, 9-5-2006; Ord. No. 07-O-0017, § 2, 4-16-2007; Ord. No. 08-O-0026, § 2, 5-5-2008; Ord. No. 11-O-0007, § 2, 5-16-2011; Ord. No. 11-O-0036, § 17, 6-20-2011; Ord. No. 13-O-0036, § 2, 12-2-2013; Ord. No. 15-O-0020, § 1, 6-15-2015. 
 
Sec. 1-1. - How Code is designated and cited. 
The following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the "Code of Ordinances of the City of West Chicago, Illinois," and may be so cited. 
(Ord. No. 18-O-0017, § 1, 5-7-2018)  
Sec. 1-2. - Rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code, and of all ordinances, the following rules shall be observed, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
City: The term "the city" or "this city" shall be construed as if the words "of West Chicago" followed it and shall extend to and include its several officers, agents and employees. 
City council: Whenever the words "city council" are used, they shall be construed to mean the City Council of the City of West Chicago. 
Computation of time: Whenever a notice is required to be given or an act to be done a certain length of time before any proceeding shall be had, the day on which such notice is given, or such act is done, shall be counted in computing the time, but the day on which such proceeding is to be had shall not be counted. 
Corporate limits: Whenever in this Code an act is prohibited, declared unlawful, required to be performed, directly or by implication, such references shall imply "within the corporate limits of the City of West Chicago." 
County: The words "the county" or "this county" shall mean the County of DuPage. 
Gender: A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males. 
Number: A word importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons and things as well as to one (1) person or thing. 
Oath: The word "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases, the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
Officer or office: Reference to any office or officer of the city, state or county includes any person authorized by law to perform the duties of such office or officer. 
Or, and: "Or" may be read "and," and "and" may be read "or" if the sense requires it. 
Owner: The word "owner," applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
Person: The word "person" shall include and be applied to associations, clubs, societies, firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate as well as to individuals. 
Personal property: Personal property includes every species of property except real property. 
State: The words "the state" shall be construed to mean the State of Illinois. 
Tense: Words used in the present or past tense include the future as well as the present and past. 
(Ord. No. 18-O-0017, § 1, 5-7-2018)  
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections. 
The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the sections and shall not be deemed or taken to be the titles of such sections, nor as any part of the sections, nor unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(Ord. No. 18-O-0017, § 1, 5-7-2018)  
Sec. 1-4. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed or cause of action arising under the ordinance repealed. 
(Ord. No. 18-O-0017, § 1, 5-7-2018)  
Sec. 1-5. - Severability of parts of Code. 
The sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 18-O-0017, § 1, 5-7-2018)  
Sec. 1-6. - Amendments to Code. 
All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code of Ordinances which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code of Ordinances, may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion therein, or in the case of repealed chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof, by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omissions from reprinted pages affected thereby, and the subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code of Ordinances and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new code of ordinances by the city council. 
Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code should be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section of this Code in substantially the following language: "That section _____ of the Code of Ordinances of the City of West Chicago, Illinois, is hereby amended to read as follows: " The new provisions may then be set out in full as desired. 
In the event a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "That the Code of Ordinances of the City of West Chicago, Illinois, is hereby amended by adding a section (or article or chapter) to be numbered as follows _____, which said section shall read as follows: " The new section may then be set out in full as desired. 
When the city council desires to enact an ordinance of a general and permanent nature on a subject not heretofore existing in the Code, which said council desires to incorporate into the Code, a section in substantially the following language may be made a part of the ordinance: 
"Section _____. It is the intention of the city council and it is hereby ordained that the provisions of this ordinance shall become and be made a part of the Code of Ordinances of the City of West Chicago, Illinois, and the sections of this ordinance may be renumbered to accomplish such intention." 
All sections, articles, chapters or provisions of this Code desired to be repealed should be specifically repealed by section number or chapter number, as the case may be. 
(Ord. No. 18-O-0017, § 1, 5-7-2018)  
Sec. 1-7. - Altering Code. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation in the city to change or amend, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the City of West Chicago to be misrepresented thereby. Any person, firm or corporation violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-8 hereof. 
(Ord. No. 18-O-0017, § 1, 5-7-2018)  
Sec. 1-8. - General penalty. 
(a)  Amount. The violation of or failure to comply with any provision of this Code shall constitute an offense against the city, and shall subject the offender, upon conviction, to a fine not to exceed seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) nor to be less than one hundred twenty-five dollars ($125.00) for the first offense; a fine not to exceed seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) nor to be less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for the second offense; a fine not to exceed seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) nor to be less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for the third offence; and a fine of seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for the forth offense and every subsequent offense thereafter. 
Any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this Code or any ordinance of the city shall be deemed a public nuisance and shall be subject to abatement by the city. 
Each and every act, action or thing done in violation of the provisions of this Code, or ordinance of the city, shall be construed, deemed and taken as a separate and distinct violation of such provisions of this Code, and in every event that a violation of this Code, or any of the provisions hereof, shall continue, each day of such continuance shall be deemed, construed and taken as a separate and distinct violation of the provisions of this Code that such condition so allowed to continue shall violate. 
The failure to timely pay any invoice due to the city shall be deemed and taken as a separate and distinct violation of the provisions of this Code, and in every event, the provisions of this section 1-8 shall apply. 
The provisions of this section 1-8 shall apply to all violations of the city's Amusement Tax Ordinance, chapter 16, article VI of this Code. 
The provisions of this section 1-8 shall apply to all violations of the city's Truancy Ordinance, chapter 11, article VI of this Code. 
The provisions of this section 1-8 shall apply to all violations of chapter 10 of this Code. 
(b)  Notice of violation. 
(1)  Whenever any city officer or official is authorized to charge a person or arrest a person without a warrant for a violation of the law in respect to any of the subjects enumerated in subsection (2) of this section, the city officer or official may, in lieu of filing a complaint in court, issue the alleged violator a notice of violation which shall comply with the provisions of this section. 
(2)  The authority of a city officer or official to issue a notice of violation in lieu of a complaint in court is specifically limited to the following subjects and laws in regulation thereof: 
a.  Regulating stopping, standing or parking of a vehicle. 
b.  Regulating refuse. 
c.  Regulating nuisances. 
d.  Requiring the owner or occupant of every house, building or structure to place figures showing the address number thereon. 
e.  Regulating public sidewalks, public streets and public ways. 
f.  Regulations regarding weeds. 
g.  Regulating the construction of buildings. 
h.  Regulating water usage. 
i.  Regulating certain zoning uses and restrictions. 
j.  Regulating animals and fowl. 
(3)  The notice of violation provided for in subsection (b)(1) herein shall have printed thereon statements which in substance: 
a.  Advise the person that he has violated a specific ordinance; 
b.  Request him to make payment in an amount applicable to the alleged violation as set forth in subsection (7) of this section as settlement of the violation claim; and 
c.  Inform him that upon failure to so settle, a complaint may be filed in a court of competent jurisdiction, charging him with the violation. 
(4)  Pursuant to the notice of violation specified in this section, the person accused of the violation may settle and compromise the violation claim by paying to the city the applicable amount as shown in the schedule set forth in subsection (7) of this section within a period to be specified in the notice of violation. Such payment may be made at the city hall and a receipt shall be issued for all money so received, and such money shall promptly be turned over to the administrative services director. 
(5)  Should the city be required to serve a final notice to compel collection of a fine alleged to be due hereunder for any violation, the person accused of said violation may settle and compromise the claim against him by paying to the city a sum equal to two (2) times the applicable amount as shown in the schedule set forth in subsection (7) of this section for each such violation in the manner provided above. If any person fails or refuses to settle and compromise any claim against him within the time specified in any final notice, the city may do either of the following: 
a.  Place any such claim with a collection agency approved by the mayor and city council. Should the city elect to place any claim with a collection agency, the person accused of said violation may settle and compromise the claim against him by paying to said collection agency a sum equal to three (3) times the applicable amount as shown in the schedule set forth in subsection (7) of this section for each said violation under such reasonable terms as the city may from time to time provide; or 
b.  Serve a summons or notice to appear on said person requiring him to appear in a court of competent jurisdiction. Should the city be required to serve a summons or notice to appear on said person to compel the collection of any fine alleged to be due hereunder, the amount of such fine shall be a sum equal to three (3) times the applicable amount as shown in the schedule set forth in subsection (7) of this section for each said violation exclusive of court costs. For the purposes of calculating the total amount due under this subsection (5), the amount of any permit fees or late fees required in subsection (7) of this section shall not be doubled or tripled. The police chief, or his designee, is hereby authorized to refrain from instituting a prosecution for the alleged offense involved. 
(6)  For the purposes of this section, registration with the secretary of state or with a municipality of a vehicle involved in any violation and the owner of record disclosed by such registration shall be prima facie evidence that the owner of record in such registration is the violator and that he was in control of or was the operator of the automobile or motor vehicle at the time of the alleged violation. 
(7)  Settlement of a violation claim established by notice of violation may be made prior to the issuance of a final notice by payment of the appropriate settlement fee as provided in the following schedule (the numbers in this schedule in parentheses represent the section or subsection of this code where regulations are set forth): 
a.  Violations with respect to prohibiting and restricting the stopping, standing or parking of a vehicle: 
Displaying vehicles "For Sale" (section 10-22) ..... $50.00 
Vehicle parked on premises in state of major disassembly or disrepair (ICC International Property Maintenance Code, section 302.8) ..... $50.00 
Prohibited parking or storage of a recreational vehicle or trailer or boat (Appendix A, section 7.8) ..... $50.00 
Unlawful off-street parking of a vehicle on other than a driveway, parking pad or other approved off-street parking area (Appendix A, section 13.1-13(A)(1)) ..... $50.00 
Unlawful storage or parking of a vehicle in a residential district (Appendix A, section 13.1-13(A)) ..... $50.00 
b.  Violations with respect to regulation of refuse: 
Placing of landscape waste containers, garbage containers, recyclable containers and bulk items sooner than 7:00 p.m. on the date prior to scheduled collection (section 9-142(d)(6)) ..... $50.00 
Permitting the storage of or storing of any refuse in such a way as to create a fire hazard (section 7-16; IPMC 703.1) ..... $50.00 
Unauthorized collection of recyclable materials (section 9-142(e)) ..... $50.00 
Unauthorized dumping of refuse (section 9-142(c)) ..... $50.00 
c.  Violations with respect to any nuisances (section 10-1 and 10-2, but not including violations of section 10-25) ..... $50.00 
d.  Violations with respect to the failure of the owner or occupant to have placed upon every house, building or structure, so as to be clearly visible from the street, figures showing the number of the house, building or structure (section 7-16; IPMC 304.3) ..... $50.00 
e.  Violations with respect to public sidewalks, public streets and public ways: 
Deposit of, or permitting the deposit of, dirt, mud, garbage, refuse or other material on public sidewalks or streets (section 11-116(2); section 4-7) ..... $50.00 
Unlawful discharge of storm water (section 7-16; IPMC 507.1) ..... $50.00 
Unlawful discharge of wastewater (section 18-55) ..... $50.00 
f.  Violations with respect to weeds: 
Failure of owners of land within the city to maintain such property free of weeds or plant growth in excess of eight (8) inches (section 10-3(a)) ..... $50.00 
Failure of owners of land within the city to maintain the parkway abutting such property free of weeds or plant growth in excess of eight (8) inches (section 10-3(a)) ..... $50.00 
Planting or permitting the growth of European barberry or its varieties (section 10-3(b)) ..... $50.00 
g.  Violations with respect to the construction of buildings and accessory structures: 
Failure to purchase a building permit (section 4-2 ICC International Building Code 105.1) ..... $50.00 
Failure to properly maintain fences or other accessory structures (section 7-16; IPMC 302.7) ..... $50.00 
h.  Violations with respect to the unlawful use of water (section 18-26) ..... $50.00 
i.  Violations with respect to zoning: 
Failing to obtain sign permit (Appendix A, section 12.5-2) ..... $50.00 
Prohibited signs (Appendix A, section 12.4-1) ..... $50.00 
Temporary signs (Appendix A, section 12.4-4(B)) ..... $50.00 
General standards for signs (Appendix A, section 12.3) ..... $50.00 
Violation of general provisions relating to signs with respect to signs located on property zoned for residential use (Appendix A, section 12.4-3) ..... $50.00 
Conducting prohibited home occupations (Appendix A, section 7.2) ..... $75.00 
Failure to comply with home occupation standards (Appendix A, section 7.2) ..... $50.00 
j.  Violations with respect to animals and fowl: 
Prohibited animals (section 11-78) ..... $50.00 
Dogs running at large (section 11-79) ..... $50.00 
(c)  Application: The penalty provided in this section shall be applicable to every section of this Code the same as though it were a part of each and every separate section. Any person convicted of a violation of any section of this Code where any duty is prescribed or obligation imposed, or where any act which is of a continuing nature or declared to be unlawful, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day such duty or obligation remains unperformed or such act continues, unless otherwise specifically provided in this Code. 
In all cases where the same offense is made punishable or is created by different clauses or sections of this Code, the prosecuting officer may elect under which to proceed but not more than one (1) recovery shall be had against the same person for the same offense; provided that the revocation of a license or permit shall not be considered a recovery or penalty so as to bar any other penalty being enforced. 
Whenever the doing of any act or the omission to do any act constitutes a breach of any section or provision of this Code and there shall be no fine or penalty specifically declared for such breach, the provision of this section shall apply and a separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or on which a breach or violation occurs or continues. 
(d)  Liability of officers: No provision of this Code designating the duties of any officer or employee shall be so construed as to make such officer or employee liable for any fine or penalty provided for a failure to perform such duty, unless the intention of the city council to impose such fine or penalty on such officer or employee is specifically and clearly expressed in the section creating the duty. 
(e)  Injunctive relief: In addition to, and not in lieu of, any penalty or other remedy provided in the Code, the administrative law judge or the circuit court, whatever the case may be, may enter an order enjoining any ongoing or repeated violation of the Code or otherwise mandating compliance with the Code upon due notice of such violation. The injunctive remedy set forth herein shall apply to violations of the Code that were in existence before the effective date of this amendment. If there is any conflict between this section and any other section of the Code concerning the availability of injunctive relief, this section shall control. 
(Ord. No. 18-O-0017, § 1, 5-7-2018; Ord. No. 18-O-0028, § 2, 6-4-2018)  
Sec. 1-9. - Right of entry. 
Whenever any officer or employee of the city is required or authorized by any state law, the provisions of this Code, or any ordinance or resolution, or rules and regulations or orders issued thereunder, in order to carry out his duties thereunder, to enter any premises or vehicle for the purpose of making an inspection thereof or of anything therein contained or for the purpose of carrying out his duties, such officer or employee shall have the right to enter any such premises or vehicle at any reasonable time in pursuance of such duties; provided, that such entry and inspection shall be made in a lawful manner. 
(Ord. No. 18-O-0017, § 1, 5-7-2018)  
Sec. 1-10. - Ordinances. 
The style of all ordinances shall be: "BE IT ORDAINED by the City Council of the City of West Chicago, Illinois…" as is provided by statute. 
All ordinances imposing any penalty for a violation thereof or making any appropriation shall be published as required by statute, either in a newspaper or in pamphlet form, in which case the ordinance in its pamphlet form shall be displayed for a reasonable period in a public place in city hall. 
No ordinance that must be published to comply with this section shall go into effect until ten (10) days after it is so published unless a statement of the urgency of the ordinance is contained in it and it achieves passage by a two-thirds (?) vote of the corporate authorities then holding office. In all other cases, the ordinance shall go into effect upon the passage thereof, as provided by statute, even though the operation of the ordinance may not take effect until a later date. 
(Ord. No. 18-O-0017, § 1, 5-7-2018)  
Sec. 1-11. - Certification of payment of fines, fees, and other charges relating to real estate. 
(a)  Prior to the conveyance or transferring of any interest in any real estate by deed, lease, or other instrument, all fees, fines, and other charges due and owing to the city, past or delinquent, that were assessed or charged as the result of the enforcement of any provision of this Code against or relative to the use, occupancy, or condition of such property or for the provision of water, sewer, or other city services to such property shall be paid in full by money order, cashier's check, certified check, credit card or cash. With no less than twenty-four (24) hours' notice, the city clerk shall certify payment of such by affixing a seal, stamp, or other impression, in a form and with such wording and devices as the city council shall approve, to the document in a conspicuous location on the cover or first page. There shall be no charge or fee for such certification or for the seal, stamp, or other impression. 
(b)  Except as provided for in subsection (c), no deed, lease, or other instrument conveying or transferring real property within the corporate limits of the city shall be recorded by the Recorder of DuPage County, unless such shall bear the seal, stamp, or other impression approved by the city council as provided for herein. 
(c)  This section shall not apply to transfers of interests relating to mortgages, liens or other security interests in such real estate, or to conveyances or transfer of interests in trust, unless the real estate shall be used, managed by, or occupied by the mortgagee, lienholder, other secured interest holder, or trustee. This section shall also not apply to deeds of correction or to conveyances by joint tenants or tenants in common that are exclusively between or among themselves. 
(d)  Any person who conveys or transfers an interest in real estate or to whom such an interest is conveyed or transferred in violation of this section shall be subject to a fine of three hundred dollars ($300.00) for each such conveyance or transfer. This fine shall be in addition to all amounts due and owing, past due, or delinquent. In addition to the transferor or person conveying or transferring such interest, any transferee or person to whom such interest is transferred in violation of this section shall be liable for the full amount of such due and owing, past due, or delinquent fines, fees, or charges. Additionally, the city shall refuse issuance of all occupancy and other permits for the real estate as provided for in this Code and water, sewer, garbage collection and other city services for the real estate for so long as all such fines, fees, and charges shall remain unpaid. 
(e)  The city shall have no liability to any person in relation to the certification provided for herein, nor shall any person have any claim, action, or cause of action against the city for any loss or injury alleged to arise from or be related to such certification. 
(f)  The provisions of this section shall be in addition to and not in lieu of other provisions of this Code relating to the inspection and permitting of real estate. 
(Ord. No. 18-O-0017, § 1, 5-7-2018)  
Sec. 1-12. - Delinquency fees. 
A delinquency fee shall be imposed for all outstanding fees, debts and penalties owed to the City of West Chicago in relationship to development fees, engineering fees, legal fees, costs and/or penalties, and any other debt owed to the city and outstanding for thirty (30) or more days. Said delinquency fee shall be the lesser of twenty (20) percent of the principal amount outstanding or seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00), for each month that said delinquency remains due and owing. The city shall be entitled to recover any and all costs and fees associated with said recovery under this section expended in the collection of delinquency fees and penalties. 
So long as the person owing the city money has an ownership interest in the property, in addition to any delinquency fee imposed, the city shall place a lien on any property for which such delinquency exists for more than ninety (90) days, after which no additional delinquency fees shall be charged. 
(Ord. No. 18-O-0017, § 1, 5-7-2018) 
State Law reference— Authority granted, 65 ILCS 5/11-13 et seq.  
Sec. 1-13. - Freedom of Information Act. 
The city shall adhere to the provisions of the Freedom of Information Act (5 ILCS 140) as may be amended from time to time by the state. 
(Ord. No. 18-O-0017, § 1, 5-7-2018)  
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 2-1. - Boundaries of the city. 
The city shall maintain an official boundary map depicting all land within its corporate limits. 
(Ord. No. 1540, § 1, 7-20-81; Ord. No. 11-O-0036, § 21, 6-20-2011)  
Sec. 2-2. - Corporate seal. 
The corporate seal of the city, an original design, shown below, is hereby adopted as the corporate seal of the City of West Chicago, Illinois and may be used by and for the city and shall be used in all cases in which, by the ordinances of the city, by law, or custom, the use of a seal is required. 
 
Corporate Seal 
(Code 1954, Ch. I, Art. V; Ord. No. 06-O-0082, § 2, 10-2-2006)  
Sec. 2-2.1. - Seal representations. 
(a)  Be of a form that will incorporate many elements without compromising composition or scale; 
(b)  Feature a locomotive, front and center, as a prominent symbol of the city, representing strength and surety of direction; with the date "1849" recognizing the date West Chicago was established; 
(c)  Feature buildings to left of train which shall represent commerce, both downtown and citywide; 
(d)  Feature building to the right of train which shall represent residential softened by "swoosh" of roadway in front of house to signify open space, single unit to signify larger parcels of land; 
(e)  Feature golden rays on the "horizon line" which shall depict sunrise, the dawning of a new day, a bright future, and unlimited possibility; 
(f)  Feature city title bar positioned neatly and consciously between its history (train) and its progress (plane); the bar also known as a "fess" shall symbolize a military belt or girdle of honor representing readiness to serve the public; and 
(g)  Feature a plane at the top of the seal to represent another attribute unique to West Chicago, the DuPage Airport which shall further brand the city as a transportation hub. 
(Ord. No. 06-O-0082, § 3, 10-2-2006)  
Sec. 2-3. - Official colors. 
(A)  The corporate seal of the city shall contain the official colors: 
Black 
Gold 
White 
(B)  The significances of the city's colors are as follows: 
(1)  Black: 
(a)  To authenticate the image of the locomotive, which is the dominant feature of the seal and honors one (1) of the important contributing factors in the city's growth; 
(b)  To signifies constancy, which speaks to West Chicago's steadfast spirit; 
(2)  Gold: 
(a)  To signify generosity and elevation of the mind; as a community with a strong sense of civic duty and a commitment to volunteerism, and a community on the cusp of a leadership position in a global information economy; 
(3)  White: 
(a)  To associate us with one (1) of our national colors; 
(b)  To associate us with the City of Chicago; 
(c)  To incorporate one of the two (2) colors of the West Chicago Community High School. 
(Ord. No. 906, §§ 1, 2, 6-6-66; Ord. No. 06-O-0082, § 3, 10-2-2006)  
Sec. 2-4. - Datum. 
For the purpose of indicating the elevation of levels and grades in the city, the following datum is hereby established at the horizontal plane on the front wall of the City of West Chicago Historical Museum (formerly the City Hall): 
A horizontal plane shall be marked at the location above described, by a cross in a bronze plug, based by the United States Geological Survey, in the year nineteen hundred and five (1905), and inscribed as follows: 
U. S. GEOLOGICAL SURVEY 
$250.00 fine for disturbing this mark 
ILLINOIS 
Elevation above sea 
784 feet 
Datum 1905 
B.M. 
(Code 1954, Ch. I, Art. VI, § 2)  
Sec. 2-5. - Fiscal year. 
The fiscal year of the city shall begin on January 1 of each year and end on December 31 of each year. 
(Code 1954, Ch. I, Art. VII, § 1; Ord. No. 08-O-0071, § 1, 10-6-2008)  
Sec. 2-6. - Easements for recreational purposes; power of city to accept. 
This city may, when the same is tendered, accept an easement for recreational purposes. 
The use of such easement shall be subject to the rules, regulations and ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1146, 12-18-72)  
Sec. 2-6.1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Former § 2-6.1 was moved to App. D of App. B, Subdivision Regulations, and designated as § 1, pursuant to § 2 of Ord. No. 2137, adopted June 19, 1989.  
Sec. 2-6.2. - Dedication of park lands and school sites or cash donations in lieu thereof as condition of annexation. 
(a)  The dedication of land or cash contribution in lieu thereof required by section 1 of Appendix D to the subdivision regulations of this Code shall also be required as a condition of annexation of any land involving residential use to the city. Provisions for such dedication or contribution shall be incorporated in any annexation agreement regarding the property. 
(b)  As a condition of annexation, it is also required that there be a contribution for fire protection services to the fire protection district(s) having jurisdiction of the annexed land in an amount approved by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1123, § 2, 3-20-72; Ord. No. 1310, § 2, 9-7-76; Ord. No. 2148, § 1, 6-19-89)  
Sec. 2-7. - Form of government; corporate authorities. 
(a)  The city shall be governed by the aldermanic form of government. The city council of the City of West Chicago shall consist of the mayor and two (2) aldermen from each ward. 
(b)  There shall be elected a mayor, fourteen (14) aldermen and a city clerk. 
(Code 1954, Ch. I, Art. II, § 2; Ord. No. 1639, § 1, 2-22-83; Ord. No. 3050, § 1, 10-21-96; Ord. No. 11-O-0036, § 1, 6-20-2011; Ord. No. 13-O-0005, § 6, 3-18-2013) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1639, § 1, adopted Feb. 22, 1983, amended the Code by adding provisions designated as § 2-2.1, which provisions have been construed, at the discretion of the editor, as being amendatory of § 2-7 which pertained to similar subject matter.  
Sec. 2-8. - Wards designated. 
The city shall consist of seven (7) wards, as follows: 
(a)  First ward. The first ward of the city shall consist of that part of the city described as follows: That part of the corporate area of the city lying north, east, and south of a line which runs as follows: Beginning on the centerline of the Union Pacific Railroad due south of the easternmost corporate limits of the city, thence westerly to a point of intersection with the centerline of Indian Knoll Road; thence southerly along said centerline of Indian Knoll Road to a point of intersection with the centerline of Bolles Avenue; thence westerly along said centerline of Bolles Avenue to a point of intersection with the centerline of Prince Crossing Road; thence northerly along said centerline of Prince Crossing Road to a point of intersection with the centerline of Pomeroy Street, thence westerly along said centerline of Pomeroy Street to a point of intersection with the centerline of Neltnor Boulevard (Illinois State Route 59); thence northerly along said centerline of Neltnor Boulevard to a point of intersection with the centerline of Conde Street; thence westerly along said centerline of Conde Street to a point of intersection with the centerline of Barber Street; thence northerly along said centerline of Barber Street to a point of intersection with the centerline of Spencer Street; thence easterly along said centerline of Spencer Street to a point of intersection with the centerline of Wilson Avenue; thence northeasterly along said centerline of Wilson Avenue to a point of intersection with the centerline of the Union Pacific Railroad; thence northwesterly and westerly along said centerline of the Union Pacific Railroad to a point of intersection with the east line of the northwest quarter of Section 9 in Winfield Township; thence northerly along said east line of the northwest quarter of Section 9 in Winfield Township to a point of intersection with the north line of the northwest quarter of Section 9 in Winfield Township; thence westerly along said north line of the northwest quarter of Section 9 in Winfield Township to a point of intersection with the centerline of Union Pacific Railroad spur; thence northerly along the centerline of the Union Pacific Railroad spur to a point of intersection with the centerline of National Street extended westerly; thence easterly along said centerline of National Street (and said centerline extended westerly) to a point of intersection with the centerline of Highland Avenue; thence southerly along said centerline of Highland Avenue to a point of intersection with the centerline of Grand Lake Boulevard; thence easterly along said centerline of Grand Lake Boulevard to a point of intersection with the centerline of Garden Street; thence southerly along the centerline of Garden Street to a point of intersection with the centerline of Washington Street; thence easterly along the centerline of Washington Street (which becomes Geneva Road) to a point due south of the easternmost corporate limits of the city, said point being the terminus of the described line. 
(b)  Second ward. The second ward of the city shall consist of that part of the city described as follows: That portion of the corporate area of the city lying south, east, north and west of a line which runs as follows: Beginning at the point of intersection with the centerline of Conde Street and the centerline of Neltnor Boulevard (Illinois State Route 59); thence westerly along said centerline of Conde Street to a point of intersection with the centerline of Joliet Street; thence southerly along said centerline of Joliet Street to a point of intersection with the centerline of Ann Street; thence westerly along said centerline of Ann Street to a point of intersection with the centerline of Wood Street; thence southerly along said centerline of Wood Street to a point of intersection with the centerline of Blair Street; thence westerly along said centerline of Blair Street to a point of intersection with the centerline of Factory Street; thence northerly along said centerline of Factory Street to a point of intersection with the centerline of Ann Street; thence westerly along said centerline of Ann Street to a point of intersection with the centerline of the Canadian National Railroad; thence southerly along said centerline of the Canadian National Railroad to a point of intersection with the centerline of Roosevelt Road (Illinois State Route 38); thence southeasterly along said centerline of Roosevelt Road to a point on the centerline of Bishop Street; thence northerly along said centerline of Bishop Street to a point of intersection with the centerline of Forest Avenue; thence easterly along said centerline of Forest Avenue to a point of intersection with the centerline of Neltnor Boulevard; thence northerly along said centerline of Neltnor Boulevard to the point of beginning, said point being the terminus of the described line. 
(c)  Third ward. The third ward of the city shall consist of that part of the city described as follows: That portion of the corporate area of the city lying south and west of a line which runs as follows: Beginning at the point of intersection of the west right-of-way line of Kautz Road extended southerly and the centerline of the Union Pacific Railroad, thence easterly and southeasterly along said centerline of the Union Pacific Railroad to a point of intersection with the centerline of Wilson Avenue; thence southwesterly along said centerline of said Wilson Avenue to a point of intersection with the centerline of Spencer Street; thence westerly along said centerline of Spencer Street to a point of intersection with the centerline of Barber Street; thence southerly along said centerline of Barber Street to a point of intersection with the centerline of Conde Street; thence westerly along said centerline of Conde Street to a point of intersection with the centerline of Joliet Street; thence southerly along said centerline of Joliet Street to a point of intersection with the centerline of Ann Street; thence westerly along said centerline of Ann Street to a point of intersection with the centerline of Wood Street; thence southerly along said centerline of Wood Street to a point of intersection with the centerline of Blair Street; thence westerly along said centerline of Blair Street to a point of intersection with the centerline of Factory Street; thence northerly along said centerline of Factory Street to a point of intersection with the centerline of Ann Street; thence westerly along said centerline of Ann Street to a point of intersection with the centerline of the Canadian National Railroad; thence southerly along said centerline of the Canadian National Railroad to a point on the southernmost corporate limits of the city, said point being the terminus of the described line. 
(d)  Fourth ward. The fourth ward of the city shall consist of that part of the city described as follows: That part of the corporate area of the city lying north, west and south of a line which runs as follows: Beginning at the point of intersection of the west right-of-way line of Kautz Road extended southerly and the centerline of the Union Pacific Railroad, thence easterly along said centerline of the Union Pacific Railroad to a point of intersection with the east line of the northwest quarter of Section 9 in Winfield Township; thence northerly along said east line of the northwest quarter of Section 9 in Winfield Township to a point of intersection with the north line of the northwest quarter of Section 9 in Winfield Township; thence westerly along said north line of the northwest quarter of Section 9 in Winfield Township to a point of intersection with the centerline of Union Pacific Railroad spur; thence northerly along the centerline of the Union Pacific Railroad spur to a point of intersection with the centerline of National Street extended westerly; thence easterly along said centerline of National Street (and said centerline extended westerly) to a point of intersection with the centerline of Highland Avenue; thence southerly along said centerline of Highland Avenue to a point of intersection with the centerline of Grand Lake Boulevard; thence easterly along said centerline of Grand Lake Boulevard to a point of intersection with the centerline of Garden Street; thence southerly along said centerline of Garden Street to a point of intersection with the centerline of Washington Street; thence easterly along said centerline of Washington Street (which becomes Geneva Road) to a point of intersection with the centerline of Prince Crossing Road; thence northerly along said centerline of Prince Crossing Road to a point of intersection with the southern boundary of School District 25 (also known as the southern boundary line of Hampton Hills Subdivision); thence northwesterly along the southern boundary of School District 25 to the intersection of Grove Avenue and Williams Road; thence westerly along the centerline of Grove Avenue to a point of intersection with the centerline of Neltnor Boulevard (Illinois State Route 59); thence northerly and northwesterly along said centerline of Neltnor Boulevard to a point of intersection with the centerline of Kings Circle (private drive); thence westerly and northerly and easterly along said centerline of Kings Circle extended easterly to a point of intersection with the centerline of Neltnor Boulevard; thence northwesterly along said centerline of Neltnor Boulevard to a point of intersection with the centerline of North Avenue (Illinois State Route 64); thence westerly along said centerline of North Avenue to a point of intersection with the centerline of the Commonwealth Edison right-of-way; thence southerly along said Commonwealth Edison right-of-way to a point of intersection with the centerline of the Union Pacific Railroad spur; thence westerly along said centerline of the Union Pacific Railroad spur to a point of intersection with the centerline of the Canadian National Railroad; thence southeasterly along said centerline of the Canadian National Railroad to a point of intersection with the southern boundary of Wayne Township (also known as Hawthorne Lane); thence westerly along said southern boundary of Wayne Township to a point of intersection with the west right-of-way line of Kautz Road, said point being the terminus of the described line. 
(e)  Fifth ward. The fifth ward of the city shall consist of that part of the city described as follows: That part of the corporate area of the city lying north, east and south of a line which runs as follows: Beginning on the centerline of Geneva Road at a point due south of the easternmost corporate limits of the city; thence westerly along said centerline of Geneva Road to a point of intersection with the centerline of Prince Crossing Road; thence northerly along said centerline of Prince Crossing Road to a point of intersection with the southern boundary of School District 25 (also known as the southern boundary line of Hampton Hills Subdivision); thence northwesterly along the southern boundary of School District 25 to the intersection of Grove Avenue and Williams Road; thence westerly along the centerline of Grove Avenue to a point of intersection with the centerline of Neltnor Boulevard (Illinois State Route 59); thence northerly and northwesterly along said centerline of Neltnor Boulevard to a point of intersection with the centerline of Kings Circle (private drive); thence westerly and northerly and easterly along said centerline of Kings Circle extended easterly to a point of intersection with the centerline of Neltnor Boulevard; thence southeasterly from said point on the centerline of Neltnor Boulevard to a point of intersection with the centerline of Hahndorf Street; thence easterly along said centerline line of Hahndorf Street to a point of intersection with the northern boundary line of Ingalton Hill Estates Subdivision (said subdivision plat recorded April 18, 1989 as Document R1989-044139 in the Dupage County Recorder's Office); thence easterly along said northern boundary line of Ingalton Hill Estates Subdivision to a point of intersection with the eastern boundary line of said Ingalton Hill Estates Subdivision; thence southerly along said eastern boundary line of Ingalton Hill Estates Subdivision to a point of intersection with the northern boundary line of Forest Trails Subdivision Unit 1 (said subdivision plat recorded April 29, 1988 as Document R1988-042451 in the Dupage County Recorder's Office); thence easterly along said northern boundary line of Forest Trails Subdivision Unit 1 to a point of intersection with the northern boundary line of Forest Trails Subdivision Unit 2 (said subdivision plat recorded January 21, 1988 as Document R1988-007356 in the Dupage County Recorder's Office); thence easterly along said northern boundary line of Forest Trails Subdivision Unit 2 to a point of intersection with the east line of the southwest quarter of Section 34 in Wayne Township; thence northerly along said east line of the southwest quarter of Section 34 in Wayne Township to a point of intersection with the south line of the of the northwest quarter of Section 34 in Wayne Township (also known as the southern boundary line of Prairie Meadows Subdivision); thence westerly along said south line of the northwest quarter of Section 34 in Wayne Township to a point of intersection with the western boundary line of Prairie Meadows Subdivision (said subdivision plat recorded May 29, 1996 as Document R1996-088732 in the DuPage County Recorder's Office); thence northerly along said western boundary line of Prairie Meadows Subdivision to a point of intersection with the centerline of North Avenue (Illinois State Route 64); thence easterly along said centerline of North Avenue to a point of intersection to a point on the easternmost corporate limits of the city, said point being the terminus of the described line. 
(f)  Sixth ward. The sixth ward of the city shall consist of that part of the city described as follows: That portion of the corporate area of the city lying south and east of a line which runs as follows: Beginning on the centerline of the Union Pacific Railroad due south of the easternmost corporate limits of the city, thence northwesterly to a point of intersection with the centerline of Indian Knoll Road; thence southerly along said centerline of Indian Knoll Road to a point of intersection with the centerline of Bolles Avenue; thence westerly along said centerline of Bolles Avenue to a point of intersection with the centerline of Prince Crossing Road; thence northerly along said centerline of Prince Crossing Road to a point of intersection with the centerline of Pomeroy Street, thence westerly along said centerline of Pomeroy Street to the centerline of Neltnor Boulevard (Illinois State Route 59); thence southerly along said centerline of Neltnor Boulevard to a point of intersection with the centerline of Forest Avenue; thence westerly along said centerline of Forest Avenue to a point of intersection with the centerline of Bishop Street; thence southerly along said centerline of Bishop Street to a point of intersection with the centerline of Roosevelt Road (Illinois State Route 38); thence northwesterly along said centerline of Roosevelt Road to a point on the centerline of the Canadian National Railroad; thence southerly along said centerline of the Canadian National Railroad to a point on the southernmost corporate limits of the city, said point being the terminus of the described line. 
(g)  Seventh ward. The seventh ward of the city shall consist of that part of the city described as follows: That part of the corporate area of the city lying north of a line which runs as follows: Beginning at the southwestern corner of Wayne Township (also known as intersection of the west right-of-way line of Kautz Road and the centerline of Hawthorne Lane extended westerly); thence easterly along the southern boundary of Wayne Township to a point of intersection with the centerline of the Canadian National Railroad; thence northwesterly along said centerline of the Canadian National Railroad to a point of intersection with the centerline of the Union Pacific Railroad spur; thence easterly along said centerline of the Union Pacific Railroad spur to a point of intersection with the centerline of the Commonwealth Edison right-of-way; thence northerly along said centerline of the Commonwealth Edison right-of-way to a point of intersection with the centerline of North Avenue (Illinois State Route 64); thence easterly along said centerline of North Avenue to a point of intersection with the centerline of Neltnor Boulevard (Illinois State Route 59); thence southeasterly along said centerline of Neltnor Boulevard to a point of intersection with the centerline of Hahndorf Street; thence easterly along said centerline line of Hahndorf Street to a point of intersection with the northern boundary line of Ingalton Hill Estates Subdivision (said subdivision plat recorded April 18, 1989 as Document R1989-044139 in the Dupage County Recorder's Office); thence easterly along said northern boundary line of Ingalton Hill Estates Subdivision to a point of intersection with the eastern boundary line of said Ingalton Hill Estates Subdivision; thence southerly along said eastern boundary line of Ingalton Hill Estates Subdivision to a point of intersection with the northern boundary line of Forest Trails Subdivision Unit 1 (said subdivision plat recorded April 29, 1988 as Document R1988-042451 in the Dupage County Recorder's Office); thence easterly along said northern boundary line of Forest Trails Subdivision Unit 1 to a point of intersection with the northern boundary line of Forest Trails Subdivision Unit 2 (said subdivision plat recorded January 21, 1988 as Document R1988-007356 in the Dupage County Recorder's Office); thence easterly along said northern boundary line of Forest Trails Subdivision Unit 2 to a point of intersection with the east line of the southwest quarter of Section 34 in Wayne Township; thence northerly along said east line of the southwest quarter of Section 34 in Wayne Township to a point of intersection with the south line of the of the northwest quarter of Section 34 in Wayne Township (also known as the southern boundary line of Prairie Meadows Subdivision); thence westerly along said south line of the of the northwest quarter of Section 34 in Wayne Township to a point of intersection with the western boundary line of Prairie Meadows Subdivision (said subdivision plat recorded May 29, 1996 as Document R1996-088732 in the DuPage County Recorder's Office); thence northerly along said western boundary line of Prairie Meadows Subdivision to a point of intersection with the centerline of North Avenue (Illinois State Route 64); thence easterly along said centerline of North Avenue to a point of intersection to a point on the easternmost corporate limits of the city, said point being the terminus of the described line. 
(Ord. No. 1251, § 5, 10-21-74; Ord. No. 1520, § 1, 4-20-81; Ord. No. 1630, § 1, 11-29-82; Ord. No. 2447, §§ 1, 2, 8-5-91; Ord. No. 3050, § 2, 10-21-96; Ord. No. 02-O-0080, § 1, 7-1-2002; Ord. No. 04-O-0096, § 1, 9-7-2004; Ord. No. 12-O-0034, § 1, 8-20-2012)  
Sec. 2-9. - Designation of former city hall as museum. 
The building located at 132 Main Street in the City and serving as the city hall from the year 1884 to the year 1975 is hereby designated as the "West Chicago City Museum." 
(Ord. No. 1265, §§ I, II, 4-7-75; Ord. No. 2502, § 1, 1-6-92)  
Sec. 2-10. - General development plan. 
The West Chicago General Development Plan Update, dated September, 1986, numbered pages 1 to 186, including the revised map dated January, 1990 is hereby adopted as the general development plan (official comprehensive plan and official map) of the city, together with all amendments heretofore passed. Said plan shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage and publication in pamphlet form. 
(Ord. No. 1260, § 3-3-75; Ord. No. 1927, § 2, 3-2-87; Ord. No. 2269, § 2, 5-21-90)  
Sec. 2-11. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 2626, adopted Mar. 1, 1993, repealed § 2-11, which pertained to fees and charges for costs of consultants and professionals and derived from Ord. No. 1289, §§ 1—3, adopted Dec. 1, 1975.  
Secs. 2-12—2-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ELECTED OFFICIALS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-31. - Conservators of peace. 
The mayor, aldermen, policemen and police reserves shall be the conservators of the peace. 
They shall have power to arrest or cause to be arrested, with or without process, all persons who break the peace, or are found violating any provisions of this Code or any appropriate law of the state, and to exercise all other powers as conservators of the peace.  
Secs. 2-32—2-40. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - MAYOR 
 
Sec. 2-41. - Powers and duties. 
The mayor is the chief executive officer of the city. The mayor shall have all the powers and perform all the duties, which are prescribed by law, the code and ordinances of the city, or by established custom, and shall take care that all laws and ordinances are faithfully executed. 
It shall be the mayor's duty: 
(1)  To attend and preside at all regular meetings, committees of the whole and special meetings of the council. 
(2)  To appoint and remove, with the advice and consent of the council, the city administrator, the chief of police and the corporation counsel. 
(3)  To appoint all standing and special committees of the council. 
(4)  To make all appointments, with the advice and consent of council, to the various boards and commissions of the city as required by law, this Code or otherwise. 
(5)  To serve as the city's official spokesperson and represent the city before governmental agencies, private and public organizations, citizen's groups, and the media. 
(6)  To sign all commissions, licenses, warrants, and permits as authorized by law. 
(7)  To recommend to the council for adoption municipal goals and objectives as well as such measures as he may deem necessary or expedient to accomplish them. 
(8)  To issue all official proclamations. 
(9)  To serve as the local liquor control commissioner for the city, as provided by statute, and as such shall be charged with the administration of the provisions of the Illinois Dram Shop Act and all provisions of this Code relating to alcoholic liquor. 
(Code 1954, Ch. II, Art. I, § 1; Ord. No. 2000, § 1, 1-4-88; Ord. No. 4218, § 2, 9-7-99; Ord. No. 06-O-0046, § 1, 6-5-2006; Ord. No. 07-O-0040, § 1, 6-4-2007)  
Sec. 2-42. - Term. 
The mayor shall hold the office for four (4) years, and until a successor is elected and qualified. 
(Code 1954, Ch. II, Art. I, § 2; Ord. No. 2000, § 1, 1-4-88)  
Sec. 2-43. - Compensation. 
The mayor shall receive a salary of twelve thousand dollars ($12,000.00) per year, payable in equal monthly installments, which shall be the total salary for the office of mayor and for the office of liquor commissioner. The mayor shall also receive a taxed stipend of three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) to cover out-of-pocket expenses expended on city business, payable in equal monthly installments; such items may include, but are not necessarily limited to, personal vehicle use, gasoline, and expenses associated with business meetings. The mayor shall be eligible to participate in the Illinois Municipal Retirement Fund provided he meets the requirements of the fund for the number of hours worked in a year. 
(Ord. No. 940, § 1, 5-1-67; Ord. No. 1524, § 1, 4-20-81; Ord. No. 1767, § 1, 10-1-84; Ord. No. 2000, § 1, 1-4-88; Ord. No. 2510, § 1, 2-3-92; Ord. No. 3047, § 1, 9-16-96; Ord. No. 04-O-0111, § 1, 9-20-2004; Ord. No. 11-O-0002, § 1, 1-17-2011)  
Sec. 2-44. - Emergency powers and duties. 
(1)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Curfew means a prohibition against any persons walking, running, loitering, standing or motoring upon any alley, street, highway, public property or vacant premises within the corporate limits of the city, excepting officials of any governmental unit and persons officially designated to duty with reference to a state of emergency or disaster. 
State of emergency means when there is: 
(a)  A riot or unlawful assembly characterized by the use of actual force or violence or any threat to use force if accompanied by immediate power to execute by three (3) or more persons acting together without authority of law; or 
(b)  Any natural disaster or manmade calamity, including flood, conflagration, cyclone, tornado, earthquake or explosion, within the corporate limits of the city, resulting in the death or injury of persons or the destruction of property to such an extent that extraordinary measures must be taken to protect the public health, safety and welfare, with resources normally available to the city. 
State of disaster means the conditions for a state of emergency are present and are larger than the city can handle. Assistance from DuPage County is formally requested. 
(2)  Authority to declare state of emergency or state of disaster. Whenever there is a state of emergency or disaster as defined in this section, The mayor, or his interim emergency successor, as provided under the city ordinance and identified in the city emergency operations plan, shall have the authority to declare a local state of emergency or disaster, which shall activate the city emergency operations plan, and, thereby, authorize the furnishing of necessary aid and assistance. The mayor shall declare the existence thereof by means of a written statement, under oath, finding that the standards in the aforementioned definition have been met, setting forth the facts to substantiate such findings, describing the nature of the emergency, and declaring that such an emergency or disaster exists. Such statement shall be filed with the city clerk as soon as practicable. 
(3)  Authority to order curfew. After the declaration of a state of emergency or disaster by the mayor, he may order a general curfew applicable to such geographical areas of the city, or to the city as a whole, as he deems advisable, and applicable during such hours of the day or night as he deems necessary in the interest of the public safety and welfare. 
(4)  Additional orders. After the declaration of a state of emergency or disaster, the mayor may also in the interest of public safety and welfare make any or all of the following orders: 
(a)  Order the discontinuance of selling, distributing or giving away gasoline or other liquid flammable or combustible products in any container other than a gasoline tank properly affixed to a motor vehicle. 
(b)  Order the discontinuance of selling, distributing, dispensing or giving away of any firearms or ammunition of any character whatsoever. 
(c)  Issue such other orders as are imminently necessary for the protection of life and property; provided however, that such orders shall not supersede the regularly constituted authority of the city administrator, chief of police, fire marshal, public works director or director of ESDA. 
(5)  Notification of proclamation. Any declaration, continuance or termination of a local state of emergency or disaster shall be given prompt and general publicity and shall be filed promptly with the city clerk. 
(6)  Effective period of declaration. Any initial order or proclamation declaring a local state of emergency or disaster shall not be continued or renewed for a period in excess of seven (7) days except by or with the consent of the city council. If a quorum of the city council is not capable of convening in session to continue or renew the local declaration of a state of emergency or disaster, the mayor is authorized to continue or renew the declaration until such time as a quorum of the city council can convene. 
(Ord. No. 07-O-0040, § 2, 6-4-2007; Ord. No. 10-O-0044, § 1, 5-3-2010)  
Sec. 2-45. - Emergency line of succession. 
Upon election, the mayor shall appoint, with the advice and consent of the city council, an emergency line of succession from among the alderman of the city. The successor shall exercise the powers of the office of mayor. 
(Ord. No. 07-O-0040, § 2, 6-4-2007; Ord. No. 12-O-0020, § 1, 7-16-2012)  
Secs. 2-46—2-60. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - CITY COUNCIL[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 4218, § 3, adopted Sept. 7, 1999, amended Div. 3, §§ 2-61—2-75, in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly Div. 3 pertained to the same subject matter and was derived from the 1954 Code, Ch. I, Art. III, §§ 1—4, as subsequently amended. The user's attention is directed to the Code Comparative Table at the back of this volume for derivation of this material. 
 
Sec. 2-61. - Council; composition. 
The city council shall consist of the mayor and aldermen. It shall meet in accordance with the Open Meetings Act (5 ILCS 120/1 et seq.). It shall keep a journal of its own proceedings. It shall be the sole judge whether aldermen are elected and eligible to their offices. However, a court shall not be prohibited from hearing and determining a proceeding in quo warranto. 
(Ord. No. 4218, § 3, 9-7-99)  
Sec. 2-62. - Meetings; regular. 
The regular meetings of the council shall be held on the first and third Monday in each month of the year at the hour of 7:00 p.m. in city hall unless another site shall be specified. Any regular meeting falling upon a legal holiday recognized by the city shall be held on the next following business day at the same hour and place. Meetings shall stand adjourned at 10:30 p.m. on the same evening unless extended or continued to a date and time certain by majority vote of the council then present. 
(Code 1954, Ch. I, Art. III, § 1; Ord. No. 4218, § 3, 9-7-99)  
Sec. 2-63. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 11-O-0036, § 2, adopted June 20, 2011, repealed § 2-63, which pertained to meetings; working session as a committee of the whole and derived from Ord. No. 4218, adopted September 7, 1999 and Ord. No. 01-O-0001, adopted April 16, 2001.  
Sec. 2-64. - Meetings; special. 
Special meetings of the council may be called by the mayor or by any three (3) aldermen by written request or notice being filed with the clerk at least seventy-two (72) hours prior to the time specified for such meeting. The clerk shall give notice in writing to each member of the council, stating the time, purpose and agenda of such special meeting; such notice to be served at least forty-eight (48) hours before the time of such meeting. 
(Ord. No. 4218, § 3, 9-7-99; Ord. No. 11-O-0036, § 3, 6-20-2011)  
Sec. 2-65. - Notice of meetings. 
(a)  Generally. Notice of all meetings shall be provided and shall include an agenda and shall be posted at city hall (and the location where the meeting is to be held if not at city hall) at least forty-eight (48) hours before the meeting. Notice of all meetings shall be delivered to each member of the council personally if he or she can be found, and if not, a copy of such notice shall be left at the home of such member of the council in the presence of an adult member of the council member's family, or in the absence of such person, shall be left at the residence at least forty-eight (48) hours before the meeting. 
(b)  Regularly scheduled meetings. Public notice of the schedule of regular meetings of the council or working session shall be given at the beginning of each calendar or fiscal year. Such notice shall state the regular dates, times and places of such meetings and shall be posted at city hall. Items not specifically set forth in the agenda of a regularly scheduled council meeting or working session may be considered at that meeting. 
(c)  Special, rescheduled and reconvened meetings. Public notice of any special meeting (except a meeting held in the event of a bona fide emergency) or any rescheduled or reconvened meeting shall be given at least forty-eight (48) hours before the meeting. In the event of a reconvened meeting, public notice does not need to be given if the meeting was open to the public and (i) it is to be reconvened within twenty-four (24) hours or (ii) an announcement of the time and place of the reconvened meeting was made at the original meeting and there is no change in the agenda. Notice of an emergency meeting shall be given as soon as practicable, but in any event prior to the holding of such meeting, to any news medium which has filed an annual request for notice. 
(d)  News media. Copies of the notice of regular meetings and any special, emergency, rescheduled or reconvened meeting shall be given to any news medium that has filed an annual request for such notice. Any such news medium shall also be given the same notice of all special, emergency, rescheduled or reconvened meetings provided such news medium has given the city an address, telephone number or fax number at which such notice may be given. 
(e)  Items posted for public display. Any ordinance or any motion or resolution to create any liability against the city or expend or appropriate the city's money shall be made available for public inspection at city hall by noon on the business day preceding the day of the meeting where that item is scheduled for final action. 
(Ord. No. 4218, § 3, 9-7-99)  
Sec. 2-66. - Items on the agenda; distribution. 
(a)  Packet distribution. The city administrator shall provide to all members of the council a packet of information explaining all items on the council's agenda on Thursday before said meeting whenever practical, but in no event later than the Friday before said meeting. Information pertinent to the discussion of agenda items shall be included in the packet. 
(b)  Minutes. The clerk shall keep the journal of the minutes of the meetings of the council. By noon on the Thursday preceding a regular city council meeting the clerk shall supply to the city administrator a typed written copy of the minutes from the regular, and special meetings since the date of the previous submission of minutes. The minutes shall be approved periodically. The minutes of the meetings may be amended to correctly reflect the view of the city council as to the events that occurred. 
(c)  Corporate fund disbursement report. A corporate fund disbursement report listing amounts payable for personal contractual services, material, equipment, supplies and any other expenditures necessary to provide for the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the city shall be submitted to the city council for approval at each regular meeting of the city council by the city administrator. 
(d)  Change orders. In any situation which may arise on any public improvement project, the city administrator and city engineer are authorized to approve change orders and must file a report relevant to the change order to the city council at the next regular meeting of the city council. 
(e)  Correspondence, unfinished business and new business. Copies of correspondence received by the clerk or mayor addressed to the city or city council shall be distributed before the meeting to all members of the corporate authorities. Items revised from a previous meeting for the council's consideration at a regular meeting shall appear on the agenda under unfinished business. New items for the council's consideration shall appear on the agenda under new business. 
(Ord. No. 4218, § 3, 9-7-99; Ord. No. 11-O-0036, §§ 5, 6, 6-20-2011)  
Sec. 2-67. - Visitors at meetings. 
City staff shall provide sign-in slips for any visitor who wishes to address the council; staff will provide the names to the mayor who shall recognize the visitor at the appropriate time during the meeting. During a regular meeting visitors shall be recognized during public participation and the visitor must sign in prior to the end of the public participation period. 
(Ord. No. 4218, § 3, 9-7-99; Ord. No. 11-O-0036, § 4, 6-20-2011)  
Sec. 2-68. - Rules. 
Unless otherwise provided by law, the council shall determine its own rules of proceeding by resolution. 
(Ord. No. 4218, § 3, 9-7-99)  
Sec. 2-69. - Censure of members; expulsion of aldermen. 
Any member of the council acting or appearing in lewd or disgraceful manner, or who uses opprobrious, obscene, or insulting language to or about any member of the council, or who does not obey the order of the presiding officer, shall be, on motion, censured by a majority vote of the corporate authorities and, in addition, may be fined not to exceed twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for each such occurrence. With the concurrence of two-thirds ( 2/3 ) of the aldermen then holding office, the council may expel an alderman, but not a second time for the same incident. 
(Ord. No. 4218, § 3, 9-7-99)  
Sec. 2-70. - Standing committees; membership. 
The council shall have standing committees as defined by ordinance. No two (2) aldermen serving on a standing committee shall represent the same ward. The mayor shall be a member ex-officio of all standing committees. Appointments to fill vacancies on standing committees shall be made by the mayor. Members of standing committees shall elect their own chairman at the first meeting following the seating of aldermen upon their election, or following the resignation of the current chairman, unless otherwise specified. All members of the council are entitled to be present and speak before any standing committee. 
(Ord. No. 01-O-0001, § 2, 4-16-2001; Ord. No. 02-O-0122, § 1, 10-21-2002)  
Sec. 2-71. - Standing committees; meetings. 
Unless otherwise specified, standing committee meetings will begin at the hour of 7:00 p.m. in city hall. Any standing committee meeting falling upon a legal holiday recognized by the city shall be held on the next following business day at the same hour and place. Meetings shall stand adjourned at 10:30 p.m. on the same evening unless extended or continued to a date and time certain by majority vote of the council then present. Special meetings of a standing committee may be called by the chairman or by any two (2) members by written request or notice being filed with the clerk at least seventy-two (72) hours prior to the time specified for such meeting. The clerk shall give notice in writing to each member of the council, stating the time, purpose and agenda of such special meeting; such notice to be served at least forty-eight (48) hours before the time of such meeting. 
(Ord. No. 01-O-0001, § 2, 4-16-2001)  
Sec. 2-72. - Finance committee. 
The finance committee shall be a standing committee of the council. The finance committee shall meet on the fourth Thursday in each month of the year. There shall be seven (7) members of the finance committee. The duties of the finance committee shall include but not be limited to the following. 
(1)  Items related to the finances of the city. 
(2)  Items related to personnel of the city. 
(3)  Franchise agreements. 
(4)  Preparation of the annual budget. 
(Ord. No. 01-O-0001, § 2, 4-16-2001; Ord. No. 03-O-0041, § 1, 5-19-2003; Ord. No. 13-O-0005, § 5, 3-18-2013)  
Sec. 2-73. - Infrastructure committee. 
The infrastructure committee shall be a standing committee of the council. The infrastructure committee shall meet on the first Thursday in each month of the year. There shall be seven (7) members of the infrastructure committee. The duties of the infrastructure committee shall include but not be limited to the following. 
(1)  Items related to the streets, water distribution and wastewater management of the city. 
(2)  Properties and facilities of belonging to the city. 
(3)  Capital improvement projects. 
(Ord. No. 01-O-0001, § 2, 4-16-2001; Ord. No. 05-O-0043, § 1, 6-6-2005; Ord. No. 09-O-0015, § 1, 4-20-2009)  
Sec. 2-74. - Development committee. 
The development committee shall be a standing committee of the council. The development committee shall meet on the second Monday in each month of the year. There shall be seven (7) members of the development committee. The duties of the development committee shall include but not be limited to the following. 
(1)  Items related to the planning and zoning of the city. 
(2)  Items related to economic development. 
(Ord. No. 01-O-0001, § 2, 4-16-2001; Ord. No. 02-O-0122, § 2, 10-21-2002)  
Sec. 2-75. - Public affairs committee. 
The public affairs committee shall be a standing committee of the council. The public affairs committee shall meet on the fourth Monday in each month of the year. There shall be seven (7) members of the public affairs committee. The duties of the public affairs committee shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Items related to law enforcement. 
(2)  Items related to building regulations and code enforcement. 
(3)  Items related to the museum and historical preservation. 
(4)  Items related to public events. 
(Ord. No. 09-O-0015, § 2, 4-20-2009; Ord. No. 11-O-0036, § 7, 6-20-2011) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 09-O-0015, § 2, adopted Apr. 20, 2009 deleted § 2-75 and enacted a new § 2-75 as set out herein. The former § 2-75 pertained to public safety committee and derived from Ord. No. 02-O-0122, § 3, adopted Oct. 21, 2002.  
Sec. 2-76. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 09-O-0015, § 3, adopted Apr. 20, 2009 deleted § 2-76 in its entirety. The former § 2-76 pertained to community affairs committee and derived from Ord. No. 02-O-0122, § 3, adopted Oct. 21, 2002 and Ord. No. 03-O-0035, § 1, adopted May 5, 2003.  
DIVISION 4. - ALDERMEN 
 
Sec. 2-77. - How elected; term. 
Two (2) aldermen shall be elected from each ward. One (1) of these two (2) aldermen shall be elected at the general municipal election, at the time the mayor is elected. He shall hold his office for four (4) years, and until his successor is elected and qualified. The other of these two (2) aldermen shall be elected at the next regular general municipal election, and he shall hold his office for four (4) years, and until his successor is elected and qualified. 
(Code 1954, Ch. II, Art. II, § 2)  
Sec. 2-78. - Eligibility. 
No person shall be eligible to the office of alderman: 
(1)  If he is not a qualified elector of the city and has not resided therein at least one (1) year next preceding his election. 
(2)  If he has not lived within the ward for which he is elected at least thirty (30) days prior to his election. 
(3)  If he is in arrears in the payment of any tax or other indebtedness due to the city. 
(4)  If he has been convicted in state courts of malfeasance in office, bribery or any other infamous crime. 
(Code 1954, Ch. II, Art. II, § 2)  
Sec. 2-79. - Prohibited from holding other offices; exception. 
No alderman shall be eligible to hold any other office, except that of acting mayor or mayor pro tem, the salary of which is payable out of the city treasury. 
(Code 1954, Ch. II, Art. II, § 3; Ord. No. 11-O-0036, § 8, 6-20-2011)  
Sec. 2-80. - Compensation. 
The compensation of each alderman is hereby fixed at the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00) for each regular meeting of the council and for each regular meeting of a standing committee to which they are assigned, payable monthly; said compensation shall only be paid if an alderman attends the meeting. By majority vote of the city council or standing committee, whichever is applicable, said compensation may be waived. 
(Ord. No. 940, § 3, 5-1-67; Ord. No. 1524, § 1, 4-20-81; Ord. No. 3047, § 2, 9-16-96; Ord. No. 06-O-0045, § 1, 6-5-2006)  
Sec. 2-81. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 11-O-0036, § 9, adopted June 20, 2011, repealed § 2-81, which pertained to absence from meetings and derived from Ord. No. 787, adopted February 19, 1962.  
Sec. 2-82. - Requests on matters requiring staff time or resources. 
(a)  Aldermen who request that city staff investigate matters which require a significant amount of labor and/or monetary resources shall make such request to either a department head or the city administrator. If the request is made to a department head the city administrator shall be informed of the request. If the request is found to require a significant amount of labor and/or monetary resources in the judgment of the city administrator, the request shall be placed on a council agenda such that official direction may be given to staff. 
(b)  Aldermen who request information that does not require a significant amount of labor and/or monetary resources, and place the request by noon on the same day as a regular council meeting or working session may expect a response by the next regular council meeting or regular working session whichever is earlier. 
(Ord. No. 4218, § 5, 9-7-99)  
Secs. 2-83—2-90. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - CITY CLERK 
 
Sec. 2-91. - Office—Created. 
The office of the clerk, an executive department of the city, is hereby created. 
(Code 1954, Ch. II, Art. III, § 1)  
Sec. 2-92. - Same—Clerk to be chief executive officer. 
The duly elected and qualified clerk shall be the chief executive officer of the clerk's office. 
(Code 1954, Ch. II, Art. III, § 2)  
Sec. 2-93. - Same—Composition, absence of clerk at city council meeting. 
(a)  Said office shall consist of the clerk, and such deputy clerk as from time to time is authorized by the council. 
(b)  In the absence of the city clerk, deputy clerk, or clerk pro tem, the mayor, with the approval and consent of the city council, shall appoint a recording secretary at any regular or special city council meeting. 
(Code 1954, Ch. II, Art. III, § 3; Ord. No. 1582, § 1, 5-17-82)  
Sec. 2-94. - Powers and duties. 
The clerk shall have all the powers, and perform all the duties, now or hereinafter provided by the laws of the state, and this Code. Among other things, it shall be his duty: 
(1)  To keep the corporate seal of the city, and affix the same to all papers requiring the corporate seal. 
(2)  To attend all regular meetings, working sessions and special meetings of the council, and keep a full record of council proceedings in a journal; the journal shall include: 
a.  Any amendments to correctly reflect the view of the council as to the events that occurred. 
b.  In all cases where a resolution or motion is entered in the journal, the name of the alderman moving and seconding the same shall be entered. 
c.  The yeas and nays shall be taken upon the passage of all ordinances and on all propositions to create any liability against the city, or for the expenditure or appropriation of its money, and in all other cases at the request of any alderman. 
(3)  To record all ordinances passed by the council, and when necessary cause the same to be published as prescribed by statute. 
(4)  Be the custodian of all documents belonging to the city, which are not specifically assigned to the custody of some other officer. 
(5)  To prepare and deliver all licenses and bonds. 
(6)  To countersign all warrants drawn on the city treasurer, and deliver the same when collected. 
(7)  To keep a correct account of all moneys belonging to the city and received by him and pay the same over to the city treasurer immediately, taking the city treasurer's receipt therefor, and make report thereof to the council monthly. 
(8)  To notify all persons elected or appointed to municipal offices of their election and/or appointment, within five (5) days after the result of the election is declared, or appointment made, and generally do and perform such other duties as may be required of him by statute or this Code. 
(9)  To cause an affidavit showing service of notice of all special meetings of the council to be filed in the clerk's office at the time fixed for such special meeting, together with a statement of compliance with regard to the notices to members of the city council and the media as provided in the Open Meetings Act (5 ILCS 120/1 et seq.). 
(Code 1954, Ch. II, Art. III, § 4; Ord. No. 4218, § 6, 9-16-99; Ord. No. 4218, § 7, 9-7-99)  
Sec. 2-95. - Election; term. 
The clerk shall be elected at the municipal election when the mayor is elected, and shall hold his office for four (4) years. 
(Code 1954, Ch. II, Art. III, § 5)  
Sec. 2-96. - Compensation. 
(a)  The annual compensation of the clerk is hereby fixed at the sum of four thousand five hundred dollars ($4,500.00), payable in twelve (12) equal monthly installments. 
(b)  The rates of compensation provided for by this section shall be effective May 1, 2005. The compensation to be paid such elected officers shall be paid in accordance with the provisions of Illinois Compiled Statutes, Chapter 65, Section 5/3.1-50-5, 5/3.1-50-10 and 5/3.1-50-15, in that such compensation shall only be paid to the city clerk elected at the next general municipal election to be held in April, 2005. 
(Ord. No. 940, § 2, 5-1-67; Ord. No. 1524, § 1, 4-20-81; Ord. No. 3047, § 3, 9-16-96; Ord. No. 4369, § 1, 11-21-2000; Ord. No. 03-O-0014, § 1, 4-7-2003; Ord. No. 04-O-0110, § 1, 9-20-2004)  
Sec. 2-97. - Compensation of deputies. 
The compensation of deputy clerks shall be fixed by the council. 
(Code 1954, Ch. II, Art. III, §§ 6, 7)  
Secs. 2-98—2-105. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - CITY TREASURER 
 
Sec. 2-106. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 13-O-0005, § 2, adopted March 18, 2013, repealed § 2-106. The former § 2-106 pertained to creation of the office of the city treasurer and derived from the original Code.  
Sec. 2-107. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 13-O-0005, § 2, adopted March 18, 2013, repealed § 2-107. The former § 2-107 pertained to treasurer to be chief executive officer and derived from the original Code.  
Sec. 2-108. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 13-O-0005, § 2, adopted March 18, 2013, repealed § 2-108. The former § 2-108 pertained to composition of the office of the city treasurer and derived from the original Code.  
Sec. 2-109. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 13-O-0005, § 2, adopted March 18, 2013, repealed § 2-109. The former § 2-109 pertained to salary and derived from Ord. No. 940, § 2, adopted May 1, 1967; Ord. No. 1524, § 1, adopted April 20, 1981; Ord. No. 3047, § 4, adopted Sept. 16, 1996; Ord. No. 04-O-0109, § 1, adopted Sept. 20, 2004.  
Sec. 2-110. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 13-O-0005, § 2, adopted March 18, 2013, repealed § 2-110. The former § 2-110 pertained to duties and derived from Code 1954, C. II, Art. IV, § 1; Ord. No. 2727, § 8, adopted Jan. 3, 1994.  
Sec. 2-111. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 13-O-0005, § 2, adopted March 18, 2013, repealed § 2-111. The former § 2-111 pertained to investment policy and derived from Ord. No. 2754, § 1, adopted Sept. 6, 1994; Ord. No. 2975, §§ 1—3, adopted June 3, 1996; Ord. No. 3039, § 1, adopted Oct. 21, 1996; Ord. No. 3062, § 1, adopted Feb. 3, 1997; Ord. No. 4238, § 1, adopted Oct. 18, 1999; Ord. No. 4390, § 1, adopted March 5, 2001; Ord. No. 02-O-0136, § 1, adopted Jan. 20, 2003; Ord. No. 04-O-0113, § 1, adopted Nov. 15, 2004; Ord. No. 11-O-0036, § 18, adopted June 20, 2011.  
Secs. 2-112—2-120. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - APPOINTED OFFICERS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Section 2 of Ord. No. 2727, adopted Jan. 3, 1994, retitled Art. III, "City Administrator" as "Appointed Officers." Section 3 of Ord. No. 2727, reclassified §§ 2-121—2-141 as a new Art. III, Div. 1 entitled, "City Administrator," and § 4 of Ord. No. 2727 added a new Div. 2 to read as herein set out. 
 
DIVISION 1. - CITY ADMINISTRATOR 
 
Sec. 2-121. - Office created; appointment and qualifications. 
There is hereby created the office of city administrator. The city administrator shall be appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the city council. The appointment shall be by written contract for a period not exceeding four (4) years and which must terminate no later than the end of the term of the then presiding mayor. 
(Ord. No. 06-O-0001, § 4, 2-6-2006; Ord. No. 15-O-0015, § 1, 6-15-2015)  
Sec. 2-122. - Chief administrative official. 
The city administrator shall be responsible to the mayor and city council for the efficient administration of the city. The city administrator shall be responsible for the recruitment, selection and removal of all employees whose positions are not subject to either appointment by the mayor with the advice and consent of the city council as detailed in this article III or the civil service commission. 
(Ord. No. 06-O-0001, § 4, 2-6-2006)  
Sec. 2-123. - Removal. 
The city administrator may be removed from office by the mayor with the advice and consent of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 06-O-0001, § 4, 2-6-2006)  
Sec. 2-124. - Bonding requirements. 
(a)  Before taking office, the city administrator shall furnish a fidelity bond in the amount of seven thousand five hundred dollars ($7,500.00) and with such surety as may be approved by the council. Said bond shall be conditioned on the faithful performance of his duty and conditioned to indemnify the city for any loss by reason of any act of the city administrator. The cost of the bond shall be paid by the city and filed with the clerk after being approved by the council. 
(b)  The city is currently a member of a self-insurance pool known as the Intergovernmental Risk Management Agency ("IRMA"). IRMA currently provides public officials fidelity, crime and honesty (dishonesty) coverages equivalent to or in excess of the bonding requirements set forth above in this section. For so long as IRMA provides such coverages to the city equivalent to or in excess of the requirements set forth above in this section, the bonding requirements of this section shall be deemed satisfied. 
(Ord. No. 06-O-0001, § 4, 2-6-2006)  
Sec. 2-125. - Duties, attendance at council meetings. 
The city administrator shall execute those duties assigned to him by statute, the mayor and council. The city administrator shall attend all meetings of the council and shall recommend such actions as may be necessary or expedient for the welfare of the city. The city administrator shall have a job description which has been approved by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 06-O-0001, § 4, 2-6-2006)  
Sec. 2-126. - Power to purchase. 
The city administrator is authorized to make, in the ordinary course of business, all purchases of services, equipment, materials and supplies necessary for the city as provided in the annual budget; provided that, for purchases in excess of twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00), he shall first procure the approval of the city council and shall comply with the statutory provisions regarding solicitation of bids. When either the corporation counsel, an IRMA attorney or another attorney that has been approved by the city council pursuant to section 2-148 is unable to address a question raised by either the staff or a member of the city council, the city administrator is authorized to consult an attorney with expertise in that field. 
(Ord. No. 06-O-0001, § 4, 2-6-2006; Ord. No. 06-O-0014, § 1, 2-20-2006; Ord. No. 11-O-0036, § 10, 6-20-2011)  
Sec. 2-127. - Examination of contracts. 
The city administrator shall examine all proposed contracts to which the city may be a party and may sign on behalf of the city any contract authorized by the city council except when another officer has been directed to do so. If the contract is for services, equipment, material or supplies and is not in excess of twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00), as provided in section 2-126, no authorization of the city council is necessary. It shall be the duty of the city administrator to see that all contract terms are fully complied with by the contracting parties. 
(Ord. No. 06-O-0001, § 4, 2-6-2006; Ord. No. 06-O-0014, § 1, 2-20-2006)  
Sec. 2-128. - Budget officer. 
The city administrator shall serve as the budget officer for the city, and shall be responsible for preparing the budget as required by Section 8-2-9 of the Illinois Municipal Code as well as for preparing the capital improvement program. 
(Ord. No. 06-O-0001, § 4, 2-6-2006)  
Sec. 2-129. - Issuance of licenses and permits. 
The city administrator shall have the authority to issue all licenses and permits not otherwise provided for by state law. 
(Ord. No. 06-O-0001, § 4, 2-6-2006)  
Sec. 2-130. - Accounting and collection of monies. 
It shall be the duty of the city administrator to keep current accounts showing at all times the fiscal condition of the city including current anticipated expenses, budgeted expenditures, cash on hand and anticipated revenues; and he shall see to the collection of all monies due the municipality. 
(Ord. No. 06-O-0001, § 4, 2-6-2006)  
Sec. 2-131. - Duty to keep records. 
The city administrator shall prepare and have custody of all municipal records required to be kept by the city and not by another person. For those records that must be produced and/or maintained by the city clerk pursuant to state statute, the city administrator shall provide, or have his staff provide, assistance to ensure that those records are produced in a timely manner and maintained in accordance with law. 
(Ord. No. 06-O-0001, § 4, 2-6-2006; Ord. No. 13-O-0005, § 4, 3-18-2013)  
Sec. 2-132. - Duty to serve as collector and comptroller. 
The city administrator shall serve as city collector and comptroller unless such offices are duly filled by appointment and he shall perform the duties of such offices in the absence of such appointment. 
(Ord. No. 06-O-0001, § 4, 2-6-2006)  
Sec. 2-133. - Miscellaneous duties. 
The city administrator shall perform such other duties as directed by the city council or as may be prescribed by state law, by this Code, or by any ordinance or resolution of the City of West Chicago. 
(Ord. No. 06-O-0001, § 4, 2-6-2006)  
Sec. 2-134. - Assignment of the statutory duties of the city treasurer. 
The city administrator shall assign all duties which are statutorily required of the city treasurer to the staff person who serves as the chief financial officer of the city. Said staff person shall be subject to the general supervision and control of the city administrator in the execution of such duties. 
(Ord. No. 13-O-0005, § 3, 3-18-2013)  
Secs. 2-135—2-145. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - OFFICE OF CORPORATION COUNSEL 
 
Sec. 2-146. - Office of corporation counsel created. 
The office of corporation counsel of the city is hereby created. The mayor shall, by and with the advice and consent of the city council, appoint the corporation counsel. 
(Ord. No. 06-O-0001, § 4, 2-6-2006)  
Sec. 2-147. - Compensation. 
The corporation counsel shall receive as compensation the sum of three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) per year, payable in twelve (12) equal monthly installments, for attendance at regular council meetings. In addition, he shall receive an hourly rate as from time to time set by the council for legal services performed. He shall not receive any compensation on a percentage basis. 
(Ord. No. 06-O-0001, § 4, 2-6-2006)  
Sec. 2-148. - Appointment of additional attorneys. 
When necessary, the mayor, with the advice and consent of the city council, shall appoint additional attorneys to perform legal services for the city or to assist the corporation counsel on special matters. 
(Ord. No. 06-O-0001, § 4, 2-6-2006)  
Secs. 2-149—2-165. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - CHIEF OF POLICE 
 
Sec. 2-166. - Office created; appointment and qualifications. 
There is hereby created the office of the chief of police. The chief of police shall be appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the city council, and shall report to the city administrator. The appointment may be by written contract for a period not exceeding four (4) years and which must terminate no later than the end of the term of the then presiding mayor. 
(Ord. No. 06-O-0001, § 4, 2-6-2006; Ord. No. 15-O-0015, § 1, 6-15-2015)  
Sec. 2-167. - Duties. 
The chief of police shall have a job description which has been approved by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 06-O-0001, § 4, 2-6-2006)  
ARTICLE IV. - RESERVED[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Section 4 of Ord. No. 06-O-0001, adopted Feb. 6, 2006, amended, and at the city's instruction, deleted Art. IV, Divs. 1—4, 6—8, 10 and 11, which pertained to executive departments. For complete derivation see the Code Comparative Table at the end of this volume. 
 
Secs. 2-168—2-264. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - OTHER DEPARTMENTS 
 
Sec. 2-265. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 2240, adopted Jan. 2, 1990, deleted the provisions of Art. VI, and § 2 of said ordinance enacted a new Art. VI in lieu thereof. Former Art. VI, which pertained to similar provisions, contained §§ 2-266, 2-278, 2-279, 2-291—2-297, 2-311—2-330, 2-346—2-348, 2-361, 2-362, 2-381—2-386, 2-401—2-403, and 2-411—2-416. The deleted provisions derived from Code 1954, Ch. VI, Art. II, and the following ordinances: 
Ord. No. 	Section 	Date 	Ord. No. 	Section 	Date 
619 		1-7-57 	1366 	1 	5-1-78 
649 		9-17-57 	1481 	1 	7-21-80 
656 	1—3 	6-15-58 	1584 	1—5 	5-17-82 
1015 	Arts. I—VIII 	9-15-69 	1807 	1 	4-1-85 
1233 	1, 2 	6-3-74 	1833 	1 	8-9-85 
1284 	1 	9-2-78 	1836 	1 	10-7-85 
1315 	1—6 	8-2-76 	1864 	1 	3-17-86 
			2208 	1—3 	10-2-89 
 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-266. - Eligibility; contingent upon payment of debts to city. 
No person shall be eligible for appointment to nor shall hold membership on any board or commission of the city if he or she is in arrears in the payment of any tax or other indebtedness due the city. 
(Ord. No. 2240, § 2, 1-2-90)  
Sec. 2-267. - Appointment. 
All members of the plan commission and zoning board of appeals, building board of appeals, historical preservation commission, environmental commission and cultural arts commission shall be appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the city council. Any vacancy which exists in an unexpired term of a member shall be filled by appointment of the mayor, subject to the advice and consent of the city council, for the remainder of the unexpired term. Each member shall hold office as a member of a board or commission until a successor has been appointed. 
All members of the civil service commission and the two (2) resident appointees of the police pension board shall be appointed by the mayor. Any vacancy which exists in an unexpired term of a member shall be filled by appointment of the mayor, for the remainder of the unexpired term. Each member shall hold office as a member of a board or commission until a successor has been appointed. 
The mayor, with the advice and consent of the city council, may remove any member who fails to regularly attend meetings without a valid reason. 
(Ord. No. 2240, § 2, 1-2-90; Ord. No. 2435, § 2, 6-3-91; Ord. No. 2620, § 1, 12-21-92; Ord. No. 11-O-0036, § 11, 6-20-2011; Ord. No. 16-O-0015, § 1, 4-4-2016)  
Sec. 2-268. - Chairman selection. 
The mayor shall annually, on or before June 1 of each year, appoint one (1) member of each board and commission as chairman, unless the appointment is prescribed by state statute. A chairman may serve multiple terms as chairman. The boards and commissions shall select among themselves a secretary, assistant chairman or other positions as set out in their rules. 
(Ord. No. 2240, § 2, 1-2-90; Ord. No. 16-O-0015, § 2, 4-4-2016)  
Sec. 2-269. - Rules. 
All commissions shall develop and use their own rules. Meetings shall be run in accordance with Robert's Rules of Order, unless modified by the commission's own rules. 
(Ord. No. 2240, § 2, 1-2-90)  
Sec. 2-270. - Expenditure of funds. 
All boards and commissions shall be authorized to expend no municipal funds other than those appropriated and approved by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2240, § 2, 1-2-90)  
Sec. 2-271. - Meeting place. 
All meetings of boards and commissions shall be held at city hall. Meeting rooms, times and dates shall be coordinated with and approved by the city administrator to eliminate conflicts between the various groups using city hall. 
(Ord. No. 2240, § 2, 1-2-90)  
Sec. 2-272. - Meeting records. 
All boards and commissions shall prepare a written record of all meetings held to discuss board or commission business. This written record shall be made available for public inspection except for personnel matters found in the civil service commission. 
(Ord. No. 2240, § 2, 1-2-90)  
Secs. 2-273—2-277. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - HISTORICAL PRESERVATION COMMISSION[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 11-O-0036, § 12, adopted June 20, 2011, repealed the former Div. 2, §§ 2-278—2-283, and enacted a new Div. 2 as set out herein. The former Div. 2 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2365, adopted November 5, 1990 and Ord. No. 02-O-127, and November 4, 2002. 
Cross reference— Museum department, § 2-250 et seq.; buildings and building regulations, Ch. 4; landmark and historic district regulations, § 4-90 et seq.; Turner Junction Historic District, § 7-51 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-278. - Establishment. 
There is hereby created a commission, to be known as the historical preservation commission. 
(Ord. No. 11-O-0036, § 12, 6-20-2011)  
Sec. 2-279. - Membership. 
(a)  The commission shall consist of seven (7) members. 
(b)  Appointment to the commission shall be for three-year terms. 
(Ord. No. 11-O-0036, § 12, 6-20-2011; Ord. No. 16-O-0015, § 3, 4-4-2016)  
Sec. 2-280. - Meetings; by-laws. 
(a)  The commission shall have the power to adopt its own by-laws and schedule of regular meetings. These rules shall include procedures for the election by the members of a vice-chairman, and secretary from among the membership of the commission. 
(b)  Meetings shall be held monthly at a regularly scheduled time. Special meetings of the commission may be called by the chairman or any three (3) members provided that notice is given as provided in the Illinois "Open Meetings Act." 
(c)  No commissioner shall vote on any matter which affects his property, or business interest. 
(d)  No action shall be taken by the commission which could in any manner deprive or restrict the owner of a property in its use, modification, maintenance, disposition or demolition until such owner shall first have had the opportunity to be heard at a public meeting of the commission, as provided by the law. 
(Ord. No. 11-O-0036, § 12, 6-20-2011)  
Sec. 2-281. - Functions of the commission. 
The historic preservation commission shall: 
(1)  Adopt its own procedural regulations. 
(2)  Advise and recommend to the mayor and city council on the administration of all city-owned or -operated historical museums or grounds, and on all matters of a historical nature. 
(3)  Recommend to the city council ways and means of receiving and expending grants, donations and income. 
(4)  Conduct an ongoing survey to identify West Chicago's historically and architecturally significant properties, structures and areas, including landscapes. 
(5)  Investigate and recommend to the city council certain West Chicago properties or structures having special historic, community or architectural value be designated as "landmarks". 
(6)  Investigate, hold public hearings and recommend to the city council that certain West Chicago areas as having special historic, community, architectural or archeological value as "historic districts". 
(7)  Keep a register of all property and structures which have been designated under this division, including all information required for each designation. 
(8)  Determine an appropriate system of markers and make recommendation for the design and implementation of specific markings of the streets and routes leading from one (1) historic district to another, or a landmark. 
(9)  Advise and assist owners of landmarks and property or structures within historic districts on procedures for inclusion on the National Register of Historic Places. 
(10)  Inform and educate the citizens of West Chicago concerning the historic and architectural heritage of the city. 
(11)  Review building permit applications for construction, alteration, removal or demolition of designated landmarks or structures within historic districts and to notify the city council of the commission's decision to issue or deny certificates of appropriateness for such actions. Applicants shall be required to submit one (1) additional set of plans, drawings, elevations, specifications and other information as may be necessary to make decisions in conjunction with the application to the building department. 
(12)  Develop specific design criteria for the restoration, construction or removal of landmarks, or property and improvements within historic district which will be approved by council. 
(13)  Review and advise on proposed zoning amendments, applications for special uses or applications for zoning variances that affect designated landmarks and historic districts. 
(14)  Accept and administer on behalf of the city upon designation by the city council, such gifts or grants of money as may be designated by the grantor or donor for the uses and purposes of this division. Such money may be expended for publishing maps and brochures, or for hiring staff persons or consultants or performing other appropriate functions for the purpose of carrying out the duties and powers of the commission and the purposes of this division. 
(15)  Call upon city staff members as well as to engage other experts and professionals for technical advice as may be required, and as may be provided for in the budget of the commission. 
(16)  Testify before all boards, committees, agencies and commissions including the city plan commission, building committee and the zoning board of appeals on any matter affecting historically and architecturally significant property, structures and areas. 
(17)  Insure that recognition is conferred upon the owners of designated landmarks or property or improvements within historic district. 
(18)  Periodically review the West Chicago zoning ordinance and to recommend to the plan commission and the city council any amendments appropriate for the protection and continued use of landmarks or property and improvements within designated historic districts. 
(19)  Provide guidelines approved by the city council to the building department for methods and procedures, to notify the historical commission of proposed construction alteration, removal or demolition of designated landmarks or improvements within historic districts. 
(20)  Undertake any other action or activity necessary or appropriate for the implementation of its powers and duties, or to the implementation of the purposes of this division, as permitted by statute, and approved by city council. 
(Ord. No. 11-O-0036, § 12, 6-20-2011)  
Sec. 2-282. - Report to mayor and city council. 
The historic preservation commission shall submit an annual written report to the city council summarizing its doings and transactions and specifically, to recommend at such time, action to be taken by the city in matters of historical nature. 
(Ord. No. 11-O-0036, § 12, 6-20-2011)  
Secs. 2-283—2-290. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - BUILDING BOARD OF APPEALS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 03-O-0064, § 1, adopted July 21, 2003, deleted the former Div. 3, §§ 2-291—2-298, and enacted a new Div. 3 as set out herein. The former Div. 3 pertained to economic development commission and derived from Ord. No. 2240, § 2, adopted Jan. 2, 1990; and Ord. No. 2977, § 5, adopted April 1, 1996. 
 
Sec. 2-291. - Establishment. 
There shall be and is hereby created and established a building board of appeals to provide a means of appeal of the code official's determination as detailed in the codes adopted in chapter 4 of this City Code. 
(Ord. No. 03-O-0064, § 1, 7-21-2003)  
Sec. 2-292. - Membership. 
The building board of appeals shall consist of five (5) members, to be appointed by the mayor with the consent of the city council for four (4) year terms, all of whom shall be registered design professionals from the following professions or disciplines: 
(1)  Registered architect or a builder or superintendent of building construction; 
(2)  Structural engineering; 
(3)  Mechanical or plumbing contractor; 
(4)  Electrical contractor; or 
(5)  Fire protection contractor. 
(Ord. No. 03-O-0064, § 1, 7-21-2003; Ord. No. 11-O-0036, § 13, 6-20-2011)  
Sec. 2-293. - Powers and duties. 
The board shall have all of the power and duties as prescribed to it by the building codes adopted by the city. 
(Ord. No. 03-O-0064, § 1, 7-21-2003)  
Secs. 2-294—2-310. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - RESERVED[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 11-O-0036, § 16, adopted June 20, 2011, repealed Div. 4, §§ 2-311—2-313, which pertained to the equal opportunity board and derived from Ord. No. 02-O-0097, adopted August 5, 2002. 
 
Secs. 2-311—2-345. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - RESERVED[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 10-O-0045, § 1, adopted May 3, 2010, repealed Div. 5, §§ 2-346—2-349, which pertained to the citizen corps advisory board and derived from Ord. No. 06-O-0029, adopted April 3, 2006. 
 
Secs. 2-346—2-360. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - BOARD OF LOCAL IMPROVEMENTS 
 
Sec. 2-361. - Established; membership. 
There is hereby created the board of local improvements which shall consist of the mayor, the city engineer, the chairman of the finance committee and the chairman of the infrastructure committee of the council. 
(Ord. No. 2240, § 2, 1-2-90; Ord. No. 16-O-0015, § 4, 4-4-2016)  
Sec. 2-362. - Functions. 
The duties of the board of local improvements shall be those set forth in state statutes. 
(Ord. No. 2240, § 2, 1-2-90)  
Secs. 2-363—2-380. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 7. - PLAN COMMISSION AND ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS 
 
Sec. 2-381. - Plan commission established. 
The plan commission shall consist of seven (7) members to be appointed by the mayor with the consent of the council. Each commission member shall receive for his/her services compensation, if any, as determined by the council, so long as the member has said compensation directly deposited into a bank account. The members of the plan commission shall also serve as members of the zoning board of appeals, and the chairperson of the plan commission shall be the chairperson of the zoning board of appeals. The mayor, with the advice and consent of the city council, may appoint a non-voting ex-officio member to serve on the commission. 
(Ord. No. 01-O-0099, § 1, 10-15-2001; Ord. No. 11-O-0036, § 22, 6-20-2011; Ord. No. 14-O-0009, § 1, 3-17-2014)  
Sec. 2-382. - Zoning board of appeals established. 
The zoning board of appeals shall consist of seven (7) members. The members of the zoning board of appeals shall be the appointed members of the plan commission. 
(Ord. No. 01-O-0099, § 1, 10-15-2001)  
Sec. 2-383. - Terms of office. 
(a)  The members of the commission shall each be appointed for a term of five (5) years. 
(b)  The commission shall elect a vice-chairman from among their members for a one-year term. The term of the vice-chairman will coincide with the city's fiscal year. The vice-chairman may serve multiple terms as vice-chairman. 
(Ord. No. 01-O-0099, § 1, 10-15-2001; Ord. No. 11-O-0036, § 14, 6-20-2011; Ord. No. 16-O-0015, § 5, 4-4-2016)  
Sec. 2-384. - Meetings, rules, voting. 
(a)  All meetings of the commission shall be held at the call of the chairman and at such times as the commission may determine. All commission meetings shall be open to the public. The commission shall keep minutes of its proceedings, and shall also keep records of its hearings and other official actions. 
(b)  The commission may adopt their own rules of meeting procedures consistent with the ordinances of the city and the applicable state statutes. The chairman, or in his/her absence the vice chairman, may administer oaths to witnesses. 
(c)  In exercising its powers, the commission may, upon the concurring vote of a majority of members then in office adopt any motion, recommendation or decision brought before it. 
(d)  The commission may issue a findings of fact to the city council without a recommendation. 
(Ord. No. 01-O-0099, § 1, 10-15-2001; Ord. No. 11-O-0036, § 15, 6-20-2011)  
Sec. 2-385. - Duties and responsibilities; plan commission. 
As a plan commission, the commission shall: 
(1)  Initiate, direct, and review, from time to time, studies of the provisions of the comprehensive plan and the zoning code of the city, and make reports of its recommendations to the city council. 
(2)  Hold public hearings on all proposed text amendments to the zoning ordinance and make recommendation to the city council. 
(3)  Hold public hearings on all applications for zoning map amendments and make recommendation and advisory report on the findings of fact to the city council. 
(4)  Review all plats of subdivision and make recommendation to the city council. 
(5)  Perform other duties which are authorized by the city council, the zoning code of the city, or the state statutes. 
(Ord. No. 01-O-0099, § 1, 10-15-2001)  
Sec. 2-386. - Duties and responsibilities; zoning board of appeals. 
As a zoning board of appeals, the commission shall: 
(1)  Hear and determine appeals from and review any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the zoning administrator charged with the enforcement of the zoning code. 
(2)  Hold public hearings on all applications for variations and make recommendation and advisory findings of fact to the city council. 
(3)  Hold public hearings on all applications for special use permits, including planned unit developments, and make recommendation and advisory findings of fact to the city council. 
(4)  Perform other duties which are authorized by the city council, the zoning code of the city, or the state statutes. 
(Ord. No. 01-O-0099, § 1, 10-15-2001)  
Secs. 2-387—2-400. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 8. - POLICE PENSION FUND BOARD 
 
Sec. 2-401. - Fund established. 
There shall be a police pension fund established in the municipality, as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 2240, § 2, 1-2-90)  
Sec. 2-402. - Board created. 
(a)  A board of five (5) members shall constitute a board of trustees to administer the pension fund and to designate the beneficiaries thereof. The board shall be known as the "Board of Trustees of the Police Pension Fund of West Chicago." 
(b)  Two (2) members of the board shall be appointed by the mayor. The third and fourth members of the board shall be elected from the active participants of the pension fund by such active participants. The fifth member shall be elected by and from the beneficiaries. 
(c)  The members appointed by the mayor shall serve for two (2) years each, or until their successors are appointed and qualified. The appointment shall begin on the second Tuesday in May. 
(d)  The election for board members shall be held biennially on the third Monday in April, at such place or places in the municipality and under the Australian ballot system and such other regulations as shall be prescribed by the appointed members of the board. 
(e)  The active pension fund participants shall be entitled to vote only for the active participant members of the board. All beneficiaries of legal age may vote only for the member chosen from among the beneficiaries. No person shall be entitled to cast more than one (1) ballot at such election. The term of elected members shall be two (2) years, beginning on the second Tuesday of the first May after the election. 
(f)  Upon the death, resignation, or inability to act of any elected board member, his or her successor shall be elected for the unexpired term at a special election, to be called by the board and conducted in the same manner as the regular biennial election. 
(g)  Members of the board shall neither receive nor have any right to receive any salary from the pension fund for services performed as trustees in that office. 
(Ord. No. 2240, § 2, 1-2-90)  
Sec. 2-403. - Board meetings. 
(a)  The board shall hold, annually, regular quarterly meetings in July, October, January, and April, and special meetings as called by the president. 
(b)  At the regular July meeting, the board shall select from its members a president, vice-president, secretary, and assistant secretary to serve for one (1) year and until their respective successors are elected and qualified. 
(c)  The vice-president shall perform the duties of president during any vacancy in that office, or during the president's absence from the municipality, or if he or she is by reason of illness or other causes unable to perform the duties of the office. 
(d)  The assistant secretary shall act for the secretary whenever necessary to discharge the functions of such office. 
(Ord. No. 2240, § 2, 1-2-90)  
Sec. 2-404. - Powers and duties of board. 
The board shall have the powers and duties stated in Chapter 108½, sections 3-132 through 3-140 of the Illinois Revised Statutes. 
(Ord. No. 2240, § 2, 1-2-90)  
Sec. 2-405. - Report to mayor and city council. 
The board shall report to the mayor and city council on the condition of the pension fund. The report shall be made prior to the council meeting held for the levying of taxes for the year for which the report is made. 
The board shall certify: 
(a)  The assets in its custody at such time; 
(b)  The estimated receipts during the next succeeding calendar year from deductions from the salaries of police officers, and from all other sources; and 
(c)  The estimated amount required during said calendar year to: 
(1)  Pay all pensions and other obligations provided in this section, and 
(2)  To meet the annual requirements of the fund as provided in the state statutes. 
(Ord. No. 2240, § 2, 1-2-90)  
Sec. 2-406. - Contributions; source. 
There shall be deposited with the police pension fund the sums required by law, which shall include the percentage of each policeman's salary as set forth in the Illinois Revised Statutes and the proceeds of the annual police pension tax levy on all real property in the city. 
(Ord. No. 2240, § 2, 1-2-90)  
Secs. 2-407—2-410. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 9. - CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION 
 
Sec. 2-411. - Established. 
The provisions of the Act to Regulate Civil Service in Cities is now in full effect in the city and the civil service commission is hereby established according to the terms of the statutes of the state. 
(Ord. No. 2240, § 2, 1-2-90)  
Sec. 2-412. - Membership. 
The civil service commission shall consist of three (3) persons who shall be known as the civil service commissioners for West Chicago. The commissioners shall be appointed by the mayor for a three-year term of office and until their respective successors are appointed. 
(Ord. No. 2240, § 2, 1-2-90; Ord. No. 4144, § 1, 12-21-98; Ord. No. 11-O-0036, § 19, 6-20-2011)  
Sec. 2-413. - Report to mayor and city council. 
The commission shall provide a written report to the mayor and city council at the first council meeting of February of each year. This report shall describe the activities of the commission for the past [year]. 
(Ord. No. 2240, § 2, 1-2-90)  
Secs. 2-414, 2-415. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 10. - RESERVED[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 11-O-0036, § 16, adopted June 20, 2011, repealed Div. 10, §§ 2-416—2-421, which pertained to the commission on youth, and derived from Ord. No. 2240, adopted Jan. 2, 1990; Ord. No. 2745, adopted April 4, 1994; Ord. No. 2938, adopted Sept. 5, 1995; Ord. No. 3054, adopted Oct. 21, 1996; Ord. No. 04-O-0011, adopted Feb. 16, 2004; Ord. No. 04-O-0067, adopted Aug. 2, 2004; Ord. No. 07-O-0002, adopted Jan. 2, 2007; and Ord. No. 07-O-0013, adopted Feb. 19, 2007. 
 
Secs. 2-416—2-421. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 11. - RESERVED[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 03-O-0064, § 3, adopted July 21, 2003, deleted Div. 11, §§ 2-421—2-425, which pertained to downtown development commission and derived from Ord. No. 2435, § 1, adopted June 3, 1991; and Ord. No. 4266, §§ 1—4, adopted Jan. 3, 2000. 
 
Secs. 2-422—2-425. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 12. - ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 01-O-0024, § 1, adopted May 21, 2001, set out provisions pertaining to the environmental commission designated as §§ 2-246—2-248. To avoid duplicate section numbering, and at the editor's discretion, said provisions have been redesignated herein as §§ 2-426—2-428. 
 
Sec. 2-426. - Membership. 
The West Chicago Environmental Commission shall consist of seven (7) members to be appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the city council. Residency within the city shall not be required for eligibility for appointment to the commission. 
(Ord. No. 01-O-0024, § 1, 5-21-2001; Ord. No. 07-O-0047, § 1, 6-4-2007)  
Sec. 2-427. - Terms. 
Each appointment to the commission shall be for a three-year period. 
(Ord. No. 01-O-0024, § 1, 5-21-2001; Ord. No. 16-O-0015, § 6, 4-4-2016)  
Sec. 2-428. - Functions. 
The functions of the West Chicago Environmental Commission shall be: 
(1)  To collect general environmental and/or technical information as may pertain to the quality of life within the city and to make such material available to the mayor and city council. 
(2)  To alert the mayor and city council to state and federal laws relative to the environment which may require attention and/or action on the part of the council. 
(3)  To make recommendations to the mayor and city council for adoption of policies, programs and/or goals which would improve or sustain the environment of the city and which would not conflict with state or federal laws. 
(4)  To provide an annual report to the council, 
(5)  To complete the work plan provided by the council upon review of the annual report. 
(6)  To perform such other duties and functions as may be requested of it by the city council from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 01-O-0024, § 1, 5-21-2001)  
Secs. 2-429—2-434. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 13. - CULTURAL ARTS COMMISSION 
 
Sec. 2-435. - Establishment. 
There is hereby created a commission, to be known as the cultural arts commission. 
(Ord. No. 2620, § 2, 12-21-92)  
Sec. 2-436. - Membership and appointment. 
The commission shall consist of ten (10) members, all of whom shall be appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the city council. 
(1)  Nine (9) of the said ten (10) members shall have an interest and expertise in the functions of the commission and shall be voting members of the commission. 
(2)  One (1) of the members of the said commission shall be nonvoting ex-officio member. 
(Ord. No. 2620, § 2, 12-21-92; Ord. No. 05-O-0029, § 1, 5-2-2005)  
Sec. 2-437. - Terms. 
(a)  Appointment to the commission shall be for a term of four (4) years. 
(Ord. No. 2620, § 2, 12-21-92; Ord. No. 02-O-0127, § 2, 11-4-2002; Ord. No. 05-O-0029, § 2, 5-2-2005; Ord. No. 16-O-0015, § 7, 4-4-2016)  
Sec. 2-438. - Meetings; by-laws. 
(a)  The commission shall have the power to adopt its own by-laws and schedule of regular meetings. 
(b)  Special meetings of the commission may be called by the chairman or any three (3) members provided that notice is given as provided in the Illinois "Open Meetings Act." 
(Ord. No. 2620, § 2, 12-21-92; Ord. No. 05-O-0029, § 3, 5-2-2005; Ord. No. 16-O-0015, § 7, 4-4-2016)  
Sec. 2-439. - Functions of the commission. 
The cultural arts commission shall: 
(1)  Make recommendations to the city council for the provision of an environment in which the cultural arts will flourish within the corporate limits of the city; 
(2)  Foster educational opportunities and enhance the quality of life for all of the residents of West Chicago by making recommendations to develop arts and cultural programs directed at various age, ethnic, and religious groups; 
(3)  Enhance the economic base in West Chicago by promoting opportunities to combine areas and economic development; 
(4)  Cooperate with the professional city staff to administer all commission programs and activities; 
(5)  Support and foster strong bonds between and among all arts organizations in the community and encourage new arts organizations in a manner which will make the whole considerably stronger than the individual parts, which shall include working cooperatively with other city commissions, and other public and private agencies; 
(6)  Apply for grants to support commission programs and administer and serve as a vehicle for "regrants" under the rules of the Illinois Arts Council and other agencies; 
(7)  Provide a vehicle for publicizing all arts-related events of various organizations as well as community, state or national events related to the arts, and provide a strong public relations program for communicating the commission's goals and their impact on community life; and 
(8)  Act as a resource center and clearing house for information and provide technical assistance to community arts organizations to enable them to improve the effectiveness of grant writing, planning, audience development, identification of sources for funds, and assistance in connection with legal, tax, insurance and liability issues related to arts programs and arts organizations. 
(Ord. No. 2620, § 2, 12-21-92)  
Sec. 2-440. - Report to city council. 
The cultural arts commission shall submit a written annual report to the city council at the first council meeting in February of each year. The report shall contain an outline of activities and work accomplished during the previous year and shall include recommendations for any proposed improvements or programs which the council should consider for the next year. 
(Ord. No. 2620, § 2, 12-21-92; Ord. No. 13-O-0004, § 1, 1-21-2013) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 13-O-0004, § 1, adopted January 21, 2013, redesignated § 2-442 as § 2-440, as set out herein.  
Secs. 2-441—2-470. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 13-O-0004, § 1, adopted January 21, 2013, repealed § 2-441, pertaining to staff contact. The former § 2-441 derived from Ord. No. 2620, § 2, adopted 12-21-92; Ord. No. 05-O-0029, § 4, adopted 5-2-2005.  
ARTICLE VII. - RESERVED[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 06-O-0001, § 7, adopted Feb. 6, 2006, deleted in its entirety Art. VII, §§ 2-471, 2-472, 2-474—2-482, 2-484, 2-485, which pertained to officers and employees generally. For complete derivation see the Code Comparative Table at the end of this volume. 
 
Secs. 2-471—2-500. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - RESERVED 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 2378, adopted Jan. 7, 1991, deleted former Art. VIII, effective Jan. 9, 1991, except for §§ 2-505 and 2-510, whose deletion became effective May 1, 1991. The deleted provisions pertained to personnel rules and derived from the following ordinances: 
Ord. No. 	Section 	Date 	Ord. No. 	Section 	Date 
903 	Arts. 1—7 	5-16-66 	1756 	1 	7-16-84 
1096 		6-21-71 	1824 	1 	7-15-88 
1097 		6-21-71 	1825 	1 	7-15-88 
1199 		1-21-74 	1826 	1, 2 	7-15-88 
1475 	1 	5-5-80 	1827 	1, 2 	7-15-88 
1642 	1 	5-16-83 	1828 	1 	7-15-88 
1740 	1 	5-21-84 	1865 	1 	3-17-86 
1749 	1 	7-16-84 	2230 	1 	11-6-89 
1750 	1 	7-16-84 			
 
Provisions relative to personnel rules are set out in App. C. 
 
Secs. 2-501—2-599. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - PUBLIC WORKS CONSTRUCTION 
 
Sec. 2-600. - Prevailing rate of wages for public works contracts. 
(a)  To the extent and as required by "An Act regulating wages of laborers, mechanics, and other workmen employed in any public works by the state, county, city or any public body or any political subdivision or by anyone under contract for public works," approved June 26, 1941, as amended, the general prevailing rate of wages in this locality for laborers, mechanics and other workmen engaged in the construction of public works, coming under the jurisdiction of this city is hereby ascertained to be the same as the prevailing rate of wages for construction work in the DuPage County area as determined by the Department of Labor of the State of Illinois as of June, 1980; a copy of that determination being attached hereto and incorporated herein by reference. The definition of any terms appearing in this section which are also used in the aforesaid act shall be the same as in said act. 
Editor's note— The determination mentioned in paragraph (a) has not been set out herein but a copy may be found on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(b)  Nothing herein contained shall be construed to apply said general prevailing rate of wages as herein ascertained to any work or employment except public works construction of this city to the extent required by the aforesaid act. 
(c)  The city clerk shall publicly post or keep available for inspection by any interested party in the main office of this city which is the city hall, West Chicago, Illinois, this determination of such prevailing rate of wage. 
(d)  The city clerk shall mail a copy of this determination to any employer, and to any association of employers, and to any person or association of employees who have filed, or filed their names and addresses requesting copies of any determination stating the particular rate and the particular class of workmen whose wages will be affected by such rates. 
(Ord. No. 1478, § 1, 6-16-80) 
State Law reference— Act regulating wages of workmen employed in public works, 740 ILCS 170/1—740 ILCS 170/11.  
Secs. 2-601—2-699. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - RESERVED[13] 

Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 11-O-0036, § 17, adopted June 20, 2011, repealed Art. X, § 2-700—2-704, which pertained to freedom of information and derived from Ord. No. 1754, §§ 1, 1(1), 1(2) 1(3), 1(4), adopted 8-20-1984. Similar provisions can be found in § 1-13. 
 
Secs. 2-700—2-722. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XI. - STATE GIFT BAN ACT[14] 

Footnotes: 
--- (14) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 03-O-0077, § 3, adopted Nov. 3, 2003 did not specify manner of codification hence inclusion of these provisions as Art. XI, §§ 2-723—2-736 was at the discretion of the editor. 
 
Sec. 2-723. - Adoption of the State Gift Ban Act. 
By the adoption of this article, the city intends to comply with all provisions of the State Gift Ban Act and to incorporate its provisions as set forth herein. In the event any provision of this article shall be deemed to conflict with any provision of the State Gift Ban Act, the provisions of the State Gift Ban Act shall be held to prevail. 
(Ord. No. 03-O-0077, § 3, 11-3-2003)  
Sec. 2-724. - Definitions. 
All definitions set forth in the State Gift Ban Act and/or as modified herein shall apply: 
Employee means a part-time or full-time employee, elected officials, and appointed officials of the city and any of its subsidiary bodies. 
Gift means any gratuity, discount, entertainment, hospitality, loan, forbearance, or other tangible or intangible item having monetary value including, but not limited to, cash, food and drink, and honoraria for speaking engagements related to or attributable to government employment or the official position of an employee. 
Political organization means a party, committee, association, fund, or other organization (whether or not incorporated) organized and operated primarily for the purpose of directly or indirectly accepting contributions or making expenditures, or both, for the function of influencing or attempting to influence the selection, nomination, election, or appointment of any individual to any federal, state, or local public office or office in a political organization, or the election of presidential or vice-presidential electors, whether or not the individual or electors are selected, nominated, elected, or appointed. The term includes an organization that makes expenditures relating to an office described in the preceding sentence which, if incurred by the individual, would be allowable as a federal income tax deduction for trade or business expenses. 
Prohibited source means any person or entity who: 
(1)  Is seeking official action by the official or in the case of an employee, by the employee or by the official, governmental entity, or another employee directing the employee. 
(2)  Does business or seeks to do business with the employee, with the governmental entity or another employee directing the employee; 
(3)  Conducts activities regulated by the official or by the employee or by the governmental entity or another employee directing the employee; 
(4)  Has interests that may be substantially affected by the performance or non-performance of the official duties of the official or employee; or 
(5)  Is registered or required to be registered with the Secretary of State under the Lobbyist Registration Act. 
Ultimate jurisdictional authority means the city council. 
Unit of local government is defined as in Section 1 of Article VII of the Illinois Constitution. 
(Ord. No. 03-O-0077, § 4, 11-3-2003)  
Sec. 2-725. - Application. 
Except as otherwise provided for in this article, no elected official or employee shall solicit or accept any gift from any prohibited source or in violation of any federal or state statute, rule, regulation or any city ordinance or resolution. This ban applies to and includes spouses and immediate family living with the employee. No prohibited source shall offer or make a gift that violates this section. 
(Ord. No. 03-O-0077, § 5, 11-3-2003)  
Sec. 2-726. - Exceptions. 
Exceptions to the provisions of the State Gift Ban Act, and, accordingly, to this article, are as follows: 
(1)  Anything for which the employee pays the market value or anything not used and promptly disposed of by returning the item to the donor, or by giving the item or an amount equal to its value to an appropriate charity. 
(2)  A contribution, as defined in Article 9 of the Election Code, that is lawfully made under that Code or attendance at a fund-raising event sponsored by a political organization. 
(3)  A gift from a relative, meaning those people related to the individual as father, mother, son, daughter, brother, sister, uncle, aunt, great aunt, great uncle, first cousin, nephew, niece, husband, wife, grandfather, grandmother, grandson, granddaughter, father-in-law, mother-in-law, son-in-law, daughter-in-law, brother-in-law, sister-in-law, stepfather, stepmother, stepson, stepdaughter, stepbrother, stepsister, half brother, half sister, and including the father, mother, grandfather, or grandmother of the individual's spouse and the individual's fiance or fiancee. 
(4)  Anything provided by an individual on the basis of a personal friendship unless the elected official or employee has reason to believe that, under the circumstances, the gift was provided because of the official position or employment of the official or employee and not because of the personal friendship. 
In determining whether a gift is provided on the basis of personal friendship, the official or employee shall consider the circumstances under which the gift was offered, such as: 
a.  The history of the relationship between the individual giving the gift and the recipient of the gift, including any previous exchange of gifts between those individuals; 
b.  Whether to the actual knowledge of the official or employee the individual who gave the gift personally paid for the gift or sought a tax deduction or business reimbursement for the gift; and 
c.  Whether to the actual knowledge of the official or employee the individual who gave the gift also at the same time gave the same or similar gifts to other officials or employees. 
(5)  A commercially reasonable loan evidenced in writing with repayment due by a date certain made in the ordinary course of the lender's business. 
(6)  A contribution or other payment to a legal defense fund established for the benefit of an official or employee that is otherwise lawfully made. 
(7)  Intra-office and inter-office gifts. For the purpose of this article, "intra-office gifts" means: 
a.  Any gift given to an official or employee of a unit of local government from another employee of that unit of local government; or 
b.  Any gift given to an official or employee of any governmental unit of local government from a member or an employee of the legislative branch, a judge, or employee of the judicial branch, an official or employee of the executive branch, an official or employee of a unit of local government, home rule unit, or school district, or an official of employee of any other governmental entity. 
(8)  Food, refreshments, lodging, transportation, and other benefits: 
a.  Resulting from the outside business or employment activities (or outside activities that are not connected to the duties of the official or employee as an office holder or employee) of the official or employee or the spouse of the official or employee, if the benefits have not been offered or enhanced because of the official position or employment of the officer or employee and are customarily provided to others in similar circumstances; 
b.  Customarily provided by a prospective employer in connection with bona fide employment discussions; or 
c.  Provided by a political organization in connection with a fund-raising or campaign event sponsored by that organization. 
(9)  Pension and other benefits resulting from continued participation in an employee welfare and benefits plan maintained by a former employer. 
(10)  Informational materials that are sent to the office of the official or employee in the form of books, articles, periodicals, other written materials, audiotapes, videotapes, or other forms of communication. 
(11)  Awards or prizes that are given to competitors in contests or events open to the public, including random drawings. 
(12)  Honorary degrees (and associated travel, food, refreshments, and entertainment provided in the presentation of degrees and awards). 
(13)  Training (including food and refreshments furnished to all attendees as an integral part of the training) provided to an official or employee if the training is in the interest of the governmental entity. 
(14)  Educational missions, including meetings with government officials either foreign or domestic, intended to educate public officials on matters of public policy, to which the official or employee may be invited to participate along with other federal, state, or local public officials and community leaders. 
(15)  Bequests, inheritances, and other transfers at death. 
(16)  Anything that is paid for by the federal government, the state, or a governmental entity, or secured by the government or governmental entity under a government contract. 
(17)  A gift of personal hospitality of an individual other than a regulated lobbyist or agent of a foreign principal, including hospitality extended for a nonbusiness purpose by an individual, not a corporation or organization, at the personal residence of that individual or the individual's family or on property or facilities owned by that individual's family or on property or facilities owned by that individual or the individual's family. 
(18)  Free attendance at a widely attended event permitted under section 7-727 of this article. 
(19)  Opportunities and benefits that are: 
a.  Available to the public or to a class consisting of all employees whether or not restricted on the basis of geographic consideration; 
b.  Offered to members of a group or class in which membership is unrelated to employment or official position; 
c.  Offered to members of an organization such as an employee's association or credit union, in which membership is related to employment or official position and similar opportunities are available to large segments of the public through organizations of similar size; 
d.  Offered to any group or class that is not defined in a manner that specifically discriminates among government employees on the basis of branch of government or type of responsibility, or on a basis that favors those of higher rank or rate of pay; 
e.  In the form of loans from banks and other financial institutions on terms generally available to the public; or 
f.  In the form of reduced membership or other fees for participation in organization activities offered to all government employees by professional organizations if the only restrictions on membership relate to professional qualifications. 
(20)  A plaque, trophy, or other item that is substantially commemorative in nature and that is extended for presentation. 
(21)  Golf or tennis; food or refreshments of nominal value and catered food or refreshments; meals or beverages consumed on the premises from which they were purchased. 
(22)  Donations of products from an Illinois company that are intended primarily for promotional purposes, such as display or free distribution, and are of minimal value to any individual recipient. 
(23)  An item of nominal value such as a greeting card, baseball cap, or T-shirt. 
(Ord. No. 03-O-0077, § 6, 11-3-2003)  
Sec. 2-727. - Attendance at events. 
An employee or elected official may accept an offer of free attendance at a widely attended convention, conference, symposium, forum, panel discussion, dinner, viewing, reception, or similar event provided by the sponsor of the event, if: 
(1)  The official or employee participates in the event as a speaker or a panel participant, by presenting information related to government, or by performing a ceremonial function appropriate to the individual's official position or employment; or 
(2)  Attendance at the event is appropriate to the performance of civic affairs in Illinois or the official duties or representative function of the official or employee; or 
(3)  An official or employee who attends an event described above may accept a sponsor's unsolicited offer of free attendance at the event for an accompanying individual; or 
(4)  An official or employee, or the spouse or dependent of an official or employee, may accept a sponsor's unsolicited offer of free attendance at a charity event, except that reimbursement for transportation and lodging may not be accepted in connection with the event. 
(5)  For purposes of this section, the term "free attendance" may include waiver of all or part of a conference or other fee, the provision of transportation, or the provision of food, refreshments, entertainment, and instructional materials furnished to all attendees as an integral part of the event. The term does not include entertainment collateral to the event, nor does it include food or refreshments taken other than in a group setting with all or substantially all other attendees, except as authorized under the State Gift Ban Act. 
(Ord. No. 03-O-0077, § 7, 11-3-2003)  
Sec. 2-728. - Disposition of gifts. 
The recipient of a gift that is given in violation of the State Gift Ban Act may, at his or her discretion, return the item to the donor or give the item or an amount equal to its value to an appropriate charity. 
(Ord. No. 03-O-0077, § 8, 11-3-2003)  
Sec. 2-729. - Reimbursement. 
(a)  A reimbursement (including payment of any kind) to an official or employee from a private source other than a regulated lobbyist or agent of a foreign principal for necessary transportation, lodging, and related expenses for travel to a meeting, speaking engagement, fact finding trip, or similar event in connection with the duties of the official or employee as an employee shall be deemed to be a reimbursement to the city and not a gift prohibited by this article if the official or employee: 
(1)  Discloses the expenses reimbursed or to be reimbursed and the authorization to the fiscal officer or similar authority within thirty (30) days after the travel is completed; and 
(2)  In the case of an employee under direct supervision of another employee, receives advance authorization from the supervising employee to accept reimbursement. 
(b)  For purposes of subsection (a) events, the activities of which are substantially recreational in nature, shall not be considered to be in connection with the duties of an employee as an employee. 
(c)  Each advance authorization to accept reimbursement shall be signed by the employee under whose direct supervision the employee works and shall include: 
(1)  The name of the employee; 
(2)  The name of the person who will make the reimbursement; 
(3)  The time, place, and purpose of the travel; and 
(4)  A determination that the travel is in connection with the duties of the employee as an employee and would not create the appearance that the employee is using public employment for private gain. 
(d)  Each disclosure made under subsection (a) of expenses reimbursed or to be reimbursed shall be signed by the official or employee (in the case of travel by the official) or by the official or other employee under whose direct supervision the official or employee works (in the case of travel by the employee) and shall include: 
(1)  A good faith estimate of total transportation expenses reimbursed or to be reimbursed; 
(2)  A good faith estimate of total lodging expenses reimbursed or to be reimbursed; 
(3)  A good faith estimate of total meal expenses reimbursed or to be reimbursed; 
(4)  A good faith estimate of the total of other expenses reimbursed or to be reimbursed; and 
(5)  A determination that all those expenses are necessary transportation, lodging, and related expenses. 
(Ord. No. 03-O-0077, § 9, 11-3-2003)  
Sec. 2-730. - Ethics officer. 
The city clerk or, from time to time, any other individual appointed in his/her stead by the city council, shall be the ethics officer for the city. As such, the ethics officer shall (1) review statements of economic interest and disclosure forms of officials and senior employees before they are filed with the Secretary of State; and (2) provide guidance to officials and employees in the interpretation and implementation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 03-O-0077, § 10, 11-3-2003)  
Sec. 2-731. - Ethics commission. 
For purposes of enforcement of the State Gift Ban Act and this article, all complaints filed pursuant hereto shall be forwarded to the proper ethics commission as set forth by the Act. Said ethics commission shall have all powers and duties set forth in the Act to enforce the terms of the Act and this article. 
(Ord. No. 03-O-0077, § 11, 11-3-2003)  
Sec. 2-732. - Complaints. 
(a)  Complaints alleging a violation of the State Gift Ban Act shall be filed with the appropriate ethics commission, as set forth in the State Gift Ban Act. 
(b)  Within three (3) business days after the receipt of an ethics complaint, pursuant to the Act, the commission shall send by certified mail, return receipt requested, a notice to the respondent that a complaint has been filed against him or her and a copy of the complaint. The commission shall send by certified mail, return receipt requested, a confirmation of the receipt of the complaint to the complainant within three (3) business days after the submittal to the commission. The notices to the respondent and the complainant shall also advise them of the date, time, and place of the meeting on the sufficiency of the complaint and probable cause. 
(c)  Upon at least twenty-four (24) hours public notice of the session, the commission shall meet in a closed session to review the sufficiency of the complaint and, if the complaint is deemed to sufficiently allege a violation of the State Gift Ban Act, to determine if there is probable cause, based on the evidence presented by the complainant, to proceed. The commission shall issue notice to the complaint and the respondent of the commission's ruling on the sufficiency of the complaint, and if necessary, on probable cause within seven (7) business days after receiving the complaint. If the complaint is deemed to sufficiently allege a violation of the State Gift Ban Act and there is a determination of probable cause, then the commission's notice to the parties shall include a hearing date scheduled within four (4) weeks after the complaint's receipt. If the complaint is deemed not to sufficiently allege a violation or if there is no determination of probable cause, then the commission shall send by certified mail, return receipt requested, a notice to the parties of the decision to dismiss the complaint, and that notice shall be made public. 
(d)  On the scheduled date and upon at least twenty-four (24) hours public notice of the meeting, the commission shall conduct a closed meeting on the complaint and allow both parties the opportunity to present testimony and evidence. 
(e)  Within six (6) weeks after the complaint's receipt, the commission shall (i) dismiss the complaint or (ii) issue a preliminary recommendation to the alleged violator and to the violator's ultimate jurisdictional authority or impose a fine upon the violator, or both. The particular findings in the instance case, the preliminary recommendation, and any fine shall be made public. 
(f)  Within seven (7) business days after the issuance of the preliminary recommendation or imposition of a fine, or both, the respondent may file a written demand for a public hearing on the complaint. The filing of the demand shall stay the enforcement of the preliminary recommendation or fine. Within two (2) weeks after receiving the demand, the commission shall conduct a public hearing on the complaint after at least twenty-four (24) hours public notice of the hearing and allow both parties the opportunity to present testimony and evidence. Within five (5) business days, the commission shall publicly issue a final recommendation to the alleged violator and to the violator's ultimate jurisdictional authority or impose a fine upon the violator, or both. 
(g)  If a complaint is filed during the sixty (60) days preceding the date of any election at which the respondent is a candidate, the commission shall render its decision as required under subsection (e) within seven (7) days after the complaint is filed, and during the seven (7) days preceding that election, the commission shall render such decision before the date of that election, if possible. 
(h)  The commission may levy a fine of up to five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) against any person who knowingly files a frivolous complaint alleging a violation of the State Gift Ban Act. 
(i)  A complaint alleging a violation of the State Gift Ban Act must be filed within one (1) year after the violation. 
(Ord. No. 03-O-0077, § 12, 11-3-2003)  
Sec. 2-733. - Enforcement. 
(a)  The ethics commission may recommend to a person's ultimate jurisdictional authority disciplinary action against the person it determines to be in violation of the State Gift Ban Act. The recommendation may prescribe the following courses of action: 
(1)  A reprimand. 
(2)  To cease and desist the offensive action. 
(3)  A return or refund of money or other items, or an amount of restitution for service, received in violation of the State Gift Ban Act. 
(4)  Dismissal, removal from office, impeachment, or expulsion. 
(5)  Donation to a charity of the amount equal to the gift. 
(b)  The ethics commission may impose a fine of up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation to be deposited into the state's general revenue fund. 
(c)  The ultimate jurisdictional authority of a person who violates an ethics provision may take disciplinary action against the person as recommended by the ethics commission or as it deems appropriate, to the extent it is constitutionally permissible for the ultimate jurisdictional authority to take that action. The ultimate jurisdictional authority shall make its action, or determination to take no action, available to the public. 
(d)  If after a hearing, the commission finds no violation of the State Gift Ban Act, the commission shall dismiss the complaint. 
(Ord. No. 03-O-0077, § 13, 11-3-2003)  
Sec. 2-734. - Imposition of a fine. 
A decision of the ethics commission to dismiss a complaint or its recommendation is not a final administrative decision, but its imposition of a fine is a final administrative decision subject to judicial review under the Administrative Review Law of the Code of Civil Procedure. 
(Ord. No. 03-O-0077, § 14, 11-3-2003)  
Sec. 2-735. - Exempt from the provisions of the Open Meetings Act and the Freedom of Information Act. 
In conformance with the provisions of the State Gift Ban Act, the proceedings conducted and documents generated under the State Gift Ban Act are exempt from the provisions of the Open Meetings Act and the Freedom of Information Act. 
(Ord. No. 03-O-0077, § 15, 11-3-2003)  
Sec. 2-736. - Conflict with election commission. 
Any and all policies, resolutions or ordinances of the election commission which may conflict with this artcle shall be, and are hereby, repealed. 
(Ord. No. 03-O-0077, § 16, 11-3-2003)  
Secs. 2-737—2-744. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XII. - PUBLIC BENEFIT FUND[15] 

Footnotes: 
--- (15) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 04-O-0007, § 1, adopted Mar. 15, 2004, set out provisions intended for use as Art. XI. For purposes of classification and to preserve the style of this Code, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as Art. XII, § 2-745. 
 
Sec. 2-745. - Use of the public benefit fund. 
When reviewing a project for possible funding via the public benefit fund, the following principles should be used to guide the decision: 
(1)  The project should only use the accrued interest, with the exception that should the city undertake an inter-fund loan for a project, the money would be repaid with interest. 
(2)  The project should create a positive return on the investment, either economically or socially. 
(3)  The project should maximize benefits to as many stakeholders as possible within the community. 
(4)  The project should serve to encourage residents to take pride in their community and encourage nonresidents to visit the community, thereby improving the city's image. 
(5)  The principal may be used for the acquisition of property and related expenditures so long as any proceeds from any future sale of these properties are returned to the fund. 
(6)  Should a project be proposed that would improve the lives and safety of the residents in the community, planning and engineering costs associated with the project may be deemed eligible to be paid by the fund at the discretion of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 04-O-0007, § 1, 3-15-2004; Ord. No. 04-O-0120, § 1, 11-15-2004; Ord. No. 11-O-0036, § 20, 6-20-2011)  
Secs. 2-746—2-761. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XIII. - ETHICS ORDINANCE 
 
Sec. 2-762. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this article, the following terms shall be given these definitions: 
Campaign for elective office means any activity in furtherance of an effort to influence the selection, nomination, election, or appointment of any individual to any federal, state, or local public office or office in a political organization, or the selection, nomination, or election of mayoral or vice-mayoral electors, but does not include activities (i) relating to the support or opposition of any executive, legislative, or administrative action, (ii) relating to collective bargaining, or (iii) that are otherwise in furtherance of the person's official duties. 
Candidate means a person who has filed nominating papers or petitions for nomination or election to an elected office, or who has been appointed to fill a vacancy in nomination, and who remains eligible for placement on the ballot at a regular election, as defined in Section 1-3 of the Election Code (10 ILCS 5/1-3). 
Collective bargaining has the same meaning as that term is defined in Section 3 of the Illinois Public Labor Relations Act (5 ILCS 315/3). 
Compensated time means, with respect to an employee, any time worked by or credited to the employee that counts toward any minimum work time requirement imposed as a condition of his or her employment, but for purposes of this article, does not include any designated holidays, vacation periods, personal time, compensatory time off or any period when the employee is on a leave of absence. With respect to officers or employees whose hours are not fixed, "compensated time" includes any period of time when the officer is on premises under the control of the employer and any other time when the officer or employee is executing his or her official duties, regardless of location. 
Compensatory time off means authorized time off earned by or awarded to an employee to compensate in whole or in part for time worked in excess of the minimum work time required of that employee as a condition of his or her employment. 
Contribution has the same meaning as that term is defined in Section 9-1.4 of the Election Code (10 ILCS 5/9-1.4). 
Employee means a person employed by the City of West Chicago, whether on a full-time or part-time basis or pursuant to a contract, whose duties are subject to the direction and control of an employer with regard to the material details of how the work is to be performed, but does not include an independent contractor. 
Employer means the City of West Chicago. 
Gift means any gratuity, discount, entertainment, hospitality, loan, forbearance, or other tangible or intangible item having monetary value including, but not limited to, cash, food and drink, and honoraria for speaking engagements related to or attributable to government employment or the official position of an officer or employee. 
Leave of absence means any period during which an employee does not receive (i) compensation for employment, (ii) service credit towards pension benefits, and (iii) health insurance benefits paid for by the employer. 
Officer means a person who holds, by election or appointment, an office created by statute or ordinance, regardless of whether the officer is compensated for service in his or her official capacity. 
Political activity means any activity in support of or in connection with any campaign for elective office or any political organization, but does not include activities (i) relating to the support or opposition of any executive, legislative, or administrative action, (ii) relating to collective bargaining, or (iii) that are otherwise in furtherance of the person's official duties. 
Political organization means a party, committee, association, fund, or other organization (whether or not incorporated) that is required to file a statement of organization with the state board of elections or a county clerk or election authority under Sections 5/6A-4 and 5/9-3 of the Election Code (10 ILCS 5/6A-4 and 5/9-3), but only with regard to those activities that require filing with the state board of elections or a county clerk or election authority. 
Prohibited political activity means: 
(1)  Preparing for, organizing, or participating in any political meeting, political rally, political demonstration, or other political event. 
(2)  Soliciting contributions, including but not limited to the purchase of, selling, distributing, or receiving payment for tickets for any political fundraiser, political meeting, or other political event. 
(3)  Soliciting, planning the solicitation of, or preparing any document or report regarding anything of value intended as a campaign contribution. 
(4)  Planning, conducting, or participating in a public opinion poll in connection with a campaign for elective office or on behalf of a political organization for political purposes or for or against any referendum question. 
(5)  Surveying or gathering information from potential or actual voters in an election to determine probable vote outcome in connection with a campaign for elective office or on behalf of a political organization for political purposes or for or against any referendum question. 
(6)  Assisting at the polls on election day on behalf of any political organization or candidate for elective office or for or against any referendum question. 
(7)  Soliciting votes on behalf of a candidate for elective office or a political organization or for or against any referendum question or helping in an effort to get voters to the polls. 
(8)  Initiating for circulation, preparing, circulating, reviewing, or filing any petition on behalf of a candidate for elective office or for or against any referendum question. 
(9)  Making contributions on behalf of any candidate for elective office in that capacity or in connection with a campaign for elective office. 
(10)  Preparing or reviewing responses to candidate questionnaires. 
(11)  Distributing, preparing for distribution, or mailing campaign literature, campaign signs, or other campaign material on behalf of any candidate for elective office or for or against any referendum question. 
(12)  Campaigning for any elective office or for or against any referendum question. 
(13)  Managing or working on a campaign for elective office or for or against any referendum question. 
(14)  Serving as a delegate, alternate, or proxy to a political party convention. 
(15)  Participating in any recount or challenge to the outcome of any election. 
Prohibited source means any person or entity who: 
(1)  Is seeking official action (i) by an officer or (ii) by an employee, or by the officer or another employee directing that employee; 
(2)  Does business or seeks to do business (i) with the officer or (ii) with an employee, or with the officer or another employee directing that employee; 
(3)  Conducts activities regulated (i) by the officer or (ii) by an employee, or by the officer or another employee directing that employee; or 
(4)  Has interests that may be substantially affected by the performance or non-performance of the official duties of the officer or employee. 
(Ord. No. 04-O-0043, § 2, 5-3-2004)  
Sec. 2-763. - Prohibited political activities. 
(a)  No officer or employee shall intentionally perform any prohibited political activity during any compensated time, as defined herein. No officer or employee shall intentionally use any property or resources of the city in connection with any prohibited political activity. 
(b)  At no time shall any officer or employee intentionally require any other officer or employee to perform any prohibited political activity (i) as part of that officer or employee's duties, (ii) as a condition of employment, or (iii) during any compensated time off (such as holidays, vacation or personal time off). 
(c)  No officer or employee shall be required at any time to participate in any prohibited political activity in consideration for that officer or employee being awarded additional compensation or any benefit, whether in the form of a salary adjustment, bonus, compensatory time off, continued employment or otherwise, nor shall any officer or employee be awarded additional compensation or any benefit in consideration for his or her participation in any prohibited political activity. 
(d)  Nothing in this section prohibits activities that are permissible for an officer or employee to engage in as part of his or her official duties, or activities that are undertaken by an officer or employee on a voluntary basis which are not prohibited by this article. 
(e)  No person either (i) in a position that is subject to recognized merit principles of public employment or (ii) in a position the salary for which is paid in whole or in part by federal funds and that is subject to the Federal Standards for a Merit System of Personnel Administration applicable to grant-in-aid programs, shall be denied or deprived of employment or tenure solely because he or she is a member or an officer of a political committee, of a political party, or of a political organization or club. 
(Ord. No. 04-O-0043, § 3, 5-3-2004)  
Sec. 2-764. - Gift ban. 
(a)  Gift ban. Except as permitted by this section, no officer or employee, and no spouse of or immediate family member living with any officer or employee (collectively referred to herein as "recipients"), shall intentionally solicit or accept any gift from any prohibited source, as defined herein, or which is otherwise prohibited by law or ordinance. No prohibited source shall intentionally offer or make a gift that violates this section. 
(b)  Exceptions. Subsection (a) is not applicable to the following: 
(1)  Opportunities, benefits, and services that are available on the same conditions as for the general public. 
(2)  Anything for which the officer or employee, or his or her spouse or immediate family member, pays the fair market value. 
(3)  Any (i) contribution that is lawfully made under the election code or (ii) activities associated with a fundraising event in support of a political organization or candidate. 
(4)  Educational materials and missions. 
(5)  Travel expenses for a meeting to discuss business. 
(6)  A gift from a relative, meaning those people related to the individual as father, mother, son, daughter, brother, sister, uncle, aunt, great aunt, great uncle, first cousin, nephew, niece, husband, wife, grandfather, grandmother, grandson, granddaughter, father-in-law, mother-in-law, son-in-law, daughter-in-law, brother-in-law, sister-in-law, stepfather, stepmother, stepson, stepdaughter, stepbrother, stepsister, half brother, half sister, and including the father, mother, grandfather, or grandmother of the individual's spouse and the individual's fiance or fiancee. 
(7)  Anything provided by an individual on the basis of a personal friendship unless the recipient has reason to believe that, under the circumstances, the gift was provided because of the official position or employment of the recipient or his or her spouse or immediate family member and not because of the personal friendship. In determining whether a gift is provided on the basis of personal friendship, the recipient shall consider the circumstances under which the gift was offered, such as: (i) the history of the relationship between the individual giving the gift and the recipient of the gift, including any previous exchange of gifts between those individuals; (ii) whether to the actual knowledge of the recipient the individual who gave the gift personally paid for the gift or sought a tax deduction or business reimbursement for the gift; and (iii) whether to the actual knowledge of the recipient the individual who gave the gift also at the same time gave the same or similar gifts to other officers or employees, or their spouses or immediate family members. 
(8)  Food or refreshments not exceeding seventy-five dollars ($75.00) per person in value on a single calendar day; provided that the food or refreshments are (i) consumed on the premises from which they were purchased or prepared or (ii) catered. For the purposes of this section, "catered" means food or refreshments that are purchased ready to consume which are delivered by any means. 
(9)  Food, refreshments, lodging, transportation, and other benefits resulting from outside business or employment activities (or outside activities that are not connected to the official duties of an officer or employee), if the benefits have not been offered or enhanced because of the official position or employment of the officer or employee, and are customarily provided to others in similar circumstances. 
(10)  Intra-governmental and inter-governmental gifts. For the purpose of this act, "intra-governmental gift" means any gift given to an officer or employee from another officer or employee, and "inter-governmental gift" means any gift given to an officer or employee by an officer or employee of another governmental entity. 
(11)  Bequests, inheritances, and other transfers at death. 
(12)  Any item or items from any one (1) prohibited source during any calendar year having a cumulative total value of less than one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
Each of the exceptions listed in this section is mutually exclusive and independent of every other. 
(c)  Disposition of gifts. An officer or employee, his or her spouse or an immediate family member living with the officer or employee, does not violate this article if the recipient promptly takes reasonable action to return a gift from a prohibited source to its source or gives the gift or an amount equal to its value to an appropriate charity that is exempt from income taxation under Section 501 (c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as now or hereafter amended, renumbered, or succeeded. 
(Ord. No. 04-O-0043, § 4, 5-3-2004)  
Sec. 2-765. - Penalties. 
(a)  Penalties. A person who intentionally violates any provision of section 7-763 of this article may be punished by a term of incarceration in a penal institution other than a penitentiary for a period of not more than three hundred sixty-four (364) days, and may be fined in an amount not to exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). 
(b)  A person who intentionally violates any provision of section 7-764 of this article is subject to a fine in an amount of not less than one thousand one dollar ($1,001.00) and not more than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). 
(c)  Any person who intentionally makes a false report alleging a violation of any provision of this article to the local enforcement authorities, the state's attorney or any other law enforcement official may be punished by a term of incarceration in a penal institution other than a penitentiary for a period of not more than three hundred sixty-four (364) days, and may be fined in an amount not to exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). 
(d)  A violation of section 7-763 of this article shall be prosecuted as a criminal offense by an attorney for the city by filing in the circuit court an information, or sworn complaint, charging such offense. The prosecution shall be under and conform to the rules of criminal procedure. Conviction shall require the establishment of the guilt of the defendant beyond a reasonable doubt. 
A violation of section 7-764 of this article may be prosecuted as a quasi-criminal offense by an attorney designated by the city through an administrative procedure. 
(e)  In addition to any other penalty that may be applicable, whether criminal or civil, an officer or employee who intentionally violates any provision of sections 7-763 and 7-764 of this article is subject to discipline or discharge. 
(Ord. No. 04-O-0043, § 5, 5-3-2004)  
Chapter 3 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 01-O-0035, § 1, adopted July 2, 2001 repealed the former Ch. 3 and enacted a new Ch. 3 to read as set out herein. Former Ch. 3, §§ 3-1—3-40, pertained to similar subject matter. For complete derivation see the Code Comparative Table. 
Cross reference— Zoning, App. A 
 
ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 3-1. - Purpose. 
It is the policy of the city to limit the sale of alcoholic liquor at retail primarily to the sale in its original package, or if not in the original package to retail sale by restaurants or by businesses whose primary purpose is not the sale of alcoholic liquor. It is not deemed conducive to the promotion of this public policy to allow the sale of alcoholic liquor at retail for consumption on the premises where such sale is the sole or primary business to be conducted. 
(Ord. No. 01-O-0035, § 1, 7-2-2001)  
Sec. 3-2. - Definitions. 
All words and phrases used in this chapter, not otherwise defined herein, and which are defined in "An Act Relating to Alcoholic Liquors," approved January 31, 1934, as amended (Illinois Revised Statutes, 1987 Ch. 43, Sec. 93.9 et seq.) shall have the meaning accorded to such words and phrases in the Act. Unless the context otherwise requires, the following terms, as used in this article, shall be construed according to the definition given below; in addition, the definitions as provided in the Liquor Control Act of 1934 shall apply: 
Banquet facility. A business conducted on a premises at which the primary activity is the catering of private parties where there is service for consumption at tables of a full multiple course meal or hors d'oeuvres, buffet or smorgasbord, and at which alcoholic liquor may be served or sold incident to such food service; provided that each of such private parties is prearranged under the sponsorship of a particular person or organization, including but not limited to wedding dinners, school graduation dinners, periodic meetings of service organizations and similar affairs, as contrasted to restaurants. As a secondary activity, a business may also serve meals, at which alcoholic liquor may be served, at times when banquets are not scheduled. As an ancillary activity, a business may also have live entertainment that is open to the public, up to twenty-four (24) times per year. All such shows shall be for customers who are twenty-one (21) years of age or older. A business must provide seven (7) days notice to the liquor control commissioner or his designee of the date of each show and information about the entertainer. 
Club. A corporation, organized under the laws of this state, not for pecuniary profit, solely for the promotion of some common object other than the sale and consumption of alcoholic liquors which conforms to the definition of a club in 235 ILCS 5/1-3.24. 
Holding area. A place within a restaurant that is primarily used by patrons of the restaurant while waiting to be seated at a table for meal service and in which alcoholic beverages are served to such restaurant patrons. 
Hotel. Every building or other structure kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public to be a place where food is actually served and consumed and sleeping accommodations are offered for adequate pay to travelers and guests, where transient, permanent or residential, in which twenty-five (25) or more rooms are used for the sleeping accommodations of such guests, and having one (1) or more public dining rooms where meals are served to such guests, such sleeping accommodations and dining rooms being conducted in the same building or buildings in connection therewith and such building or buildings, structure or structures, being provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment and capacity. 
Live musical performance shall mean the singing or playing of a musical instrument by one or more persons on the licensed premises, whether or not accompanied by any mechanical or electronic musical or other sound device, but shall not include karaoke or other singing or the playing of a musical instrument by any customer or patron on the licensed premises who is not paid or compensated in any other form for such. 
Local liquor control commissioner (the mayor of the city). For purposes of this chapter, liquor control commissioner and local liquor control commissioner have the same meaning and refer to the same individual. When, in this chapter, the local liquor control commissioner shall be referred to, it shall include any committee or agency appointed by such local liquor control commissioner. 
Nightclub. Any building or other structure kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public as (1) a place or establishment permitting dancing by patrons only therein and/or (2) a place or establishment which serves alcoholic beverages as an adjunct to entertainment on the premises. Food service is an adjunct to entertainment or service of alcohol. 
Off-site catering business. A business which serves food at a location not owned or leased by such business. 
Recreational facility. Any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public as a bowling alley, billiard or pool room, health club, tennis, racquetball or handball club or facility, whether such place is open to the public in general or only available to those who have paid a membership fee. 
Retail sale. The sale for use or consumption and not for resale in any form. 
Restaurant. A public place, kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public as a place where complete meals are served off of a printed menu and prepared in the premises' kitchen, without sleeping accommodations. The service of alcoholic beverages shall be incidental and complementary to the service of such meals. Limited food service such as provided by lounges, luncheonettes, diners, coffee shops, and drive-ins, does not satisfy the requirements of this definition. 
Restaurant and lounge. A public place, kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public as a place where meals are served off of a printed menu and prepared in the premises' kitchen, without sleeping accommodations. The service of alcoholic beverages either shall be incidental and complementary to the service of such meals or shall be in a separate room or holding area containing a number of seats which constitute not more than twenty-five (25) percent of the seats devoted to the service of meals. 
Room temperature. In excess of sixty-five (65) degrees Fahrenheit. 
Segregated area. An area which is separated by a full enclosure or full partition with a controlled access to and from all other retail sales activity. 
(Ord. No. 01-O-0035, § 1, 7-2-2001; Ord. No. 07-O-0082, § 1, 9-17-2007; Ord. No. 09-O-0013, § 1, 2-16-2009; Ord. No. 11-O-0024, § 1, 5-16-2011; Ord. No. 11-O-0046, § 2, 9-6-2011; 13-O-0038, § 1, 12-2-2013)  
Sec. 3-3. - Possession of alcoholic liquor in motor vehicle. 
No person shall transport, carry, possess or have any alcoholic liquor in, upon or about any motor vehicle, except in the original package with the seal unbroken. 
(Ord. No. 01-O-0035, § 1, 7-2-2001)  
Sec. 3-4. - Underage consumption of alcoholic liquor. 
(a)  The consumption of alcoholic liquor by any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years is forbidden. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to sell, give or deliver alcoholic liquor to any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years to misrepresent his or her age for the purpose of purchasing or obtaining alcoholic liquor in any place in the city where alcoholic liquor is sold. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any parent or guardian to permit any persons under the age of twenty-one (21) years old of which he or she be parent or guardian to violate any provisions of this chapter. 
(e)  The possession, dispensing or consumption by a person under the age of twenty-one (21), of alcoholic liquor, in the performance of a religious service or ceremony, or the consumption by a person under the age of twenty-one (21) under the direct supervision and approval of the parents or parent of such underage person in the privacy of a home, is not prohibited. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for any owner or occupant of any premises located within the city to knowingly allow any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years to remain in such premises while in the possession of alcoholic liquor or while consuming alcoholic liquor in violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 01-O-0035, § 1, 7-2-2001)  
Sec. 3-5. - Other general restrictions. 
(a)  Any person to whom the sale, gift or delivery of alcoholic liquor is prohibited because of age shall not purchase or accept a gift of such alcoholic liquor or have such alcoholic liquor in his possession. 
(b)  No person shall transfer, alter or deface such an identification card, use such identification card, use the identification card of another, carry or use a false forged identification card, or obtain an identification card by means of false information. No person shall purchase, accept delivery or have possession of alcoholic liquor on the basis of an identification card in violation of this section. 
(Ord. No. 01-O-0035, § 1, 7-2-2001)  
ARTICLE II. - LICENSING 
 
Sec. 3-6. - License required. 
It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale at retail in the city any alcoholic liquor without having a retail liquor dealer's license, or in violation of the terms of such license. 
(Ord. No. 01-O-0035, § 1, 7-2-2001)  
Sec. 3-7. - Application. 
(a)  Applications for such licenses shall be made to the local liquor control commissioner, in writing, under oath, and signed by the applicant, in accordance with the directions set forth in the application. The application shall include the following information and statements: 
(1)  The name, age and address of the applicant, and the name, age and address of every sole owner, general partner, corporate officer, director, manager, and anyone owning five (5) percent or more of the aggregate limited partner shares of the applicant limited partner interest or shares of the applicant business entity or parent of the business entity. 
(2)  The citizenship of the applicant, his place of birth and, if a naturalized citizen, the time and place of his naturalization. 
(3)  The character of the business of the applicant; and in the case of a corporation, the objects for which it was formed. 
(4)  The length of time that said applicant has been in business of that character, or in the case of a corporation, the date on which its charter was issued. 
(5)  Reserved. 
(6)  The location and description of the premises or place of business which is to be operated under such license. 
(7)  A statement whether the applicant has made similar application for a similar other license on premises other than described in this application, and the disposition of such application. 
(8)  A statement that the applicant has never been convicted of a felony and is not disqualified to receive a license by reason of any matter or thing contained in this chapter, laws of the state, or the ordinances of the city. 
(9)  Whether a previous license by any state or subdivision thereof, or by the federal government has been revoked, and the reasons therefor. 
(10)  A statement that the applicant will not violate any of the ordinances of the city or the laws of the state or of the United States in the conduct of his place of business. 
(11)  A statement that adequate dramshop insurance is in force covering the applicant and premises which is to be operated under such license. Further, in addition to the foregoing statement under oath, all applicants shall be required to attach to said application as proof of insurance a copy of the policy for dramshop insurance coverage, which policy shall contain at a minimum the following information: insurer's name, agent's name, date of expiration of policy, amount of coverage and type of coverage. 
(12)  The classification of the license for which application is made. 
(13)  The date of incorporation, if an Illinois corporation, or the date of becoming qualified under the Illinois Business Corporations Act to transact business in Illinois, if a foreign corporation. 
(b)  License personal interest forms, providing information deemed necessary for the local liquor commissioner, shall be completed in writing, under oath, for each person signing the application and each manager employed or to be employed at the licensed premises. 
(c)  The local liquor control commissioner may, within the discretion of the local liquor control commissioner, require to be fingerprinted any applicant for a new liquor license or any applicant for a renewal of a liquor license. Should the applicant be a partnership corporation the local liquor control commissioner may, within the discretion of the local liquor control commissioner, require to be fingerprinted any sole owner, general partner, corporate officer, director, manager, or anyone owning five (5) percent or more of the aggregate limited partner shares of the applicant limited partner interest or shares of the applicant business entity or parent of the business entity. All such fingerprinting shall be done by the city police department or other police department approved by the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 01-O-0035, § 1, 7-2-2001; Ord. No. 11-O-0024, § 12, 5-16-2011)  
Sec. 3-8. - Renewal of license. 
(a)  Any licensee may renew his license at the expiration thereof, provided that he is then qualified to receive a license, and the premises for which such renewal license is sought are suitable for such purpose; provided further, that the renewal privilege herein provided for shall not be construed as a vested right which shall in any case prevent the local liquor control commissioner, with city council consent, from decreasing the number of licenses to be issued within his jurisdiction. 
(b)  A liquor licensee shall file an application for renewal of a liquor license accompanied by the appropriate license fee by the first day of December; failure to do so may result in a renewal license not being issued on January 1 of any such year. The application shall state: name of licensee, name of establishment, license class, renewal period, changes that have occurred to statements made in the original application and previous renewals, name and address of the current resident manager, and an affidavit stating the application is true and correct. 
(Ord. No. 01-O-0035, § 1, 7-2-2001; Ord. No. 11-O-0024, § 13, 5-16-2011)  
Sec. 3-9. - Persons ineligible to be licensed. 
No such license shall be issued by the local liquor control commissioner to: 
(1)  A person, other than a corporation, who is not a resident of the city. 
(2)  A person who is not of good character and reputation in the community in which he resides. 
(3)  A person who is not a citizen of the United States. 
(4)  A person who has been convicted of a felony under any federal or state law, unless the local liquor control commissioner determines that such person has been sufficiently rehabilitated to warrant the public trust after considering matters set forth in such person's application and the local liquor control commissioner's investigation. The burden of proof of sufficient rehabilitation shall be on the applicant. 
(5)  A person who has been convicted of being the keeper or is a keeper of a house of ill fame. 
(6)  A person who has been convicted of pandering or other crime or misdemeanor opposed to decency and morality. 
(7)  A person whose license issued under this chapter or the Liquor Control Act of 1934 has been revoked for cause. 
(8)  A person who at the time of application for renewal of any license issued hereunder would not be eligible for such license upon a first application. 
(9)  A co-partnership, if any general partnership thereof, or any limited partnership thereof, owning more than five (5) percent of the aggregate limited partner interest in such co-partnership would not be eligible to receive a license hereunder. 
(10)  A corporation, if any officer, manager or director thereof, or any stockholder or stockholders owning in the aggregate more than five (5) percent of the stock of such corporation, would not be eligible to receive a license hereunder for any reason other than citizenship and residence within the city. 
(11)  A corporation unless it is incorporated in Illinois, or unless it is a foreign corporation which is qualified under the Business Corporation Act of 1983 to transact business in Illinois. 
(12)  A person whose place of business is conducted by a manager or agent unless the manager or agent possesses the same qualifications required by the licensee. 
(13)  A person who has been convicted of a violation of any federal or state law concerning the manufacture, possession or sale of alcoholic liquor, or has forfeited his bond to appear in court to answer charges for any such violation. 
(14)  A person who does not beneficially own the premises for which a license is sought, or does not have a lease thereon for the full period for which the license is to be issued. 
(15)  Any law enforcing public official, including members of local liquor control commissions, any mayor, alderman, or member of the city council or commission, any president of the village board of trustees, any member of a village board of trustees, or any president or member of a county board; and no such official shall be interested directly in the manufacture, sale or distribution of alcoholic liquor, except that a license may be granted to such official in relation to premises which are not located within the territory subject to the jurisdiction of that official if the issuance of such license is approved by the state liquor control commission. 
(16)  A person who is not a beneficial owner of the business to be operated by the licensee. 
(17)  A person who has been convicted of a gambling offense as prescribed by any of subsections (a)(3) through (a)(10) of Section 28-1 of, or as proscribed by Section 28-3 of, the criminal code of 1961, approved July 28, 1961, as heretofore or hereafter amended, or as proscribed by a statute replaced by any of the aforesaid statutory provisions. 
(18)  A person to whom federal wagering stamp or federal gaming device stamp has been issued by the federal government for the current tax period. 
(19)  A copartnership to which a federal wagering stamp or a federal gaming device stamp has been issued by the federal government for the current tax period, or if any of the partners have been issued a federal gaming device stamp or federal wagering stamp by the federal government for the current tax period. 
(20)  A corporation, if any officer, manager or director thereof, or any stockholder owning in the aggregate more than twenty (20) percent of the stock of such corporation has been issued a federal wagering stamp or federal gaming device stamp for the current tax period. 
(21)  Any premises for which a federal wagering stamp or federal gaming device stamp has been issued by the federal government for the current tax period. 
(22)  A person who is not eligible for a state retail liquor dealer's license. 
(23)  Any person who fails to obtain a state retail liquor dealer's license. 
(24)  Any person who at the time of application for a license, or renewal thereof, owes money to the city or is otherwise indebted to the city. 
(25)  Any person in violation of the Retailer's Occupational Tax Act, including: 
a.  Failure to make a tax return; 
b.  The filing of a fraudulent return; 
c.  Failure to pay all or part of any tax or penalty finally determined to be due; 
d.  Failure to keep books and records; 
e.  Failure to secure and display a certificate or subcertificate of registration; 
f.  Willful violation of any rule or regulation of the Illinois Department of Revenue relating to the administration and enforcement of tax liability. 
(Ord. No. 01-O-0035, § 1, 7-2-2001)  
Sec. 3-10. - Classifications. 
(a)  On premise restaurant license—Class A. 
Class A-1 license authorizes the retail sale, on the premises specified, of alcoholic liquor by the drink for consumption on restaurant premises. Alcoholic liquor may only be sold during the period when regular food service from the restaurant is available. All liquor service shall be from a service bar not available for customer use. To qualify for a Class A-1 license, a restaurant must seat not less than fifty (50) persons with a floor area of not less than one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet. 
Class A-2 license authorizes the retail sale, on the premises specified, of alcoholic liquor by the drink for consumption on restaurant and lounge premises. Alcoholic liquor may only be sold during the period when food service from the restaurant kitchen is available. If regular food service is not available the licensee must provide a printed bar menu. To qualify for a Class A-2 license, a restaurant must seat not less than one hundred (100) persons with a floor area of not less than three thousand (3,000) square feet. 
Class A-3 license authorizes the retail sale, on the premises specified, of alcoholic liquor by the drink for consumption on the premises. Alcoholic liquor may only be sold when food service from the restaurant is available. To qualify for an A-3 license, a restaurant must be located in the B-1 Central Business District as defined in Appendix A section 10.2 of this Code. 
(b)  On premise nonrestaurant license—Class B. 
Class B-1 license authorizes the retail sale, on the premises specified, of alcoholic liquor by the drink for consumption on recreational facility premises. To qualify for a Class B-1 license, a recreational facility must devote over one-half of the useable square footage to recreational activities. 
Class B-2 license authorizes the retail sale, on the premises specified, of alcoholic liquor by the drink for consumption on hotel premises. This shall include all banquets, conventions, 
meetings, group dining services, catering, cafeterias, restaurants, delis, cocktail lounges, bars, general entertainment areas, executive floor lounges, room service, health clubs, bar/vending machines in guest rooms, lobby and meeting room service or any other liquor dispensing facilities located on the hotel premises. 
Class B-3 license authorizes the retail sale, on the premises specified, of alcoholic liquor by the drink for consumption on nightclub premises. To qualify for a Class B-3 license, the premises must be in excess of five thousand (5,000) square feet. At all times, including non-business hours and times when no alcohol is being sold or served, all persons under the age of twenty-one (21) years are prohibited from being on the property, or any portion thereof, including parking lots and all other exterior areas, of any premises having a Class B-3 license, unless such persons are employees of the licensee or of any contractor of the licensee or subcontractor and present on the premises in connection with that employment, or are applying for employment with the licensee. 
Class B-4 license authorizes the retail sale, on the premises specified, of alcoholic liquor for consumption on golf courses. 
Class B-5 license authorizes the retail sale, on the premises specified, of beer and wine by the drink for consumption on an indoor recreational facility premises. To qualify for a Class B-5 license, a recreational facility must devote over one-half (½) of the usable square footage to recreational activities and the beer and wine may only be consumed in a separate lounge area where no one under the age of twenty-one (21) shall be permitted unless accompanied by his parent or legal guardian. Beer and wine shall only be dispensed and delivered to purchasers thereof only in cups of soft and lightweight material, such as paper cups, polyethylene cups, plastic cups, etc. Holders of a Class B-5 liquor license shall post signs throughout the recreational facility indicating that alcohol can only be consumed in the lounge area. 
(c)  Package store license—Class C. 
Class C-1 license authorizes the retail sale, on the premises specified, of alcoholic liquor in its original individual package, not for consumption on the premises. To qualify for a Class C- 1 license, the premises must be used primarily for the sale of alcoholic beverages. Free tasting may only be given on the premises for advertising purposes. No point of any premises for which a Class C-1 license has been issued shall be located less than one and one-half (1.5) miles from the nearest point of any other Class C-1 licensed premises. 
Class C-2 license authorizes the retail sale, on the premises specified, of alcoholic liquor in its original individual package, not for consumption on the premises. To qualify for a Class C-2 license, the premises must be primarily used for retail sales other than alcoholic liquor and provide retail sales floor area in excess of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet. The floor area devoted to liquor sales shall not be in excess of two thousand (2,000) square feet and shall be in a segregated area, approved by the local liquor control commissioner, so designed to be separate and distinct. 
Class C-3 license authorizes the retail sale, on the premises specified, of beer and wine in its original individual package at room temperature, not for consumption on the premises. To qualify for a Class C-3 license, the premises must be primarily used for retail sales other than alcoholic liquor and provide retail sales floor area in excess of ten thousand (10,000) square feet. The floor area devoted to liquor sales shall not be in excess of two thousand (2,000) square feet and shall be in a segregated area, approved by the local liquor control commissioner, so designed to be separate and distinct. 
Class C-4 license authorizes the retail sale, on the premises specified, of alcoholic liquor in its original individual package, not for consumption on the premises. To qualify for a Class C-4 license, the premises must be primarily used as a gas station. The floor area devoted to liquor sales shall not be in excess of five hundred (500) square feet and shall be in a segregated area, approved by the local liquor control commissioner, so designed to be separate and distinct. 
Class C-5 license authorizes the retail sale, on the premises specified, of beer and wine in its original individual package, which may be refrigerated, not for consumption on the premises. To qualify for a Class C-5 license, the premises must be primarily used for retail sales other than alcoholic liquor and provide retail sales floor area in excess of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet. The floor area devoted to liquor sales shall not be in excess of two thousand (2,000) square feet and shall be in a segregated area, approved by the local liquor control commissioner, so designed to be separate and distinct. 
(d)  Temporary license—Class D. 
Class D license authorizes the retail sale, on the premises specified, of beer and wine by the drink for consumption on or adjacent to the premises. To qualify for a Class D license, the applicant must be a local organization or group providing beer and/or wine at a picnic, carnival or similar function. A Class D license shall be authorized on a day-to-day basis but not for more than seven (7) consecutive days. 
(e)  On premise beer and wine license—Class E. 
Class E-1 license authorizes the retail sale, on the premises specified, of beer and wine by the drink for consumption on premises. Beer and wine may only be sold during the period when regular food service is available. 
Class E-3 license authorizes the retail sale, on the premises specified, of beer and wine by the drink for consumption on premises. Beer and wine may only be sold during the period when regular food service is available. To qualify for an E-3 license, a restaurant must be located in the B-1 Central Business District as defined in Appendix A, section 10.2 of this Code. 
(f)  Club license—Class F. 
Class F license authorizes the retail sale, on the premises specified, of alcoholic liquor by a club. Alcoholic liquor may only be sold to members of the club and their guests and persons attending programs of the club. For each program wherein the club facilities are rented, leased or utilized by any person, corporation, club or group, whether for fee, admission price, donation, gratuity or other remuneration of any form or manner, an application shall be filed with the local liquor control commissioner, shall include a filing fee as prescribed in Appendix G. 
(g)  West Chicago Park District—Class G. 
Class G license authorizes the retail sale of alcoholic liquor by the West Chicago Park District, only by the individual drink and only for consumption within the premises known as Reed-Keppler Park, and only at and during one-day events organized and supervised by the Park District and for the city's annual summer multi-day festival. 
(h)  Banquet facility—Class H. 
Class H license authorizes the retail sale, in banquet facilities only, of alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises where sold. 
(i)  Live musical performances—Class I. 
Class I license shall authorize any holder of a Class A-1, A-2, A-3, E-1, or E-3, to offer live musical performances on the licensed premises. Live musical performances on any premises licensed Class A-1, A-2, A-3, E-1, or E-3, are prohibited unless a Class I license shall have been issued in addition therefor. The local liquor control commissioner of the city may require the applicant for a Class I license to provide information about the facilities on the premises for accommodating live musical performances and may require that the licensee provide reasonable security measures at such performances. A Class I license shall expire, terminate, or be revoked or suspended simultaneously, without the taking of any action, with the expiration, termination, suspension, or revocation of the associated Class A-1, A-2, A-3, E-1, or E-3 license. 
(Ord. No. 01-O-0035, § 1, 7-2-2001; Ord. No. 01-O-0105, § 1, 11-5-2001; Ord. No. 06-O-0089, § 1, 11-20-2006; Ord. No. 08-O-0059, § 1, 8-4-2008; Ord. No. 08-O-0060, § 1, 8-4-2008; Ord. No. 09-O-0013, § 2, 2-16-2009; Ord. No. 09-O-0052, § 1, 10-19-2009; Ord. No. 10-O-0053, § 1, 6-21-2010; Ord. No. 11-O-0007, § 44, 5-16-2011; Ord. No. 11-O-0024, § 10, 5-16-2011; Ord. No. 11-O-0046, §§ 3, 4, 9-6-2011; Ord. No. 12-O-0033, § 1, 11-5-2012)  
Sec. 3-11. - License fees. 
The amount of the application fee and annual license fee shall be as prescribed in Appendix G. 
(Ord. No. 01-O-0035, § 1, 7-2-2001; Ord. No. 01-O-0105, § 2, 11-5-2001; Ord. No. 02-O-0120, § 1, 11-4-2002; Ord. No. 06-O-0011, § 1, 2-6-2006; Ord. No. 06-O-0089, § 2, 11-20-2006; Ord. No. 07-O-0105, § 6, 12-7-2007, eff. 1-1-2008; Ord. No. 08-O-0060, § 2, 8-4-2008; Ord. No. 09-O-0013, § 3, 2-16-2009; Ord. No. 09-O-0052, § 2, 10-19-2009; Ord. No. 10-O-0053, § 2, 6-21-2010; Ord. No. 11-O-0007, § 36, 5-16-2011; Ord. No. 11-O-0024, § 11, 5-16-2011; Ord. No. 13-O-0038, § 2, 12-2-2013)  
Sec. 3-12. - Records; number of licenses. 
(a)  The city clerk shall keep a complete record of all such licenses issued, and shall furnish the chief of police with a copy thereof; upon revocation or suspension of any license, the city clerk shall immediately give written notice thereof to the chief of police. 
(b)  The number of licenses as may be increased or reduced at any time by the local liquor control commissioner with city council consent. No license in violation of that number shall be issued or renewed. 
(c)  There shall be no more than the following number of licenses issued for each class: 
Class A-1 .....  3 
Class A-2 .....  6 
Class A-3 .....  4 
Class B-1 .....  0 
Class B-2 .....  1 
Class B-3 .....  0 
Class B-4 .....  2 
Class B-5 .....  1 
Class C-1 .....  5 
Class C-2 .....  2 
Class C-3 .....  2 
Class C-4 .....  1 
Class C-5 .....  0 
Class D ..... no limit 
Class E-1 .....  3 
Class E-3 .....  1 
Class F .....  3 
Class G .....  1 
Class H .....  1 
Class I .....  3 
(d)  The number of Class C-4 licenses shall not be increased. 
(Ord. No. 01-O-0036, § 1, 6-4-2001; Ord. No. 01-O-0035, § 1, 7-2-2001; Ord. No. 01-O-0077, § 1, 8-6-2001; Ord. No. 01-O-0078, § 1, 8-6-2001; Ord. No. 01-O-0079, § 1, 8-6-2001; Ord. No. 01-O-0105, § 3, 11-5-2001; Ord. No. 01-O-0119, § 1, 11-5-2001; Ord. No. 01-O-0109, § 1, 12-3-2001; Ord. No. 01-O-0131, § 1, 12-17-2001; Ord. No. 02-O-0102, § 1, 8-19-2002; Ord. No. 02-O-0103, § 1, 8-19-2002; Ord. No. 03-O-0030, § 1, 4-21-2003; Ord. No. 03-O-0108, § 1, 12-1-2003; Ord. No. 04-O-0004, § 1, 5-17-2004; Ord. No. 04-O-0008, § 1, 3-1-2004; Ord. No. 04-O-0014, § 1, 3-1-2004; Ord. No. 04-O-0038, § 1, 5-3-2004; Ord. No. 04-O-0044, § 1, 5-3-2004; Ord. No. 05-O-0042, § 1, 5-16-2005; Ord. No. 05-O-0050, § 1, 6-20-2005; Ord. No. 05-O-0051, § 1, 6-20-2005; Ord. No. 05-O-0091, § 1, 11-7-2005; Ord. No. 05-O-0094, § 1, 11-21-2005; Ord. No. 05-O-0095, § 1, 11-21-2005; Ord. No. 06-O-0027, § 1, 3-20-2006; Ord. No. 06-O-0036, § 1, 4-3-2006; Ord. No. 06-O-0031, § 1, 4-17-2006; Ord. No. 06-O-0039, § 1, 4-17-2006; Ord. No. 06-O-0066, § 1, 8-21-2006; Ord. No. 06-O-0070, § 2, 8-28-2006; Ord. No. 06-O-0072, § 1, 8-28-2006; Ord. No. 06-O-0092, § 1, 11-20-2006; Ord. No. 06-O-0095, § 1, 12-4-2006; Ord. No. 07-O-0035, § 1, 4-16-2007; Ord. No. 07-O-0088, § 1, 9-17-2007; Ord. No. 07-O-0089, § 1, 9-17-2007; Ord. No. 07-O-0100, § 1, 11-19-2007; Ord. No. 08-O-0058, § 1, 7-7-2008; Ord. No. 08-O-0084, § 1, 10-20-2008; Ord. No. 09-O-0014, § 1, 2-16-2009; Ord. No. 09-O-0033, § 1, 5-4-2009; Ord. No. 09-O-0052, § 3, 10-19-2009; Ord. No. 10-O-0051, § 1, 5-17-2010; Ord. No. 10-O-0053, § 3, 6-21-2010; Ord. No. 10-O-0076, § 1, 10-18-2010; Ord. No. 10-O-0077, § 1, 10-18-2010; Ord. No. 11-O-0011, § 1, 3-7-2011; Ord. No. 11-O-0032, § 1, 5-16-2011; Ord. No. 11-O-0029, § 1, 7-5-2011; Ord. No. 11-O-0037, § 1, 8-1-2011; Ord. No. 11-O-0048, § 1, 9-6-2011; Ord. No. 11-O-0078, § 1, 1-3-2012; Ord. No. 12-O-0006, § 1, 4-2-2012; Ord. No. 12-O-0033, § 2, 11-5-2012; Ord. No. 13-O-0003, § 1, 1-21-2013; Ord. No. 14-O-0028, § 1, 11-17-2014; Ord. No. 15-O-0003, § 2, 2-2-2015; Ord. No. 16-O-0008, § 1, 2-15-2016; Ord. No. 16-O-0027, § 1, 7-5-2016; Ord. No. 16-O-0028, § 1, 7-5-2016; Ord. No. 17-O-0003, § 1, 4-3-2017; Ord. No. 17-O-0025, § 1, 7-3-2017; Ord. No. 18-O-0001, § 1, 1-15-2018)  
Sec. 3-13. - Transfer of license. 
(a)  Nontransferable. A license shall be a personal privilege, in force and effect for that period of time set forth in section 3-9 of this chapter, unless sooner revoked as in this chapter provided, and shall not constitute property, nor shall it be subject to attachment, garnishment or execution, nor shall it be alienable or transferable, voluntarily or involuntarily, or subject to being encumbered or hypothecated. Such license shall cease upon the death of the licensee, and shall not descend by the law of testate or intestate devolution, provided that executors or administrators of the estate of any deceased licensee, and the trustee of any insolvent or bankrupt licensee, when such estate consists in part of alcoholic liquor, may continue the business of the sale or manufacture of alcoholic liquor under the order of the appropriate court, and may exercise the privileges of the deceased or insolvent or bankrupt licensee after the death of such decedent or such insolvency or bankruptcy, until the expiration of such license, but not longer than six (6) months after the death, bankruptcy or insolvency of such licensee. 
(b)  Change in personnel. Any changes in partnerships, officers, directors, persons holding directly or beneficially more than five (5) percent of the stock or ownership interest, or managers of establishments licensed under this chapter, shall be reported in writing to the local liquor control commissioner, within ten (10) days of the change and such new individuals shall meet all the standards of this chapter and must otherwise qualify to hold a liquor license; and such new individuals shall be subject to review by the local liquor control commissioner. 
(1)  When a license has been issued to a partnership and a change of ownership occurs resulting in a partnership interest by one who is not eligible to hold a liquor license, the license shall terminate. 
(2)  When a license has been issued to a corporation and a change takes place in officers, directors, managers or stockholders of more than five (5) percent of the stock, resulting in the holding of office or such of stock by one who is not eligible for a license, the license shall terminate. 
(3)  When a license has been issued to an individual who is no longer eligible for a license, the license shall terminate. 
The processing fee for any of the activities under this paragraph shall be three-hundred dollars ($300.00). 
(Ord. No. 01-O-0035, § 1, 7-2-2001; Ord. 09-O-0013, § 5, 2-16-2009; Ord. No. 11-O-0024, § 2, 5-16-2011)  
Sec. 3-14. - Change of location. 
A license issued hereunder shall permit the sale of alcoholic liquor only in the premises described in application and license. Such location may be changed only when and upon the written permit to make such change shall be issued by the local liquor control commissioner. No change of location shall be permitted unless the proposed new location is in compliance with the provisions and regulations of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 01-O-0035, § 1, 7-2-2001)  
Sec. 3-15. - Location restrictions. 
(a)  No license shall be issued for the sale at retail of any alcoholic liquor within one hundred (100) feet of any undertaking establishment, mortuary, church, school, hospital, home for the aged or indigent persons, or for veterans, their wives, or children, or any military or naval station; provided, that this prohibition shall not apply to hotels offering restaurant service, regularly organized clubs, or to restaurants, food shops, or other places where the sale of alcoholic liquors is not the principal business. 
(b)  No license shall be issued to any person for the sale of any alcoholic liquor at any school or other place of business frequented by persons under twenty-one (21) years of age except for any business where the selling of alcoholic beverages is ancillary to the main business on the premises. 
(c)  Pursuant to the authority granted by Section 6-15 of the Liquor Control Act, alcoholic liquor may be sold or delivered at Reed-Keppler Park located in the city. 
(Ord. No. 01-O-0035, § 1, 7-2-2001)  
Sec. 3-16. - Bring your own liquor (BYOL) regulations. 
No person shall bring onto any premises where food is sold any alcoholic beverage for that person's or another's consumption while on the premises for the purposes of eating, nor shall the owner, leasee, or other person in possession of such premises permit such consumption, unless the premises shall have been duly licensed by the city and the state. Only wine or beer may be brought onto such premises by a person for his or hers or another's consumption while present for the purpose of eating, and the annual cost of a city class BYOL liquor license therefore shall be one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) annually. 
(Ord. No. 10-O-0054, § 1, 6-21-2010)  
Sec. 3-17. - Outdoor seating areas. 
Holders of licenses, other than a Class C license, may sell and serve alcoholic beverages in an outdoor seating area located on the licensed premises, provided that such outdoor seating area is accessible only through the interior of a building or other fully enclosed structure on the licensed premises. The seating capacity and square footage of the outdoor seating area need not comply with the requirement of the license for such, if any, but shall not be considered for purposes of determining premises' compliance with the minimum requirements for such under the license. 
(Ord. No. 11-O-0024, § 3, 5-16-2011)  
Secs. 3-18—3-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - OPERATIONS AND SALES 
 
Sec. 3-21. - Liability of owners and licensees. 
(a)  Nothing in this chapter shall excuse or relieve the owner, proprietor, or person in charge of any place where alcoholic liquor is sold from the restrictions and requirements of any other ordinances of the city and laws of the State of Illinois, including the provisions of the Firearms Concealed Carry Act (430 ILCS 66/). 
(b)  If the owner of the licensed premises or any person for whom the licensee derives the right to possession of such premises, or the agent of such owner or person, shall knowingly permit the licensee to use the license and premises in violation of terms of this chapter, such owner, agent or other person shall be guilty of a violation of this chapter to the same extent as the licensee and be subject to the same punishment if applicable. 
(c)  Every act or omission of whatever nature constituting the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, by any officer, director, manager or other agent or employee of any licensee, shall be deemed and held to be the act of such employer or licensee, and such employer or licensee shall be punishable in the same manner as if the act or omission had been done or omitted by him personally. 
(d)  Any holder of a liquor license issued hereunder shall at all times provide proper management and supervision over the license, premises, beverages and persons therein and failure to so provide during all business hours shall be grounds, after hearing, for suspension or revocation of said license. 
(e)  Any holder of a liquor license shall at all times maintain a valid State of Illinois Liquor License, a copy of which must be provided to the city. 
(f)  Any holder of a liquor license shall maintain valid liquor liability (dramshop) insurance that indicates that the City of West Chicago, its officials, agents, employees and volunteers are additionally insured; a certificate of insurance that meets these requirements must be provided to the city. 
(Ord. No. 01-O-0035, § 1, 7-2-2001; Ord. No. 14-O-0003, § 1, 2-3-2014; Ord. No. 15-O-0003, § 1, 2-2-2015)  
Sec. 3-22. - Displaying license. 
Every licensee shall cause his license or licenses to be framed and hung in plain view, in a conspicuous place, on the licensed premises. 
(Ord. No. 01-O-0035, § 1, 7-2-2001)  
Sec. 3-23. - Closing hours. 
(a)  No person who has been issued a Class C license (of any type) hereunder as a seller of alcoholic liquor either personally or through his agents or employees, shall sell or permit to be sold, offer for sale, or give away any alcoholic liquor between the hours of midnight and 6:00 a.m., except that however, no such sales shall be made between 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. on Sunday. 
(b)  No person who has been issued other than a Class C license hereunder as a seller of alcoholic liquor either personally or through his agents or employees, shall sell or permit to be sold, offer for sale, or give away any alcoholic liquor between the hours of 1:30 a.m. and 6:00 a.m., except that sales may be made up to 2:30 a.m. on Saturday and Sunday mornings; however, no such sales shall be made between 2:30 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. on Sunday. 
(c)  No person who has been issued other than a Class C license hereunder as a seller of alcoholic liquor, either personally or through its agents or employees, shall allow any patron or customer to remain on the premises later than the sales/closing hours herein established. 
(Ord. No. 01-O-0035, § 1, 7-2-2001; Ord. No. 06-O-0091, § 1, 11-20-2006; Ord. No. 08-O-0060, § 3, 8-4-2008; Ord. No. 09-O-0013, § 4, 2-16-2009; Ord. No. 09-O-0032, § 1, 6-1-2009; Ord. No. 11-O-0024, § 4, 5-16-2011)  
Sec. 3-24. - Sanitary conditions. 
All premises used for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor, or for the storage of such liquor for sale, shall be kept in full compliance with the ordinance regulating the condition of premises used for the storage or sale of food for human consumption. 
(Ord. No. 01-O-0035, § 1, 7-2-2001)  
Sec. 3-25. - Interior lighting of licensed premises. 
In premises upon which the sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises is licensed, all rooms shall be continuously lighted during business hours by natural light or by artificial white light, so that all parts of the interior of the premises shall be clearly visible. In case the lighting of any rooms of any such licensed premises required by the foregoing provisions shall be permitted to be obscured by the licensee or by his agents or employees, then such license shall be subject to revocation in the manner therein provided. In order to enforce the provisions of this section, the mayor shall have the right to require the filing with him of plans, drawings and photographs showing the clearance of the view, as required above. 
(Ord. No. 01-O-0035, § 1, 7-2-2001)  
Sec. 3-26. - Original packages, containers; individual units. 
(a)  Filling, refilling original packages. No person licensed under this chapter shall fill or refill, in whole or in part, any original package of alcoholic liquor with the same or any other kind of quality of alcoholic liquor; and, it shall be unlawful for any person to have in his possession for sale at retail any bottles, casks or other containers containing alcoholic liquor except in original packages. 
(b)  Selling etc., alcoholic liquor in original container; unbroken seal. No person licensed hereunder as a dealer of alcoholic liquor, either personally or through his agent or employee, shall sell or permit to be sold, offer for sale, or give away any alcoholic liquor except in the original container and with the seal unbroken. 
(c)  Selling individual units. For the purpose of this section, it shall be a violation for any such seller to sell, as individual units, a single can or package out of what is commonly known as a six-pack, eight-pack, twelve-pack, case or other such packaging device, except for on-premises consumption by those possessing the proper license. 
(Ord. No. 01-O-0035, § 1, 7-2-2001)  
Sec. 3-27. - Employees under the age of twenty-one prohibited. 
No person under the age of twenty-one (21) years shall be employed upon the premises or portion of the premises where liquor is sold. 
(Ord. No. 16-O-0013, § 1, 3-21-2016) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 16-O-0013, § 1, adopted March 21, 2016, deleted the former § 3-27 and enacted a new § 3-27 as set out herein. The former section pertained to sales to persons under age of twenty-one years, habitual drunkards, spendthrifts and mental incompetents, and derived from Ord. No. 01-O-0035, § 1, 7-2-2001; Ord. No. 11-O-0024, § 5, 5-16-2011.  
Sec. 3-28. - Gambling. 
It shall be unlawful for any holder of a liquor license, either personally or through his agents or employees, to permit any gambling on any premises licensed to sell alcoholic liquor. 
(Ord. No. 01-O-0035, § 1, 7-2-2001)  
Sec. 3-29. - Kinds of conduct prohibited. 
In addition to all other acts prohibited by the Liquor Control Act of 1934 which are cause for revocation or suspension, the following kinds of conduct are prohibited in licensed establishments: 
(1)  The performance of acts, or simulated acts, of sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation, or any sexual acts; 
(2)  The act or simulated touching, caressing or fondling on the breasts, buttocks, anus or genitals; 
(3)  The actual or simulated displaying of the breasts, buttocks, pubic hair, anus, vulva or genitals; 
(4)  The permitting, by a licensee, of any person to remain in or upon the licensed premises who exposes to public view his or her entire breasts or buttocks; 
(5)  The permitting, by a licensee, of any person to remain in or upon the licensed premises who exposes to public view any portion of his or her genitals, vulva or anus; 
(6)  The displaying of moving pictures or photographic slide presentations depicting acts or simulated acts of sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation, or any sexual act; 
(7)  The permitting of any act to be performed which is contrary to any state, federal, or local criminal or quasi-criminal law. 
(Ord. No. 01-O-0035, § 1, 7-2-2001)  
Sec. 3-30. - Prohibited activities at licensed establishments. 
It shall be unlawful for any holder of a liquor license, either personally or through his agents or employees, to permit, sponsor, or promote on any licensed premises, or for the patron of any licensed premise to participate in or to promote or encourage the participation in or the holding of on the said premises of a "wet T-shirt" contest; actual or simulated wrestling or fight using jell-o, butter, lard, shortening, peanut butter, jelly, jam, flour, marshmallows, eggs, ketchup, or other food stuffs, mud, or other substance; or other similar kind of indecorous contest or match. Furthermore, the following activities are also prohibited: any boxing match, wrestling match, "iron man", "tough guy" or similar contest match, wrist or arm wrestling match or other real or simulated athletic contest involving direct body contact between or among participants while in a premises holding a liquor license. 
(Ord. No. 11-O-0024, § 6, 5-16-2011)  
Sec. 3-30.1. - Preservation of peace on premises selling alcoholic beverages. 
(a)  It shall be the duties and responsibilities of each liquor license holder, his employees or agents, to maintain the premises in a peaceable and orderly manner so as not to allow any patron, employee or member of the public on the premises to commit any act, which act is done in an unreasonable manner so as to alarm or disturb another and to provoke a breach of the peace or to commit an act which causes another person to become unconscious as a result of that act. 
(b)  Each liquor license holder shall have sufficient employees or agents on the premises to maintain the peace. Any employee, agent, or person acting on behalf of the liquor license holder shall be suitably trained to observe and be aware of persons who may become unconscious. Any employee, agent, or person acting on behalf of the liquor license holder shall be suitably trained to maintain the peace of the premises, and may not act in any fashion so as to promote or aggravate situations which may result in physical altercations, fighting or other acts of an unreasonable manner so as to alarm or disturb another and provoke a breach of the peace. 
(c)  No liquor license holder, employee or agent shall knowingly permit any fighting; which shall consist of physical contact or an insulting or provoking nature; or causes physical harm to an individual nor shall the liquor license holder, employee or agent knowingly permit the use of any drug, item or act causing an individual on the premises to become unconscious. 
(d)  "Premises," as defined for purposes of this chapter, shall mean the actual physical space wherein alcoholic beverages are sold to the public, any area set aside for use by the general public (restrooms, lounge), any area used by agents or employees of the liquor license holder for preparation of services (kitchen or storage facilities) and any outdoor area wherein the public is served or awaiting service or where the customers are authorized to park any vehicles and any means of ingress and egress to the parking facility. 
(e)  Each liquor license holder, employee or agent who is present or observes any type of criminal activity, fighting, or notes that any person is unconscious is required to immediately notify 9-1-1 of the event. In the event an individual on the premises loses consciousness or is in a state of stupor so as not to be competent, each liquor license holder, employee or agent who is present shall immediately call 9-1-1 and notify the police department of the condition of the individual. In the event the liquor license holder, employee or agent receives a complaint from any person that someone has or had been drugged on or at the premises, the liquor license holder, employee or agent shall immediately notify the police department of the complaint and any other relevant information. The police department shall inform the local liquor control commissioner of any conduct of patrons or other persons on the premises of a liquor license establishment which results in any reports to the police department pursuant to this subsection. 
(f)  Failure to immediately report any incident as required under subsection (e) of this section shall subject the holder of a liquor license to the revocation or suspension of the retail liquor dealer's license, as well as a possible fine from the local liquor control commissioner. In the event that more than three (3) incidents of similar types of activity such as drugging of persons, disorderly conduct, fighting or other criminal activity which is classified as crimes against persons occur on any liquor license establishment within the course of one (1) year, said violations shall constitute a public nuisance. 
(g)  The city shall invoice the owner of any liquor license establishment for the cost of providing what extraordinary resources, in the sole determination of the city administrator or chief of police, associated with the preservation of peace at that establishment; said invoice shall include a twenty-five (25) percent surcharge to account for administrative expenses. 
(h)  The local liquor control commissioner shall have the right and/or authority to revoke or suspend the retail liquor dealer's license as well as fine or take any other legal steps necessary to prevent the reoccurrence of a public nuisance as hereinabove defined. 
(Ord. No. 11-O-0024, § 7, 5-16-2011)  
ARTICLE IV. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
 
Sec. 3-31. - Local liquor control commissioner designated. 
The mayor is hereby designated to be the local liquor control commissioner and shall be charged with the administration and all duties as provided by the Liquor Control Act of 1934, and of such ordinances, resolutions, rules or regulations relating to alcoholic liquor as hereinbefore provided and as may be enacted hereinafter. The mayor may appoint a person or persons to assist him in the exercise of the powers and the performance of his duties as local liquor control commissioner. 
(Ord. No. 01-O-0035, § 1, 7-2-2001)  
Sec. 3-32. - Local liquor control commissioner—Powers and duties. 
(a)  The local liquor control commissioner, with city council consent, may, from time to time, adopt such rules and regulations pertaining to the sale or dispensing of alcoholic liquor. Any and all rules and regulations hereinafter proposed or adopted, and amendments thereto may be proposed by the commissioner, assistants, city council member or any other interested person. The proposed rule or regulation shall be submitted to the commissioner in writing and be read during a public meeting before adoption, amendment or rejection. Motions and resolutions concerning rules and regulations shall be in written form and recorded in the minutes by the secretary, together with the action taken. All rules and regulations made as hereinafter provided, and all changes therein shall forthwith be printed for distribution by said commission; and the commission shall give notice of the place or places where said rules or regulations may be obtained by publication in newspapers published in West Chicago and such publication as shall be specified. The date, not less than ten (10) days subsequent to the date of such publication, when such rules and regulations shall be effective shall be provided. 
(b)  The local liquor control commissioner shall have the following powers, functions and duties with respect to local liquor licenses: 
(1)  To grant local licenses to persons for premises within his jurisdiction, to suspend for not more than thirty (30) days or revoke for cause all such licenses, and in addition to suspension of such licenses, to levy fines in accordance with state and local laws. 
(2)  To enter or to authorize any law enforcing officer to enter at any time upon any premises licensed hereunder to determine whether any of the provisions of state law, local ordinance, rule or regulation adopted by the local commissioner or by the state liquor control commission have been or are being violated, and at such time to examine said premises of said licensee in connection therewith. 
(3)  To receive complaints from any citizen within his jurisdiction that any of the provisions of the Liquor Control Act of 1934, as amended or of this chapter or any rules or regulations adopted by him or by the state liquor control commission have been or are being violated, and to act upon such complaints in manner hereinafter provided by law. 
(4)  To notify the secretary of state where a club incorporated under the General Not for Profit Corporation Act or a foreign corporation functioning as a club in this state under a certificate of authority issued under that act has violated the Liquor Control Act of 1934, as amended, or this chapter or any rules or regulations adopted by the local liquor control commission by selling or offering for sale at retail alcoholic liquors without a retailer's license. 
(5)  To examine, or cause to be examined, under oath, any applicant for a local license or for a renewal thereof, or any licensee upon whom notice of revocation or suspension and/or fine has been served, or any licensee against whom a citation proceeding has been instituted by the state liquor control commission, to examine, or cause to be examined, the books and records of such an applicant or licensee or respondent; and to hear testimony and take proof for his information in the performance of this duty; and for such purposes to issue subpoenas which shall be effective in any part of this state. For the purpose of obtaining any of the information desired by the local liquor control commissioner under this section, he may authorize his agent to act on his behalf; 
(6)  If the local liquor control commissioner has reason to believe that any continued operation of a particular licensed premises will immediately threaten the welfare of the community, the commissioner may, upon the issuance of a written order stating the reason for such conclusion and without notice or hearing, order a licensed premises closed for not more than seven (7) days, giving the licensee an opportunity to be heard during that period, except that if such licensee shall also be engaged in the conduct of another business or businesses on licensed premises, such order shall not be applicable to such other business or businesses; 
(7)  To award, at his sole discretion, a bounty to a licensee or the licensee's agent or employee, who has, in connection with an attempt to purchase or obtain alcoholic liquor by a person, demanded positive identification and found that person to be misrepresenting his or her age for the purpose of purchasing or obtaining alcoholic liquor. In order to be eligible for a bounty, the licensee, agent or employee must have confiscated the identification and filed a police report regarding the incident. The bounty shall be no less than fifty dollars ($50.00) and no more than one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(8)  The local liquor control commissioner shall be authorized to issue a modification, in writing and signed by him, to any class of license provided for in section 3-10 to permit, in his discretion, without action by the city council, an extension of hours of sale or the sales of alcoholic beverages not provided for in said license for such period as he shall determine appropriate, but not exceeding thirty (30) days in any calendar year, upon the following conditions: 
1.  Any city liquor licensee wishing such modification shall file a written application for such, signed by the licensee, with the local liquor control commissioner, which states: 
a.  The name, address, and telephone number of the licensee, the address of the licensed premises, and class of license held. 
b.  If the modification requested is an extension of hours of sale, the hour at which the license holder wishes sales to begin and end. 
c.  If the modification requested is to permit the sales of alcoholic beverages not provided for in the license, the kind, specific brand or label, alcoholic content, and container size or amount of each such beverage. 
d.  The period for which the licensee wishes the modification. 
2.  A licensee submitting such application must not have plead guilty to or have been adjudicated guilty of more than one (1) violation of this chapter 3 or of the Liquor Control Act of 1934 within the twelve (12) months preceding the date on which the modification is to begin. 
3.  The licensee must not have been issued a modification for the premises within the twelve (12) months preceding the date on which the modification is to begin. 
4.  The license for which the modification is sought must be current and valid and not revoked or suspended at the time of application, with all fees and charges due the city in connection therewith fully paid. 
5.  The modification shall apply to and be valid for the licensed premises only. 
The local liquor control commissioner shall not deny any part of the request in such application, except upon the opportunity for a public hearing as provided for in subsection 3-33(d), pursuant to which the local liquor control commissioner shall issue a written order as provided for subsection 3-33(e). Such order may be appealed as provided for in section 3-34. 
The local liquor control commissioner shall file a copy of all modifications issued with the city clerk. All modifications issued hereunder shall expire of their own accord, without notice to the licensee, at 11:59 p.m. on the expiration date stated therein, and all sales of alcoholic beverages thereafter shall be only as authorized by the license. A modification shall not be deemed to be a separate license but part of the license for which it is issued. Violation of the provisions of a modification shall be deemed a violation of such license and may result in the suspension or revocation of the license or fining of the licensee as provided in sections 3-33, 3-35, and 3-36 hereof. Any suspension or revocation of the license for which the modification is issued shall also suspend or revoke the modification without the requirement of further action or a specific provision. 
(c)  The local liquor control commissioner shall notify the city council of the following activities: 
(1)  The receipt of any new license application prior to the license being issued. Requests for Class D, temporary licenses, are excluded from this requirement. 
(2)  Any hearing scheduled to review alleged violation before the local liquor control commissioner of any rules and regulations established by the Code. 
(3)  Copies of decisions made by the local liquor control commissioner. 
(4)  All modifications to licenses issued pursuant to subsection (b)(8) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 01-O-0035, § 1, 7-2-2001; Ord. No. 06-O-0096, §§ 2, 3, 12-4-2006; Ord. No. 11-O-0024, § 8, 5-16-2011)  
Sec. 3-33. - Suspension or revocation of license, fine. 
(a)  Upon receipt of any report or notice of any violation by the license holder or his agents of any city ordinance or state or federal statute, regulation or order relating to the conduct of such business or occupation, the local liquor control commissioner may issue notice to the holder of the license so charged or convicted to appear before said commissioner to show cause why he should not be fined or why his license shall not be revoked or suspended. 
(b)  For violations of this chapter, the local liquor control commissioner may, in addition to or in lieu of issuing the aforementioned notice, issue a notice to the licensee advising the licensee of the violation and allowing him or her an opportunity to avoid a hearing and avoid incurring a greater fine by admitting the violation under the following conditions: 
(1)  The licensee or his agents shall not have admitted to or have been found to be in violation of this chapter for the five (5) preceding years. 
(2)  The licensee shall sign and return an order within two (2) weeks of the date the order was sent admitting the violation and agreeing to pay the predetermined fine. 
(3)  The fine shall be set at five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each violation. 
(4)  In addition to the fine, the licensee shall reimburse the city its attorney's fees and costs as provided for in subsection (f) of this section, plus an amount equal to ten (10) percent of the total thereof as an administrative fee. 
(c)  In addition to the suspension of a local license, the local liquor control commissioner may levy a fine on the licensee for any violation referred to in this section. The fine imposed shall not exceed one thousand ($1,000.00) dollars for the first violation with a twelve-month period; one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) for the second violation within a twelve-month period; and two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for the third violation within a twelve-month period. Each day on which a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation. No more than fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00) in fines levied under this section shall be imposed against any licensee during the period of his or her license. 
(d)  No local license shall be so revoked or suspended and no licensee shall be fined except after a public hearing by the local liquor control commissioner with a three-day prior written notice to the licensee affording the licensee an opportunity to appear and defend. Based upon the evidence at such hearing the local liquor control commissioner may enter an order of one (1) of the following: 
(1)  Revoking the licensee's license. 
(2)  Suspending the licencee's license. 
(3)  Suspending the licencee's license and fining the licensee as provided above. 
(4)  Fining the licensee as provided above. 
(e)  The local liquor control commissioner shall, within five (5) days after such hearing, if he determines after such hearing that the license should be revoked or suspended or that the licensee should be fined, state the reason or reasons for such determination in a written order and either the amount of the fine and/or the period of suspension or that the license has been revoked, and serve a copy of such order within the five (5) days upon the licensee. 
(f)  Any licensee determined by the local liquor control commissioner to have violated any of the provisions of the Liquor Control Act of 1934, as amended, or any ordinance or resolution of the city, or any rule or regulation established by the local liquor control commissioner, or the Illinois Liquor Control Commission, shall pay to the city the costs of the hearing before the local liquor control commissioner on such violation. The local liquor control commissioner shall determine the costs incurred by the city for said hearing, including, but not limited to, court reporter fees, the costs of transcripts or records, attorneys' fees, the cost of preparing and mailing notices and orders and all other miscellaneous expenses incurred by the city or such lesser sum as the local liquor control commissioner may allow. 
(g)  The licensee shall pay said costs to the city within thirty (30) days of notification of the costs by the local liquor control commissioner. Failure to pay said costs within thirty (30) days of notification is a violation of this section and may be cause for license suspension or revocation or the levy of a fine. 
(Ord. No. 01-O-0035, § 1, 7-2-2001; Ord. No. 07-O-0010, §§ 2, 3, 2-5-2007)  
Sec. 3-34. - Appeals. 
(a)  All reviews on appeal of any order or action of the local liquor control commissioner shall be made by the Illinois Liquor Control Commission on the official record of proceedings made before the local liquor control commissioner. 
(b)  The local liquor control commissioner shall, within five (5) days after the notice of an appeal has been filed to the Illinois Liquor Control Commission, file a certified official record of the proceedings with the Illinois Liquor Control Commission, provided that the appellant licensee pays for the cost of the transcript as provided by 235 ILCS 5/7-9. 
(c)  In the event of an appeal to the Illinois Liquor Control Commission, and in cases where the appeal is taken pursuant to the Administrative Review Act, 735 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq., payment is due forty (40) days after the entry of an order finally affirming the determination of the local liquor control commissioner. 
(Ord. No. 01-O-0035, § 1, 7-2-2001)  
Sec. 3-35. - Revocation of license after conviction. 
(a)  Whenever any licensee shall be convicted of any violation of this chapter, the licenses of said licensee may, in the discretion of the local liquor control commissioner or the state liquor control commission, (whichever has jurisdiction), be revoked and forfeited and all fees paid thereon shall be forfeited and it shall thereafter be unlawful and shall constitute a further violation of this chapter for the licensee to continue to operate under said license. 
(b)  The conviction by any employee of the licensee of a violation of this chapter shall have the same force and effect as if the licensee itself were convicted. 
(Ord. No. 01-O-0035, § 1, 7-2-2001)  
Sec. 3-36. - Penalty. 
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this chapter (other than an applicant or licensee subject to sanction detailed in section 3-33) shall be subject to the general penalty provisions as provided for in Chapter 1, section 1-8 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of West Chicago. 
(Ord. No. 01-O-0035, § 1, 7-2-2001; Ord. No. 11-O-0024, § 9, 5-16-2011)  
Chapter 4 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Housing, Ch. 7; nuisances, Ch. 10; pollution control, § 14-1 et seq.; storm water controls, § 14-40 et seq.; erosion and sedimentation regulations, § 14-50 et seq.; water and sewer services, Ch. 18. 
 
ARTICLE I. - BUILDING CODE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 04-O-0100, § 1(Exh. A), adopted Dec. 6, 2004, deleted the former Art. I, §§ 4-1—4-11, and enacted a new Art. I as set out herein. The former Art. I pertained to similar subject matter. For complete derivation see the Code Comparative Table and the end of this volume. 
 
Sec. 4-1. - Administration. 
(a)  Title. This article shall be known as the "Building Code of the City of West Chicago." 
(b)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this article is to provide safety, health and public welfare through structural strength and stability, means of egress, adequate light and ventilation and protection to life and property from fire and hazards incidental to the design, construction, alteration, removal, or demolition of buildings or structures. 
(c)  Article as remedial. This article shall be construed to secure its expressed intent, which is to ensure public safety, health and welfare insofar as they are affected by building construction, through structural strength, adequate egress facilities, sanitary facilities, light and ventilation and fire safety; and, in general, to secure safety to life and property from all hazards incidental to the design, erection, construction, alteration, removal or demolition of all buildings and structures. 
(d)  Application and scope of regulations. 
(1)  Application of provisions: This article shall control all matters concerning the construction, alteration, addition, repair, removal, demolition, use, location, occupancy and maintenance of all buildings and structures, and shall apply to existing or proposed buildings and structures; except as such matters are otherwise provided for in other ordinances or statutes, or in the rules and regulations authorized for promulgation under the provisions of this article. 
(2)  Compliance with provisions: No building or structure shall be constructed, extended, repaired, removed or altered in violation of these provisions except for repairs as defined in subsection (3) of this section, and except further, that the raising, lowering or moving of a building or structure as a unit necessitated by a change in legal grade or widening of a street shall be permitted, provided the building or structure is not otherwise altered or its use or occupancy changed. 
(3)  General repairs and maintenance: Ordinary repairs to structures may be made without application or notice to the city, but such repairs shall not include the cutting away of any wall, partition, or portion thereof, the removal or cutting of any structural beam or bearing support, or the removal or change of any required means of egress, or rearrangement of parts of a structure affecting the exit requirements; nor shall ordinary repairs include addition to, alteration of, replacement or relocation of any standpipe, water supply, sewer, drainage, drain leader, gas, soil, waste, vent or similar piping, electric wiring or mechanical or other work affecting public health or general safety. 
(4)  Conflicting provisions: When the provisions contained in this article conflict with any other provision contained in the City Code or in any state or federal statute, the most restrictive or rigid provisions shall control. 
(e)  Existing structures, structures moved into city. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful to use or occupy any building or structure, or part thereof, in violation of the provisions of this article, except as otherwise provided for in this Code. 
(2)  The legal use and occupancy of any structure existing on the date of adoption of this article which has been heretofore approved, may be continued without change, except as may be specifically provided for in this article. 
(3)  Alterations or repairs may be made to any structure without requiring the existing structure to comply with all the requirements of this article, provided such work conforms to that required of a new structure. Alterations or repairs shall not cause an existing structure to become unsafe or adversely affect the performance of the building. 
(4)  Alterations or repairs to an existing structure which are nonstructural and do not adversely affect any structural member or any part of the structure having a fire resistance rating may be made with the same materials of which the structure is constructed. 
(5)  In the event a building or structure is altered or repaired beyond fifty (50) percent of its present size or physical value, the city may require that the entire building or portions thereof be brought into compliance with all provisions of this article. 
(6)  Buildings and structures moved into or within the city shall comply with the provisions of this article for new buildings and structures and shall not be used or occupied in whole or in part until the certificate of occupancy has been issued by the city. 
(f)  Building official. 
(1)  Defined: Whenever in this article the term "building official" is used, it shall mean that person appointed by the city administrator. That officer is hereby authorized and has the duty to administer and enforce the provisions of the building code, making such determinations, interpretations, and orders as are necessary therefore, and requiring such plats, plans and other descriptive material in connection with applications for permits as are necessary to judge compliance with this article. 
(g)  General requirements. 
(1)  License required: All contractors performing work within city limits are required to obtain a license as specified in Chapter 9, Article II of this Code. 
Exception: Unless otherwise established by an approved intergovernmental agreement. 
(2)  Occupation of streets or other public property: Streets or other public property shall not be occupied with building materials unless approved by the building official, subject to such conditions as the building official deems necessary. 
(3)  Barricades required: Any person using streets or other public property for storage or construction shall provide substantial and suitable barricades and shall provide, place and maintain proper and sufficient lights or flares to guard and protect all traffic and passersby. 
(4)  Damage to barricading: It shall be unlawful to move, remove, turn off, extinguish, diminish or disturb any light or barricades required by subsection (g)(3) above. 
(5)  Removal of rubbish—Public property: Rubbish or excavated material which is deposited on any street or other public property shall be removed from day to day, as rapidly as produced. Trash containers or dumpsters shall not be placed on streets unless otherwise approved in advance by the building official and must, where possible, be located a minimum of five (5) feet from the curb. Trash containers shall be placed in such a manner that they do not obstruct the vision of motorists or interfere with pedestrian traffic. 
(6)  Removal of rubbish—Private property: Rubbish or surplus materials shall not be thrown, dropped or swept from any floor above the ground or from any roof, but shall either be carried or lowered in such a manner as not to cause dust, and shall be removed from day to day, or placed in an approved noncombustible container and shall be protected in such a manner as not to be blown or scattered onto adjacent properties. Trash containers or dumpsters shall be located on private property and no closer than five (5) feet to the property line. 
(7)  Public inconvenience: All building operations shall be conducted in a manner that least inconveniences the public and abutting property owners. 
(8)  Protection of passersby: Where during construction an excavation or other hazard exists five (5) feet or less from a public way, the contractor shall provide and maintain a barricade or fence for the protection of passersby. 
(h)  Building permits. 
(1)  Permit required: No person shall begin the erection, construction, alteration or repair, demolition or movement of any building or structure in the City of West Chicago, or begin the clearing or excavating of the site of any proposed building or structure, or construct or maintain any driveway in or across any public walk, parkway or curb, without first having applied for and obtained a permit in writing to do so from the city. 
(2)  Application for permit: An application for a permit shall be submitted in such form as the building official may prescribe. Such application shall contain the full name and address of the applicant and of the owner, and if the owner is a corporate body, of its responsible officer. The application shall also list all subcontractors, addresses, phone numbers and a brief description of work to be performed and such additional information as may be required by the building official for an intelligent understanding of the work proposed. 
(3)  Required plans and information: 
a.  Grading plan: At the time of applying for a permit to construct a principal building, the applicant shall submit copies of a plat of topographic survey of the lot and grading plan prepared by an Illinois Registered Professional Engineer, and shall indicate all information as otherwise required by the city engineer. 
b.  Plans, drawings, etc.: Plans, drawings, specifications and calculations meeting all requirements of the building code shall be presented to the building official for approval before a permit will be issued. Plans shall specifically show all design loads and occupant capacities for all spaces and floors and shall be prepared and sealed by a registered architect licensed in the State of Illinois. 
Exception: Working drawings in sufficient detail to describe the character of the work proposed are required for single-family residential additions, alterations, remodeling and accessory structures. 
c.  To relocate a principal building, or, relocate or construct an accessory building greater than five hundred seventy-six (576) square feet, the applicant shall submit the same information as indicated above unless otherwise approved by the building official or city engineer. 
d.  Proof of compliance; improvements: A permit shall not be issued until satisfactory proof has been submitted that an adequate and approved water supply and sewerage facilities are available; that surface and roof drainage will not damage adjoining properties; that, to maintain the public safety because of the activity on the property, public pedestrian walks and curbs are provided; and that access for police and fire equipment is provided on a satisfactory, hard surface, all weather roadway. 
(4)  Alteration of plans: It shall be unlawful to erase, alter or modify any lines, figures or coloring contained upon drawings or plans bearing the approval stamp of the building official, or filed with him for reference. If during the progress of the execution of such work, it is desired to deviate in any manner affecting the construction or other essentials of the building from the terms of the application or drawing, notice of such intention to alter or deviate shall be given to the building official and approval of an amended plan showing such alteration or deviation shall be obtained before such alteration or deviation shall be made. 
(5)  Revocation of permit: The building official may revoke a permit issued in case there has been any false statement or misrepresentation as to a material fact in the application or plans on which the permit or approval was based. 
(6)  Permit for moving building or structure: Before a building or structure may be moved, the owner or agent shall notify all utilities having service connections within the building or structure such as water, electric, gas, sewer any other connections. A permit for moving a building or structure shall not be issued until all utilities having service connections within the structure have been removed or sealed and plugged in a safe manner. Route approval shall be required from the public services department and a five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) cash bond deposited. 
(7)  Commencement notice to be given: The building official shall be given at least twenty-four (24) hours' notice of the starting of work under a permit. 
(8)  Payment of fees: A permit shall not be issued until all required fees have been paid. 
(9)  Compliance with article: The permit shall be a license to proceed with the work and shall not be construed as authority to violate any of the provisions of this article, except as specifically stipulated by modification or variation. 
(10)  Compliance with permit: All work shall conform to the approved application and plans for which the permit has been issued and any approved amendments thereto. 
(11)  Compliance with grading plan—Spot survey required: All new work shall be located strictly in accordance with the approved grading plan. Two (2) copies of the platted survey, prepared by an Illinois Registered Professional Land Surveyor shall be filed with the building official within fourteen (14) days after foundation is placed. No construction will be permitted over the foundation except for water, sewage and related items unless such platted survey has been filed and approved by the building official. 
The spot survey shall indicate the following: 
a.  Elevations of the top of foundation walls shall be labeled at each corner and at every break point if steps in the foundation occur. 
b.  All dimensions of foundation walls. 
c.  Actual front, side, and rear yard setbacks. 
(12)  Extension and expiration of building permit or application for building permit: 
a.  If, after a building permit required by this article shall have been granted, the operation called for by such permit shall not have been started within six (6) months after the date thereof, such permit shall be void and no operation hereunder shall be begun. 
b.  Where, under authority of a permit, work has begun and has not been prosecuted for a continuous or cumulative period of six (6) months, as determined by the building official, all rights under such permits shall thereupon terminate and work may be continued only after application for and issuance of a new permit. If, after a period of thirty (30) days following the expiration of a permit, no subsequent permit has been issued, all structures or portions thereof shall be removed and the site shall be returned to its original condition. 
c.  Where, under authority of a permit, work has not been completed within one (1) year after the issuance of such permit and an occupancy permit issued, all rights under such permit shall thereupon terminate and work may be continued only after application for and issuance of a new permit. Where the construction process is expected to exceed one-year time in completion, a schedule of completion shall be provided at the time of application for permit. 
d.  The fee for extending a permit shall be one-half (½) the amount required for a new permit for such work, provided no changes have been made in the original plans and specifications for such work, and provided that such abandonment has not exceeded six (6) months. 
e.  Any application for a building permit that is approved but has not been issued within six (6) months of notification of said approval by the city shall be void. 
f.  Any application for a building permit where the applicant has failed to respond to any request for additional information, including but not limited to plan reviews and contractor information for a period of more than six (6) months, said application shall be void. 
g.  No voided building permit application may be renewed. No re-application for a previously voided permit application shall be accepted until which time all fees owed for plan review and out-of-pocket expenses have been paid. The code in effect for a permit re-application will be that in effect at the time said re-application is accepted. 
(13)  Permits for sewer and water repairs: Permits are required for sewer and water repairs. All work must be performed in accordance with the plumbing code listed in section 4-4 of this article. All parkways must be restored to their original condition within two (2) weeks of completion of sewer and water repairs. Any sidewalk, which is damaged or removed, must be replaced immediately. The contractor is responsible to ensure that the excavation is performed in a safe manner and suitable protection for the general public shall be provided. Sewer and water excavations on private property shall be compacted, leveled and restored to natural grade within six (6) months of the date of the issuance of the permit. 
(i)  Demolition of buildings or structures. 
(1)  Application: Along with a completed permit application; the following information is required for submittal for a demolition permit: 
a.  Service connections: For other then sewer and water services under direct control of the city, the owner or agent shall notify all utilities having service connections within the structure such as electric, gas, cable, telephone and other connections of intent to demolish before a permit may be issued. The contractor shall submit an affidavit certifying that the respective service connections and appurtenant equipment, such as meters and regulators, have been removed or sealed and plugged in a safe manner. 
b.  Well and septic: An approved and executed copy of the DuPage County Health Department site evaluation permit. 
c.  City water and sewer: A copy of the city's inspection report, signed by the city administrator, or his designee, indicating sewer and water services have been disconnected, inspected and approved as part of a valid permit issued for disconnection of said utilities for the property/structure in question. 
d.  Survey/plot plan: A survey or plot plan showing the buildings or structures to be demolished and the buildings or structures to remain. 
e.  Environmental review: A Phase I (NESHAP) environmental report for demolition of commercial and industrial structures. 
f.  Collateral: Cash, certified check, an irrevocable letter of credit or some other surety instrument from a company authorized by the department of insurance to sell sureties in Illinois shall be deposited with the city, in an amount equal to one hundred twenty-five (125) percent of the cost of demolition, as determined by a written estimate from the contractor and/or the building official. 
(2)  Notice to adjoining owners: Written notice shall be given to the owners of adjoining lots and to the owners of wired or other facilities, of which the temporary removal of any service is necessitated by the proposed work, before demolition of a building or structure may begin. 
(3)  Notice to building official: Should a person causing a demolition excavation to be made is not afforded license to enter an adjoining structure, that person shall immediately notify in writing both the building official and the owner of the adjoining property that the responsibility of providing support to the adjoining lot, building or structure has become the exclusive responsibility of the owner of the adjoining property. 
(4)  Lot regulation: Whenever a structure is demolished or removed, the premises shall be maintained free from all unsafe or hazardous conditions by the proper regulation of the lot, including temporary fencing or other measures, restoration of established grades and planting vegetation as detailed herewith, and the erection of the necessary retaining walls and fences. Temporary fencing is subject to the requirements of appendix A, section 7.1 of this Code. 
(5)  Grading of lot: Where a structure has been demolished or removed and a building permit has not been approved, the vacant lot shall be filled, graded and maintained in conformity to the established elevation of the street grade at curb level nearest to the point of demolition. Provision shall be made to prevent the accumulation of water or damage to any foundations on the premises or the adjoining property. 
(6)  Acceptable fill: Any foundations, footings or other below ground structures must be removed or pulverized into acceptable fill. Concrete containing metal reinforcement shall not be used as fill. Any basements or trenches must be filled with approved material. 
(7)  Removal of debris: All waste materials shall be removed in a timely manner so as to prevent injury or damage to persons, adjoining properties and public rights-of-way. 
(8)  Planting of grass: After any demolition of building(s) and after removal of debris there from, black topsoil shall be spread four (4) inches deep over the entire surface of the building site; and the soil shall be seeded for grass or sodded within thirty (30) days of demolition or the commencement of seasonable weather. Once seeded or sodded, the grass shall be maintained. If seeding, appropriate erosion control measures must be taken until such seed is established as approved by the building official. 
(9)  Complete removal: Demolition must include the removal of all foundations, septic tanks, stoops, slabs, private sidewalks, driveways and any other abandoned structures. 
(j)  Inspections. 
(1)  Preliminary inspections: Before issuing a permit, the building official may examine or cause to be examined all buildings, structures and sites for which an application has been filed. Safe access to all work being inspected must be provided at all times. 
(2)  Required inspections: 
a.  Inspections required under the provisions of this article shall be made by the building official. If an inspection has been scheduled and, in the opinion of the building official, after arrival on the inspection site, the job is not ready or has not progressed to a point where an inspection can be made properly, or if access is not possible to perform the inspection, or if the job site has not been maintained free from excessive construction debris, or, upon re-inspection, not all previously identified code violations have been corrected, a seventy-five dollar ($75.00) re-inspection fee may be charged. No further inspections shall be made until the re-inspection fee has been paid. 
b.  The owner or contractors are required to call the building department a minimum of twenty-four (24) hours in advance, but no later then 1:00 p.m. the day before, for any inspection. Required inspections include, but are not limited to the following: 
1.  Footing: Before concrete is poured and after footing and pier excavation has been completed and all form work and steel reinforcement is complete. 
2.  Foundation wall: Prior to placement of concrete when reinforcing steel is required in a foundation. 
3.  Drain tile: Before backfilling, after placement of footing drain tile, after window wells are attached, gravel has been placed and the walls have been damp-proofed or waterproofed. 
4.  Sewer connection: Before any backfill and after house sewer has been tapped into sanitary sewer. 
5.  Water connection: Before any backfill and after installation of the service pipe, main valve inside the building, and pressurization of the service line. 
6  Electrical service: At the time the electrical service is to be energized or re-energized. 
7.  Underground electrical: After underground electrical is installed and before it is covered over. 
8.  Rough electrical: Before any insulation, vapor barriers or wall finish is applied and after the rough electric is complete. Wires must be pulled at the time of inspection. 
Exception: Wires need not be pulled at the time of inspection for remodeling work or when otherwise approved. 
9.  Underground plumbing: After under slab plumbing is installed and before covering. 
10.  Rough plumbing: Before any insulation, vapor barriers or wall finish is applied and after the rough plumbing is completed. 
11.  Framing: Before any insulation, vapor barrier or wall finish is applied, after rough electric, plumbing and HVAC are approved and the framing is complete. 
12.  Insulation: Before any interior wall finish is applied and after insulation and vapor barriers are completed. 
13.  Ceiling inspection: Prior to the placement of suspended ceiling panels. 
14.  Concrete slab: Before any concrete floor or garage slabs are poured, after underground electric and plumbing are approved, and after insulation and vapor barriers are installed. 
15.  Concrete driveway: After stone base is set and formwork installed. A proof-roll inspection of the driveway base may be required. 
16.  Asphalt driveway: After stone base is set. A proof-roll inspection of the driveway base may be required. 
17.  Public sidewalk: After formwork is installed and prior to pour. 
18.  Final inspection: After all work is completed and building is to be approved for issuance of certificate of occupancy. 
19.  Other: Any other inspection that may be specifically required by the building official. 
(3)  Obstruction of inspection: No work shall be done which will cover or obstruct from view construction work scheduled for inspection which is not yet approved by the building official. 
(4)  Approval: As each stage or item of construction is approved, the approval shall be recorded by the building official in his official records thereby authorizing the continuation of the work. 
(5)  Right of entry: In the discharge of duties, the building official shall have the authority to enter at any reasonable hour any building, structure or premises in the jurisdiction to enforce the provisions of this article. 
(k)  Stop work orders. 
(1)  Authority: Whenever the building official finds any work regulated by this article being performed in a manner either contrary to the provisions of this article, or, dangerous or unsafe, the building official is authorized to issue a stop work order. 
(2)  Issuance: The stop work order shall be in writing and given to the owner of the property involved, or to the owner's agent, or to the person doing the work. Upon issuance of a stop work order, the cited work shall immediately cease. The stop work order shall cite the reason for the order, and the conditions under which the cited work will be permitted to resume. 
(3)  Unlawful continuance: Any person who shall continue any work after being served with a stop work order, except such work that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be subject to the penalties provided for in section 1-8(a) of this Code. 
(l)  Occupancy permits. 
(1)  Definitions: 
a.  " Change of occupancy ", as used in this section, shall refer to any person or persons: 1) assuming actual occupancy or possession of or acquiring the right to occupy or possess any existing building or structure or unit thereof or of vacant property pursuant to the surrendering of such by another person or persons; or 2) assuming actual occupancy or possession of or acquiring the right to occupy or possess any abandoned real estate. "Change of occupancy" shall not refer to, and the requirements of this section shall not apply to, a purchaser, landlord or sublessor of an existing building or structure or unit thereof or of unimproved property who acquires the right to occupy and possess such incident to a sale or the termination of a lease or sublease, provided that such purchaser, landlord or sublessor shall continue to seek to sell, lease or sublet such and does not actually occupy or use such. In addition, "Change of occupancy" shall not refer to, and the requirements of this section shall not apply to, a change of residential tenants or lessees occupying a dwelling unit that is subject to the requirements of Chapter 9, Article XV of the City Code, "Licensing of Residential Rental Property". 
b.  " Unit ", as used in this section shall refer to a "dwelling unit," as defined in section 9-301, Definitions, of Article XV, Licensing of Residential Rental Property, of the City Code; and for all other kinds of real estate, to any building or structure or to any office or room or suite of offices or rooms, store front, condominium unit, unit, or permanently partitioned area or areas within such that are separately conveyed, demised, or occupied or intended to be separately conveyed, demised, or occupied. 
c.  " Building permit ", as used in this section, shall also include permits for work such as mass grading, parking lot construction, stormwater improvements, watermain and sanitary sewer improvements and other engineering-related projects of a similar nature. 
d.  " New construction " as used in this section, shall also include any construction requiring a building permit. 
(2)  City's right to prosecute violations: The issuance of an occupancy permit or temporary occupancy permit shall not stop the city from prosecuting, or operate as a waiver of any right of the city to prosecute, an owner or occupant of any real estate for any violation of any city ordinance. 
(3)  Payment to city: No occupancy permit or temporary occupancy permit shall be issued by the city when any applicant owes the city any money for any purpose whatsoever. 
(4)  Issuance of permit: No occupancy permit shall be issued except upon the approval of any two (2) of the following: 
a.  City administrator 
b.  Director of community development 
c.  Director of administrative services 
d.  Building official 
e.  Building inspector 
(5)  Change of occupancy or use: 
a.  General regulations: 
1.  No change of occupancy without an occupancy permit: Except as provided for herein, there shall be no change of occupancy or use of any existing building or structure or unit thereof or of unimproved property unless, prior thereto, an occupancy permit shall first have been obtained from the city certifying that the building, structure, unit or unimproved property and the proposed use comply with all provisions of the City Code. Every application shall be filed with the building official and be in such form and contain such information as the building official shall provide by general rule. An occupancy permit fee as prescribed in Appendix G of the City Code shall be paid at the time of filing the application. 
2.  Inspection and approval: Except as provided herein, no occupancy permit shall be issued until the premises shall have been inspected and determined to be in full and complete compliance with all of the provisions of the City Code. The city shall complete a re-inspection within five (5) business days of receiving a request for such. 
3.  Re-inspection: If any existing building, structure or unit thereof or unimproved property fails the inspection, all violations of this article and of other provisions of the City Code shall be corrected by the owner, contractor or other person responsible, who shall thereafter notify the city that the premises are ready for re-inspection. The city shall complete a re-inspection within five (5) business days of receiving a request for such. 
b.  Issuance of a temporary occupancy permit: A temporary occupancy permit may be issued only when an application for an occupancy permit has been made pursuant to this section and the application is pending. The city may issue a temporary occupancy permit only when noncompliance with the requirements of the City Code would not pose an immediate threat to the health, safety or welfare of the occupants. Such temporary occupancy permit may be issued for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days from its date of issuance, pending the correction of any deficiencies. The building official may, upon expiration of an initial temporary occupancy permit, issue not more than one (1) renewal thereof for an additional period not to exceed ninety (90) days. 
1.  A letter-of-intent, signed by the grantee, transferee, mortgagee or lessee and notarized, accepting full responsibility without condition for correction of all deficiencies, shall be submitted with any application for a temporary occupancy permit. Such temporary occupancy permit shall be subject to such terms and conditions as the city deems appropriate. 
2.  A cash bond, in an amount equal one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) per dwelling unit for residential properties, and three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) for nonresidential properties, plus a nonrefundable administrative fee as prescribed in Appendix G of the City Code, shall be submitted with any application for a temporary occupancy permit. The cash bond shall be returned only when all deficiencies have been corrected; no partial refunds shall be given. A cash bond shall not be required for residential properties when the party/parties otherwise responsible for the bond can provide a copy of current FHA 203k documents for the existing deficiencies at the subject property. The applicable administrative fee (as prescribed in Appendix G of the City Code) shall be required. 
3.  Expiration of temporary occupancy permits. Upon the expiration of any temporary occupancy permit or extension thereof, the city may cause the premises to be vacated and to remain vacant until full compliance with all applicable ordinances has been obtained. 
4.  When the permittee has failed to obtain an occupancy permit prior to the expiration of a temporary occupancy permit, the city shall transfer the cash bond to the general corporate fund of the city and use it for any purpose it deems appropriate, including to offset the cost of ensuring code compliance on the property of the permittee. 
(6)  New construction: 
a.  General regulations: 
1.  No occupancy without an occupancy permit: No structures or additions thereto constructed, moved, remodeled or reconstructed pursuant to a building permit, and no land improved pursuant to a building permit, shall be occupied or used for any purpose unless an occupancy permit or temporary occupancy permit shall first have been obtained. Every application for a building permit shall be deemed an application for an occupancy permit. 
2.  Completion of work: Except as provided herein, no occupancy permit shall be issued for a structure or addition thereto constructed, moved, remodeled or reconstructed pursuant to a building permit, or for land improved pursuant to a building permit, until all work encompassed by the permit has been completed and the premises have been inspected by the building official and determined to be in full and complete compliance with the plans and specifications upon which the issuance of the building permit was based. 
3.  Re-inspection: If any newly constructed, moved, remodeled or reconstructed building or structure or addition thereto or unit thereof, or any improved land, fails the inspection required for issuance of an occupancy permit, all violations of this article and of other provisions of the City Code shall be corrected by the owner, contractor or other person responsible, who shall thereafter notify the city that the premises are ready for re-inspection. The city shall complete re-inspections within five (5) days of notification. 
4.  Land improvements: For a building, structure or improvement to land for which a building permit has been issued, the following improvements and documentation shall be provided by the permittee prior to the issuance of an occupancy permit: 
i.  The buffalo (water shut-off) box shall be adjusted to grade, and be accessible and operable. 
ii.  All public and private sidewalks on and immediately adjacent to the lot shall be completed. 
iii.  Any replacement or repair to damaged curbs and gutters, streets, sidewalks, driveways and street lighting shall be completed. 
iv.  All final grading within the lot and parkway areas shall be completed, and a final topographical survey shall be submitted indicating that the grading has been completed in compliance with the approved subdivision or site grading plan and that all overland storm water flow conforms with said grading plan. 
v.  All required yards and parkway areas shall be sodded or seeded and a homogeneous grass surface shall be satisfactorily established. 
vi.  Trees of an approved species shall be planted in all parkway areas. The species, number and spacing of such trees shall be in conformance with applicable city regulations. 
vii.  All other required landscaping shall be installed. 
viii.  Address numbers shall be affixed to the building. 
ix.  For single family homes, a final as-built plan shall be submitted showing all final as-built dimensions of all buildings and/or structures erected. The city shall review and approve the as-built drawings before the public improvements are accepted by the city and prior to final occupancy. The plan shall show all easements, setbacks, utilities, elevations, grades, slopes, drainage routes, sidewalks, utility services, trees, and other items as required. The plans must be signed and sealed by a professional engineer or surveyor licensed in the state. 
x.  For multi-family, commercial, and subdivision developments, electronically produced as-built engineering drawings of the permitted subdivision and/or design improvements shall be submitted within fifteen (15) months of the date of permit issuance. The city engineer shall review and approve the as-built drawings before the public improvements are accepted by the city and prior to final occupancy. 
xi.  As-built engineering drawings shall be based on the original approved engineering plans and shall show all items depicted in the original approved plan(s) for all existing and proposed onsite and offsite improvements. The as-built engineering drawings shall accurately depict the as-constructed location, grade, slope, profile, elevation, contour, rim, invert, stage/storage/volume, specified lid or grate, detail, size, length, etc., for all improvements as shown on the originally approved plans. Additionally, the as-built location of all streetlights and associated conduits and control equipment, installed parkway trees, and all recorded easements shall be clearly shown on the plan sheets for verification purposes. As-built items deviating from their approved design may require additional documentation prior to approval. The as-built engineering drawings shall be signed and sealed by a professional engineer or surveyor licensed in the state. 
xii.  After approval of the as-built engineering drawings, final mylar and digital as-built engineering drawings shall be submitted to the city. Digital as-built submissions shall comply with the formatting set forth by the city's geographic information system (G.I.S.) department. In the event that the subdivision and/or design plans are not submitted in a format compatible with the city's geographic information system, an additional fee shall be charged as prescribed in Appendix G of the City Code. 
xiii.  In addition to the as-built requirements, other items including, but not limited to, deed of conveyance/bill of sale for public improvements to be conveyed to the city, original lien waivers, easements, and maintenance securities may be required prior to final occupancy and project close-out. 
b.  Temporary occupancy permits: A temporary occupancy permit may be issued, provided that the only deficiencies from the requirements of the City Code are those listed in this section and that all of the conditions of this section are met. Prior to issuance of any temporary occupancy permit where a water service is installed or replaced, the water meter and the remote reader shall be installed and a conduit shall be provided for the installation of the remote water meter reader cable. 
1.  A temporary occupancy permit may be issued only when noncompliance with the requirements of the City Code would not pose an immediate threat to the health, safety or welfare of the occupants. Such temporary occupancy permit may be issued for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days from its date of issuance, pending the correction of any deficiencies. The building official may, upon expiration of an initial temporary occupancy permit, issue not more than one (1) renewal thereof for an additional period not to exceed ninety (90) days. 
2.  Where the deficiencies from the requirements of the City Code pertain to a structure or improvement other than a building intended for occupancy, a temporary occupancy permit may only be issued according to the following schedule and for the following reasons: 
i.  Between July 1 and August 31, temporary occupancy permits may be issued only for sod and seed installation and landscape planting not being completed, and only if adverse weather conditions existing during that time period prevented such installation or planting, based on nursery/landscape industry standards. A temporary occupancy permit issued pursuant to this paragraph shall expire on September 30 of that year. 
ii.  Between December 1 and May 1, temporary occupancy permits may be issued only for the following items not being completed. 
(i)  Parkway tree planting. 
(ii)  Final grading, provided that the lot is rough graded to drain away from building and no drop-offs exist adjacent to installed sidewalks. 
(iii)  Sidewalk installation. 
(iv)  Driveway paving, so long as gravel is placed the full limits from curb to the house. 
(v)  Submittal of final as-built survey. 
(vi)  Sod and seed installation and landscape plantings. 
A temporary occupancy permit issued pursuant to this paragraph shall expire on May 1 of that year. Temporary occupancy permits pending completion of these items may be issued prior to December 1, or extended beyond May 1, if the city, in its sole discretion, determines that adverse weather conditions, or other circumstances beyond the control of the applicant, would prevent the items from being completed. 
iii.  A cash bond, in an amount equal to one hundred fifty (150) percent of the city's estimated cost to correct all deficiencies, plus a nonrefundable administrative fee as prescribed in Appendix G of the City Code, shall be submitted with any application for a temporary occupancy permit pursuant to a building permit. The cash bond shall be returned only when all deficiencies have been corrected; no partial refunds shall be given. At the time of posting the cash bond, the applicant and the proposed occupant of the property shall provide written permission to the city and its contractors to enter upon the property to complete the required items. If all deficiencies are not corrected within the time frames specified herein for specific deficiencies, or within one hundred eighty (180) days after the initial issuance of the temporary occupancy permit, whichever is shorter, the city shall transfer the cash bond to the general corporate fund of the city and use it for any purpose it deems appropriate, including to offset the cost of ensuring code compliance on the property of the permittee. 
(7)  Expiration of temporary occupancy permits: Upon the expiration of any temporary occupancy permit or extension, thereof the city may cause the premises to be vacated and to remain vacant until full compliance with all applicable ordinances has been obtained. 
(8)  If inspection of any premises establishes that it cannot be occupied due to violations of the City Code, the city may post a "No Occupancy" notice on such structure. Should a structure be posted, said posting shall remain until the premises are brought sufficiently into compliance with the City Code so that a permanent or temporary occupancy permit may be issued. 
(9)  Yielding of occupancy: Occupancy of any premises shall not be yielded to any person until an occupancy permit or a temporary occupancy permit has been posted. No person shall take occupancy of any premises without an occupancy permit or temporary occupancy permit having been issued. 
(10)  Disclaimer: By the issuance of an occupancy permit or temporary occupancy permit, the city does not warrant the condition of any property inspected to the owner thereof or to any other person and shall not be liable to any person for any claims arising out of the property or the condition thereof. The city does not warrant that all property deficiencies are listed in the inspection report and does not warrant anything as to the condition of the property or the liability therefore. 
(11)  Discontinuation of water service: If no application for an occupancy permit has been made to the city prior to any premises becoming vacant or within seven (7) days thereof, the city, at its sole discretion, may discontinue water service to such premises until such time that the building official determines that water service to such premises may resume. 
(12)  Violation: Any owner of real estate or his representative who enters into an agreement for the sale, lease or transfer of property for which an occupancy permit is required hereunder and who fails to advise the person or persons named in such agreement as the purchaser, lessee or transferee in writing that an occupancy permit is required pursuant to such sale, lease or transfer shall be subject to a fine as prescribed in section 1-8 of the City Code. However, such owner's or representative's failure to so advise shall neither excuse the failure of the purchaser, lessee or transferee from applying for an occupancy permit nor preclude him from any liability hereunder for failure to do so, or prohibit the city from taking any action authorized hereunder as a result of the failure to obtain an occupancy permit. 
(m)  Emergency measures. 
(1)  Vacating structures: When, in the opinion of the building official, there is actual and immediate danger of failure or collapse of a building or structure or any part thereof which would endanger life, or when any structure or part of a structure has fallen and life is endangered by the occupation of the building or structure, the building official is hereby authorized and empowered to order and require the occupants to vacate the same forthwith. The building official shall post the building or structure as uninhabitable at each entrance. It shall be unlawful for any person to enter such building or structure except for the purpose of making the required repairs or demolishing the same. 
(2)  Temporary safeguards: When, in the opinion of the building official, there is actual and immediate danger of collapse or failure of a building or structure or any part thereof which would endanger life, the building official shall cause the necessary work to be done to render such building or structure or part thereof temporarily safe. 
(3)  Closing streets: When necessary for the public safety, the building official may temporarily close sidewalks, streets, buildings and structures, and places adjacent to such unsafe structures and prohibit the same from being used. 
(n)  Off-street parking. All off-street parking and loading facilities, including driveways and pavement, shall be constructed in accordance with all provisions contained in the subdivision regulations ordinance and the zoning ordinance of the city, and such provisions are hereby incorporated into the building code of the city by reference, as if fully set forth herein. 
(o)  Numbering of buildings. 
(1)  Required: All houses, buildings and structures within the city shall be numbered in accordance with the regulations set forth by the city. 
(2)  Duty to affix, visibility: It shall be the duty of the owner or occupant of every house, building, or structure in the city to have placed thereon, so as to be clearly visible from the street, figures showing the number of the house, building, or structure. The minimum height of letters and numbers shall be four (4) inches set on a visually contrasting background. 
(p)  Installation of sidewalks. Each and every person applying for a building permit for the construction of a building upon any vacant lot or tract of land within the city shall install a sidewalk or sidewalks, at such place or places on said lot or tract of land and at such grade and manner as the city may require. 
(q)  Newly improved property to bear share of cost of local government services. Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, the building inspector shall file an unexecuted certificate of occupancy with the Wayne or Winfield Township Assessor, whichever is appropriate, and the owner of the property for which said occupancy permit is requested shall obtain from either the Wayne or Winfield Township Assessor, in the form prescribed by said official, a receipt showing that the unexecuted certificate of occupancy has been duly filed and that the property is subject to increased assessment from the date of issue of the certificate on a proportionate basis for the year in which the improvement was completed. The owner of said property shall file the receipt with the building department of the city and the building inspector shall file a certified copy of the certificate of occupancy, when issued, with the Wayne or Winfield Township Assessor. 
(r)  Cleanup during construction. 
(1)  As a condition of the issuance of a building permit, the contractor or other person to whom a building permit is issued must provide noncombustible trash containers or dumpsters on the building site during the entire construction period. Said containers or dumpsters shall be located on private property and shall be protected or covered in such a manner so that the contents thereof are not blown or scattered onto adjacent properties. They shall be placed no closer than five (5) feet from the property line and in such a manner that they do not obstruct the vision of motorists or interfere with pedestrian traffic. This requirement shall be applicable only to the construction of new buildings or structures or the renovation, remodeling, demolition or repair of existing buildings or structures or portions thereof or to any other activity for which a building permit is required where, in the reasonable judgment of the building official, such activity is likely to produce debris, rubbish and surplus materials in a significant volume. For purposes of this section, the terms "building" and "structure" shall have the same definitions as in the city's zoning ordinance. 
(2)  Rubbish, surplus materials or other debris including, but not limited to, pieces of wood, drywall, insulation and piping, shall not be thrown, dropped or swept from any floor above the ground or from any roof, but shall either be carried or lowered in such a manner as not to cause dust. Cleanup of all rubbish or surplus materials or other debris located on the building site shall be accomplished on a daily basis. 
(3)  In addition, the contractor (or other person to whom the building permit is issued) must clean up mud or other rubbish or surplus materials, or other debris, including, but not limited to, pieces of wood, drywall, insulation, and piping, deposited on the streets or other public property of this city by any vehicles, trucks or pieces of equipment serving the building site. The clean up must be accomplished within a reasonable time after notice from the city. 
(s)  Construction hours. No construction, erection, excavation, or any other process of building whatsoever, shall be performed within the city before the hour of 7:00 a.m. or after 8:00 p.m., Monday through Friday and before the hour of 8:00 a.m. or after the hour of 7:00 p.m. on Saturday and Sunday. 
(t)  Violation. Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this article shall be, upon judicial finding, subject to a fine per section 1-8 of this Code. A separate offense shall be determined to have been committed each day during which or on which the violation occurs or continues. 
(1)  Violation penalties first time violation(s): Any person who shall be subject to penalties as provided for in this article and who: (i) receives a first violation(s) in connection with a particular parcel; and (ii) has submitted adequate proof of full compliance with the City Code and proof that the subject violation(s) has been remedied, as determined by an administrative law judge before, or at, the first administrative hearing, shall be liable for a fine reduced by seventy-five (75) percent, provided said fine shall be paid at the initial administrative adjudication hearing. 
(u)  Appeals. Any person directly affected by a decision of the building official or a notice or order issued under this Code shall have the right to appeal to the building board of appeals as provided for in Chapter 2 of this Code. 
(1)  Application for appeal: Any person directly affected by a decision of the building official or a notice or order issued under this Code shall have the right to appeal to the board of appeals, provided that a written application for appeal is filed within twenty (20) days after the day the decision, notice or order was served. An application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this Code or the rules legally adopted hereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this Code do not fully apply, or the requirements of this Code are adequately satisfied by other means. 
(2)  Notice of meeting: The board shall meet upon notice from the building official, within twenty (20) days of the filing of an appeal, or at stated periodic meetings. 
(3)  Open hearing: All hearings before the board shall be open to the public. The appellant's representative, the building official and any person whose interests are affected shall be given the opportunity to be heard. A quorum shall consist of not less than two-thirds ( 2/3 ) of the board membership. 
a.  Procedure: The board shall adopt and make available to the public through the secretary procedures under which the hearing shall be conducted. The procedures shall not require compliance with strict rules of evidence, but shall mandate that only relevant information be received. 
(4)  Postponed hearing: When the full board is not present to hear an appeal, either the appellant of the appellant's representative shall have the right to request a postponement of the hearing. 
(5)  Board decision: The board shall modify or reverse the decision of the building official only by a concurring vote of a majority of the total of the total number of appointed board members. The board shall have the discretion to allow a variance from the provisions of the code if, after having received a written report, certified by a licensed architect or engineer, the board of appeals determines that strict compliance with the code is impractical from an engineering, architectural or structural standpoint, and not simply unaffordable, that the spirit and intent of the code has been met and life safety has not been materially compromised as a result of the variance. 
(6)  Records and copies: The decision of the board shall be recorded. Copies shall be furnished to the appellant and to the building official. 
(7)  Administration: The building official shall take immediate action in accordance with the decision of the board. 
(8)  Court review: Any person, whether or not a previous party of the appeal, shall have the right to apply to the appropriate court for a writ of certiorari to correct errors of law. Application for review shall be made in the manner and time required by law following the filing of the decision in the office of the chief administrative officer. 
(9)  Stays of enforcement: Appeals of notices and orders (other than those of immediate threat to life safety) shall stay the enforcement of the notice and order until the appeal is heard by the appeals board. 
(Ord. No. 04-O-0100, § 1(Exh. A), 12-6-2004; Ord. No. 06-O-0008, § 1(Exh. A), 2-6-2006; Ord. No. 06-O-0004, § 2a—2m, 3-6-2006; Ord. No. 06-O-0076, § 2a—m, 9-5-2006; Ord. No. 08-O-0082, § 2, 11-3-2008; Ord. No. 10-O-0039, §§ 1, 2, 4-19-2010; Ord. No. 11-O-0031, § 1, 8-1-2011; Ord. No. 12-O-0049, § 1, 12-3-2012; Ord. No. 14-O-0020, § 1, 7-7-2014; Ord. No. 15-O-0017, §§ 1, 2, 7-6-2015) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 15-O-0017, §§ 1, 2, adopted July 6, 2015, shall be in full force and effect on Aug. 1, 2015.  
Sec. 4-2. - Industrial, commercial, multifamily building code. 
(a)  There is hereby adopted by reference as if fully set out herein that certain code known as the "2015 International Building Code", including Appendixes C and F—J inclusive, as published by the International Code Council, Inc., together with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes hereinafter set forth, one (1) copy of which has been on file for a period of more than thirty (30) days prior to the adoption of this section and is now on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(b)  Amendments. The following additions, insertions, deletions and changes are hereby made to the above-adopted code: 
101.1 Title. Insert "City of West Chicago" where indicated. 
105.2 Work exempt from permit. Delete in its entirety. 
312.1 General. Amend this section by adding the following language at the end of the paragraph: 
"Other non-habitable or detached accessory structures as determined by the Building Official" 
412.4.6 Fire suppression. Delete this section in its entirety and substitute the following new language: 
"412.4.6 Fire suppression. Any airplane hangar, which exceeds either of the following limitations, shall comply with NFPA 409 (Standard on Aircraft Hangars) - 2011 Edition; 
1. A single fire area more than 50,000 square feet in area. 
2. A hangar door greater than 33 feet in height. 
Exception: Group II hangars, as defined in NFPA 409, storing private aircraft with or without major maintenance or overhaul are exempt from foam suppression requirements." 
507.3 Nonsprinklered, One-Story. Delete in its entirety. 
Section 901.6.1 Automatic sprinkler systems. Modify this section by deleting Exception #2. 
[F] 903.2.1 Group A. Delete this section and all subsections in its entirety and substitute the following new sections: 
"[F] 903.2.1 Group A. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all Group A-1, A-2, A-3 and A-4 occupancies. 
[F] 903.2.1.1 Group A-5. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for Group A-5 occupancies in the following areas: concession stands, retail areas, press boxes and other accessory use areas in excess of 1,000 square feet." 
[F] 903.2.2 Group B ambulatory health care facilities. Delete this section in its entirety and substitute the following new section: 
" [F] 903.2.2 Group B. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all Group B occupancies." 
[F] 903.2.3 Group E. Delete this section in its entirety and substitute the following new section: 
"[ F] 903.2.3 Group E. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all Group E occupancies." 
[F] 903.2.4 Group F-1. Delete this section and all subsections in their entirety and insert the following new section: 
" [F] 903.2.4 Groups F-1 & F-2. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all Group F-1 and F-2 occupancies." 
[F] 903.2.5.3 Pyroxylin plastics. Delete this section in its entirety. 
[F] 903.2.7 Group M. Delete this section in its entirety and substitute the following new section: 
"[F] 903.2.7 Group M. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all Group M occupancies." 
[F] 903.2.9 Group S-1. Delete this section and all subsections in their entirety and insert the following new section: 
" [F] 903.2.9 Groups S-1 & S-2. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all Group S-1 and S-2 occupancies. 
EXCEPTION: Buildings used primarily for the bulk storage of road salt." 
[F] 903.2.10 Group S-2. Delete this section and all subsections in their entirety and insert the following new section: 
" [F] 903.2.10 Group U. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all occupiable spaces of Group U exceeding 1,000 square feet (93 m 2 )" 
"Exception: Group U agricultural buildings as identified in Appendix C." 
[F] 903.2.11.1 Stories without openings. Delete this section and all subsections in their entirety. 
[F] 903.2.11.3 Buildings over 55 feet in height. Delete this section in its entirety and substitute the following new section: 
[F] 903.2.11.3 Airport control towers. Automatic sprinkler systems are not required to be installed in airport control towers. 
[F] 903.4 Sprinkler system supervision and alarms. Exceptions: 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7. Delete in their entirety. 
SECTION 903 AUTOMATIC SPRINKLER SYSTEMS, amend by adding thereto the following new section: 
" 903.6 System diagram. A diagram indicating all areas served by the control valves shall be posted adjacent to the risers and/or control valves." 
[F] 905.3 Required installations. Amend by adding thereto the following new sections [F] 905.3.9 and [F] 905.3.9.1: 
" [F] 905.3.9 All other buildings. Standpipes shall be installed in areas where horizontal or vertical access is more than one hundred fifty (150) feet beyond the level of fire department vehicle access. Distance is measured starting from the fire department apparatus' hose connection. 
[F] 905.3.9.1 Locations. Where a standpipe system is required by this section, there shall be hose connections at each required exit door on each floor. All other doors shall have an approved plaque or sign permanently affixed on the exterior next to the handle side of the door with plainly legible wording stating 'NO STANDPIPE.' " 
SECTION 905 STANDPIPE SYSTEMS, amend by adding thereto the following new sections: 
" 905.11 Water supply. When installed as required above, water flow requirements for standpipes shall be one hundred fifty (150) gpm at one hundred (100) psi at each outlet with a maximum of six hundred (600) gpm. 
905.12 Hose connections. All hose connections shall be a minimum of a 2½ inch hose outlet with a gated valve, a 2½ inch to 1½ inch reducer with national standard thread and a 1½ inch cap." 
[F] 907.2 Where required—new buildings and structures . Delete the first paragraph in its entirety and substitute the following language: 
"[F] 907.2 Where required—new buildings and structures . An approved addressable fire alarm system installed in accordance with the provisions of this code and NFPA 72 shall be provided in new buildings and structures in accordance with Sections 907.2.1 through 907.2.23 and provide occupant notification in accordance with Section 907.5, unless other requirements are provided by another section of this code. Fire alarm system shall only include that necessary for required operation of the system and not include other components for security or burglar alarm functions, etc." 
[F] 907.2.1 Group A. Delete the first paragraph and the exception in its entirety and substitute the following language: 
" [F] 907.2.1 Group A. An automatic fire alarm detection system shall be installed and maintained in all new occupancies of Group A." 
[F] 907.2.1.1 System initiation in Group A occupancies with an occupant load of 1,000 or more. Delete the first paragraph in its entirety and substitute the following language: 
"[F] 907.2.1.1 System initiation in Group A occupancies with an occupant load of 500 or more. Activation of the fire alarm in Group A occupancies with an occupant load of 500 or more shall initiate a signal using an emergency voice/alarm communications system in accordance with Section 907.5.2.2." 
[F] 907.2.2 Group B. Delete the first paragraph and the exception in its entirety and substitute the following language: 
" [F] 907.2.2 Group B. An automatic fire alarm detection system shall be installed and maintained in all new occupancies of Group B with a total gross building area over five hundred (500) square feet." 
[F] 907.2.3 Group E. Delete the first paragraph and the exceptions in their entirety and substitute the following language: 
" [F] 907.2.3 Group E. An automatic fire alarm detection system shall be installed and maintained in all new occupancies of Groups E." 
[F] 907.2.4 Group F. Delete this paragraph in its entirety and substitute the following language: 
" [F] 907.2.4 Group F, S and U. An automatic fire alarm detection system shall be installed and maintained in all new occupancies of Groups F, S and U with a total gross building area over five hundred (500) square feet." 
[F] 907.2.5 Group H. Delete the first sentence in its entirety and substitute the following language: 
" [F] 907.2.5 Group H. An automatic fire alarm detection system shall be installed and maintained in all new occupancies of Group H." 
[F] 907.2.6 Group I. Delete the first sentence in its entirety and substitute the following language: 
" [F] 907.2.6 Group I. An automatic fire alarm detection system shall be installed and maintained in all new occupancies of Group I." 
[F] 907.2.6.1 Group I-1. Delete the first exception in its entirety. 
[F] 907.2.7 Group M. Delete this section in its entirety and substitute the following language: 
" [F] 907.2.7 Group M. An automatic fire alarm detection system shall be installed and maintained in all new occupancies of Group M." 
[F] 907.2.8 Group R-1. Delete this section in its entirety and substitute the following new section [F] 907.2.8: 
" [F] 907.2.8 Group R-1. An automatic fire alarm detection system shall be installed and maintained in all new occupancies of Group R-1." 
[F] 907.2.8.1 Manual fire alarm system. Delete this section in its entirety. 
[F] 907.2.9 Group R-2. Delete this section in its entirety and substitute the following new section [F] 907.2.9: 
" [F] 907.2.9 Group R-2. An automatic fire alarm detection system shall be installed and maintained in all new occupancies of Group R-2." 
[F] 907.2.9.1 Manual fire alarm system. Delete this section in its entirety. 
907.5.1 Presignal feature. Delete this section in its entirety. 
907.5.2.3 Visible alarms. Delete this section in its entirety and substitute the following new paragraph: 
"907.5.2.3 Visible alarms. Visible alarm notification appliances shall be provided in accordance with Sections 907.5.2.3.1 through 907.5.2.3.5." 
907.5.2.3 Visible alarms. Amend by adding thereto the following language new sections 907.5.2.3.4 and 907.5.2.3.5: 
" 907.5.2.3.4 Tenant space light. Each tenant space in a multiple tenant building shall have an audio visual alarm visible in a public access area indicating which tenant space has the activated alarm. 
907.5.2.3.5 Outside alerting device. All fire alarm and fire suppression systems shall have outside alerting devices of a type and at a location approved by the building official. 
907.6.6 Monitoring. Delete the exceptions in their entirety. 
[F] 909.1 Scope and purpose. Amend by adding the following new subsections 909.1.1 and 909.1.2: 
" [F] 909.1.1 Required smoke control systems. In addition to that required elsewhere in this code, an emergency smoke control system shall also be provided in new construction as indicated below. Unless otherwise prohibited elsewhere by this code, activation shall be by manual control located at the smoke control panel specified in Section [F] 909.16. 
1. In all buildings with a fire area exceeding forty thousand (40,000) square feet of floor area. Plenums and sub-floors enclosed within a defined fire area separation do not require separate smoke control or exhaust systems. 
2. In all buildings over three (3) stories or thirty-five (35) feet in height. 
3. In covered mall buildings including individual tenant spaces." 
Exception : Unlimited area buildings providing smoke and heat venting or a mechanical exhaust systems as required by Section 910. 
[F] 909.1.2 Design parameters. Smoke control systems shall be designed to provide a minimum of 2 air changes per hour. 
910.4.5 Manual control location. Delete this section in its entirety and substitute the following new paragraph: 
910.4.5 Manual control location. Manual controls shall be at a location approved by the fire code official so as to be easily accessible to the fire service from an exterior door of the building and protected against interior fire exposure by not less than 1-hour fire barriers constructed in accordance with Section 707 or horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 711, or both. 
CHAPTER 11 ACCESSIBILITY, delete this chapter in its entirety. 
1612.3 Establishment of flood hazard areas. Insert "DUPAGE COUNTY, ILLINOIS AND INCORPORATED AREAS" where indicated. 
1612.3 Establishment of flood hazard areas. Insert "September 2004" where indicated. 
(Ord. No. 04-O-0100, § 1(Exh. A), 12-6-2004; Ord. No. 06-O-0004, § 4, 3-6-2006; Ord. No. 11-O-0006, § 1, 3-7-2011; Ord. No. 11-O-0031, § 1, 8-1-2011; Ord. No. 15-O-0017, § 3(Exh. A), 7-6-2015; Ord. No. 18-O-0055, § 1, 12-17-2018; Ord. No. 19-O-0016, §§ 1, 2, 5-6-2019) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 15-O-0017, § 3(Exh. A), adopted July 6, 2015, shall be in full force and effect on Aug. 1, 2015.  
Sec. 4-3. - Single-family building code. 
(a)  Adopted. There is hereby adopted by reference, as if fully set out herein, that certain code known as the "2015 International Residential Code," including Appendix Chapters A through K inclusive, M and U, as published by the International Code Council, Inc. together with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes hereinafter set forth, one (1) copy of which has been [on file] for a period of more than thirty (30) days prior to the effective date hereof and now is on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(b)  Amendments. The following additions, insertions, deletions and changes are hereby made to the above-adopted single-family building code: 
R101.1 Title. Insert: "City of West Chicago". 
R105.2 Work exempt from permit. Delete this section in its entirety. 
R109.1.1 Foundation inspection. Delete from the last sentence the wording "and special requirements for wood foundations". 
SECTION R112 BOARD OF APPEALS. Delete this section in its entirety insert the following new sections: 
"R112.1 General. In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the building official relative to the application and interpretation of this code, there shall be and is hereby created a board of appeals. The board of appeals shall be appointed by the applicable and governing authority and shall hold office at its pleasure. The board shall adopt rules of procedure for conducting its business. 
R112.2 Limitations on authority. An application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this code or the rules legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this code do not fully apply or an equally good or better form of construction is proposed. The board shall have no authority to waive requirements of this code. 
R112.3 Qualifications. The board of appeals shall consist of members who are qualified by experience and training to pass on matters pertaining to building construction and are not employees of the jurisdiction." 
Table R301.2 (1) CLIMATIC AND GEOGRAPHIC DESIGN CRITERIA. Delete in its entirety and in lieu thereof substitute the following new Table 301.2(1): 
TABLE 301.2(1) 
CLIMATIC AND GEOGRAPHIC DESIGN CRITERIA 
GROUND 
SNOW 
LOAD 	WIND DESIGN 	SEISMIC 
DESIGN 
CATEGORY 	SUBJECT TO DAMAGE FROM 	WINTER 
DESIGN 
TEMP 	ICE 
BARRIER 
UNDER- 
LAYMENT 
REQUIRED 	FLOOD 
HAZARDS 	AIR 
FREEZING 
INDEX 	MEAN 
ANNUAL 
TEMP 
	Speed 
(mph) 	Topographic effects 		Weathering 	Frost line 
depth 	Termite 					
25 lb/ft 2 	90 	NO 	B 	Severe 	42" 	Moderate 
to heavy 	-2 	YES 	DuPage 
County 
Ord. No. 
OSM-001- 
99 	2000 	45 
 
Table 301.5 MINIMUM UNIFORMLY DISTRIBUTED LIVE LOADS. Change the live load indicated for "Balconies (exterior) and decks" from "40" to "60." 
R303.1 Habitable rooms. Amend by adding the following new section: 
" R303.1.1 Basements. All basements shall be provided with an aggregate glazing and ventilation area of not less than one (1) percent of the gross floor area." 
R303.9 Required heating. Amend by adding the following new section: 
" R303.9.1 Closets. All closets greater than thirty-six square feet (36 ft 2 ) and having at least two exterior walls shall be provided with heating as required above." 
SECTION R303 LIGHT, VENTILATION AND HEATING. Amend this section by adding the following new section R303.10: 
" R303.10 Habitable basement spaces. All habitable basement spaces shall be free of excess moisture, dampness and ground water seepage. All unnecessary moisture shall be removed by mechanical or gravitational means." 
R309.5 Fire Sprinklers. Delete this section in its entirety and insert the following new section: 
"309.5 Service door. All detached garages shall be provided with a side-hinged service door not less than two (2) feet eight (8) inches in width and 1 3/8 inches thick." 
SECTION R309 GARAGES AND CARPORTS. Amend by adding the following new section 309.6: 
309.6 Driveways. All garages and/or carports shall be accessible by driveways constructed of a minimum of four (4) inches of concrete over four (4) inches of compacted gravel, or, 2 1/2 inches of bituminous asphalt over six (6) inches of compacted gravel or other approved materials. Paved approaches located in the public right-of-way shall comply with Section 15-4 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of West Chicago." 
R310.1 Emergency escape or rescue required. Amend by adding the following wording at the end of this section: 
"Rooms such as studies, dens, libraries, etc., which contain closets shall be classified as a sleeping room and require emergency escape openings." 
R301.2.1 Minimum opening area. Amend this section by adding the following new section 310.2.1.1: 
" R310.2.1.1 Basement escape windows . All required basement emergency escape windows shall have a minimum area of nine square-feet (9 ft 2 ), a minimum height of thirty-six inches (36") and a minimum width of thirty-three inches (33"). Sill height shall not be more than forty-four inches (44") above the floor." 
SECTION R311 MEANS OF EGRESS. Amend this section by adding the following new sections R311.2.1 and R311.2.2.: 
" R311.2.1 Bedroom doors . All bedroom doors shall be a minimum of thirty inches (30") wide by six feet eight inches (6'8") high and one and one quarter inches (1-¼") thick. The doors shall be provided with latching hardware, and side hinges. 
R311.2.2 Locking methods. No locks or locking mechanisms requiring the use of a key to operate are permitted on bedroom doors" 
R313.2 One- and two-family dwellings. Delete this section and subsections in their entirety. 
R314.2 Where required . Amend by adding the following wording at the end of the section: 
"Rooms such as studies, dens, libraries, etc., which contain doors providing privacy and closets shall be classified as a sleeping room." 
R401.1 Application. Delete in its entirety and insert the following new section 401.1: 
" R401.1 Application. The provisions of this chapter shall control the design and construction of the foundation and foundation spaces for buildings. In addition to the provisions of this chapter, the design and construction of foundations in flood hazard areas as established by Table R301.2(1) shall meet the provisions of Section R322. Footings and foundations of wood shall not be permitted" 
R401.2 Requirements. Modify by deleting the last sentence. 
R402.1 Wood foundations. Delete this section in its entirety. 
R402.1.1 Fasteners. Delete this section in its entirety. 
R402.1.2 Wood treatment. Delete this section in its entirety. 
R403.1 General. Delete the wording "wood foundations," from the first sentence. 
Figure R403.1 (2) PERMANENT WOOD FOUNDATION BASEMENT WALL SECTION. Delete in its entirety. 
Figure R403.1 (3) PERMANENT WOOD FOUNDATION CRAWL SPACE SECTION. Delete in its entirety. 
R403.1.1 Minimum size. Modify by deleting the last sentence. 
R403.1.1 Minimum size. Amend by adding the following new section R403.1.1.1: 
" R403.1.1.1 Grade beams. Grade beam construction for detached accessory structures shall consist of a four inch (4") concrete floor on a minimum four inches (4") of crushed stone, sand and gravel poured monolithically with a minimum ten inches (10") thickened outer edge a width of twenty inches (20") around perimeter of building, said twenty inch (20") grade beam to be of equal depth on undisturbed soil." 
R403.1.4.1 Frost protection. Delete the three (3) Exceptions and insert the following new exceptions: 
Exceptions: 
1. Grade beam construction is permitted for detached residential accessory structures not exceeding five hundred seventy six square feet (576 ft 2 ) and/or where no one dimension exceeds twenty-four feet (24'). 
2. Sheds, grade-level detached decks and other accessory buildings, two hundred (200) square feet or less and not used for storage of motor vehicles, may provide a four (4) inch concrete slab for a foundation/floor, or, may be placed on grade w/o posts provided all underlying organics are removed and a 4" sand or gravel base is provided. 
3. Decks not supported by a frost protected structure need not be provided with footings that extend below the frost line." 
R403.2 Footings for wood foundations. Delete this section in its entirety. 
R404.2 Wood foundation walls. Delete this section in its entirety. 
R404.2.1 Identification. Delete this section in its entirety. 
R404.2.2 Stud size. Delete this section in its entirety. 
R404.2.3 Height of backfill. Delete this section in its entirety. 
Table R404.2.3 PLYWOOD GRADE AND THICKNESS FOR WOOD FOUNDATION CONSTRUCTION. Delete this table in its entirety. 
R404.2.4 Backfilling. Delete this section in its entirety. 
R404.2.5 Drainage and dampproofing. Delete this section in its entirety. 
R404.2.6 Fastening. Delete this section in its entirety. 
R404.3 Wood sill plates. Amend by adding the following new wording at the end of the section: 
"Shims shall be of a non-compressible material and may fill no more than a 1/2 inch gap." 
R405.1. Concrete or masonry foundations. Amend by adding the following new section 405.1.2: 
" R405.1.2 Footing drain tile. 
1. Required outside of basement and crawl space footings. Inside locations are permitted only upon approval of the Building Official. Minimum diameter shall be four inches (4"). 
2. Provide drains in all below grade stair landings and window wells. Connect drains to footing drain tile with approved "T" fittings. 
3. Connect with tight-joint glazed tile or approved equal to storm sewer, sump pump, dry well or other approved outlet. 
4. Sump pumps must discharge a minimum of three feet (3') from the foundation walls. Discharge must conform to the approved grading plan and in no case shall be extended closer than three feet (3') from the rear or side property line. Sump pumps may not discharge to the front yard or exterior side yard unless specifically approved by the Building Official." 
R405.2 Wood foundations. Delete this section in its entirety. 
R405.2.1 Base. Delete this section in its entirety. 
R405.2.2 Vapor retarder. Delete this section in its entirety. 
R405.2.3 Drainage system. Delete this section in its entirety. 
R406.3 Dampproofing for wood foundations. Delete this section in its entirety. 
R406.3.1 Panel joint sealed. Delete this section in its entirety. 
R406.3.2 Below grade moisture barrier. Delete this section in its entirety. 
R406.3.3 Porous fill. Delete this section in its entirety. 
R406.3.4 Backfill. Delete this section in its entirety. 
R408 Under floor space. Amend by adding the following new Section 408.7: 
" R408.8: Crawl spaces. In crawl spaces, the soil shall be leveled and covered with a minimum of two-inch (2") of concrete. Crawl spaces shall be ground level at least twenty-four inches (24") below bottom of floor joists and girders. Ground under dwelling is to be approximately level." 
R502.4 Joists under bearing partitions. Amend by adding the following new Sections 502.4.1 and 502.4.2: 
" R502.4.1. Joists under non-bearing partitions. Provide double joists under all parallel partitions. Double joists, which are separated to permit the installation of piping or vents, shall be blocked, spaced not more than 4 feet on center. 
R502.4.2. Other double joists. Provide double joists supporting hot water heaters, washing machines, bathtubs or other special loading conditions as determined by the Building Official." 
SECTION 504 PRESSURE PRESERVATIVELY TREATED-WOOD FLOORS (ON GROUND). Delete this section in its entirety. 
R507.8 Deck posts. Delete this section in its entirety and insert the following new section R507.8: 
" R407.4 Deck posts. Wooden post support for porches and decks with finished floor constructed six feet (6') or more above grade shall be no less than six inch by six-inch (6" x 6") nominal lumber. All lumber used for the exterior construction of porches, terraces and decks shall be naturally durable wood or pressure treated wood." 
SECTION R702.1 General. Amend this section by adding the following new section R702.1.1: 
" R702.1.1 Where required. Walls and ceilings for bedrooms on any floor level shall have a minimum one half inch (½") layer of gypsum board, or equivalent, taped and finished so as to provide a continuous surface without breaks or gaps." 
R801.3 Roof drainage. Delete in its entirety and add the following new Section 801.3.1. 
" R801.3.1 Roof drainage. All structures over one hundred fifty (150) square feet in area shall be provided with gutters and downspouts unless otherwise waived by the Building Official. Gutters and downspouts must discharge a minimum of five feet (5') away from the building in accordance with the approved grading plans or to an approved drainage system." 
SECTION R1004 FACTORY-BUILT FIREPLACES. Amend by adding the following new Section 1004.6: 
" R1004.6 Fireplace chimney enclosures. All exposed exterior chimney sections shall be enclosed in a chimney chase which provides for proper clearances per manufacturers requirements and is constructed of masonry or approved materials consistent with the construction of the existing structure." 
M1601.1.1 Above-ground duct systems. Amend by adding the following new text: 
"8. Flexible metallic air ducts may be used where practical difficulties are encountered subject to review and approval by the Building Official prior to installation. The maximum length permitted shall not exceed fourteen feet (14')." 
Part VII-Plumbing. Delete plumbing Chapters 26 through 33, inclusive, in their entirety. 
E3406.3 Minimum size of conductors. Delete the first sentence in its entirety and in lieu thereof substitute the following language: 
"The minimum size of conductors for feeders and branch circuits shall be No. 14 copper. All conductors used for feeders and branch circuits must be copper." 
E3602.1 Ampacity of ungrounded conductors. Delete in its entirety and in lieu thereof substitute the following new Section 3602.1: 
" E3602.1 Minimum size of residential service: Ungrounded service conductors shall have an ampacity of not less than the load served. For one-family dwellings, the rating of the ungrounded conductors shall be as follows: 
- 100 amp, 20 circuit panel, for dwellings under 2,300 square feet. 
No. 3 AWG, copper, minimum conductor size. 
- 200 amp, 30 circuit panel, for dwellings over 2,300 square feet. 
No. 3/0 AWG, copper, minimum conductor size. 
Square footage of dwellings is based on living space, excluding basements and garages. In all cases, the service must be sized to accommodate the installation of central air conditioning. When an electric range is installed, the service must be no less than two hundred (200) amp." 
SECTION E3703 REQUIRED BRANCH CIRCUITS. Amend by adding the following new section E3703.7: 
" E3703.7 Branch circuits for additional equipment. The following additional separate branch circuits shall be required as needed: 
1. Central air conditioning system. 
2. Electric range. 
a. Free standing ranges, two number 6 and one number 8 minimum size copper conductors. 
b. Built-in counter top and oven units. Connection shall be made by three number 10 (minimum) copper conductors. 
3. Built-in microwave oven. 
4. Through wall air conditioners and heating units. 
5. Motors of 2 horsepower or larger. 
6. Electric water heaters. 
7. Electric dryers - 240 volt, minimum number 10 wire with "L" shaped receptacle. 
8. Sump pump. 
9. Sanitary ejector pump. 
10. Central vacuum system." 
SECTION E3802 ABOVE-GROUND INSTALLATION REQUIREMENTS . Delete in its entirety and in lieu thereof substitute the following new section E3802: 
" SECTION E3802 ABOVE-GROUND INSTALLATION REQUIREMENTS. 
E3802.1 New construction. For all new construction, wiring shall be installed in rigid metallic tubing. Surface metal raceways may be used for lighting purposes only. Where flexible connections other than lighting are necessary, a separate ground wire shall be pulled in all flexible conduits. Armored cable such as BX shall not be used in new construction, including garage and/or other accessory buildings. All raceway joints shall be made tight and shall provide a continuous electrical circuit for grounding purposes." 
E3905.3 Nonmetallic boxes. Delete this section in its entirety. 
E3908.16 Nonmetallic boxes. Delete this section in its entirety. 
(Ord. No. 04-O-0100, § 1(Exh. A), 12-6-2004; Ord. No. 2011-O-0047, § 1, 10-3-2011; Ord. No. 15-O-0017, § 3(Exh. A), 7-6-2015) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 15-O-0017, § 3(Exh. A), adopted July 6, 2015, shall be in full force and effect on Aug. 1, 2015.  
Sec. 4-4. - Plumbing code. 
(a)  Adopted. There is hereby adopted by reference as if fully set out herein that certain code known as the "Illinois Plumbing Code 2014," as published by the Illinois Department of Public Health, copies of which have been on file for a period of more than thirty (30) days prior to the adoption of this section and are now on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(b)  Fees. 
(1)  A permit shall not be issued until the fees prescribed below have been paid, nor shall an amendment to a permit be released until the additional fee, if any, has been paid. 
(2)  Schedule of permit fees. A fee for each permit shall be paid as required, in accordance with the schedule as established Appendix G. 
(3)  Work commencing before permit issuance. Any person who commences any work before obtaining the necessary permits shall be subject to an additional fee which shall be in addition to the required permit fees. 
(4)  Related fees. The payment of the fee for the construction, alteration, removal or demolition of work done in connection to or concurrently with the work or activity authorized by a permit shall not relieve the applicant or holder of the permit from the payment of other fees that are prescribed by law. 
(Ord. No. 04-O-0100, § 1(Exh. A), 12-6-2004; Ord. No. 11-O-0031, § 1, 8-1-2011; Ord. No. 15-O-0017, § 3(Exh. A), 7-6-2015) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 15-O-0017, § 3(Exh. A), adopted July 6, 2015, shall be in full force and effect on Aug. 1, 2015.  
Sec. 4-5. - Electrical code. 
(a)  Adopted. There is hereby adopted by reference as if fully set out herein that certain code known as the "National Electric Code 2014 Edition," as published by the National Fire Protection Association, together with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes hereinafter set forth, one (1) copy of which has been on file for a period of more than thirty (30) days prior to the adoption of this section and is now on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(b)  Amendments. The following additions, insertions, deletions and changes are hereby made to the above-adopted code: 
210.6(C) 277 Volts to Ground. Amend by adding the following new wording at the end of the article: 
"(7) Light fixtures shall be mounted no less than eight feet (8') above finished floor. 
(8) Wall switching shall not exceed 150 volts to ground. Wall switching for circuits exceeding 150 volts to ground shall be installed in one of the following methods: 
a. Low voltage relay switches. 
b. Panelboard switches." 
210.8(A) Dwelling Units. Modify this article by deleting the first paragraph and adding the following new wording: 
"210.8(A) Dwelling Units. All 125-volt, single phase, 15- and 20-ampre receptacles installed in the locations specified in 210.9(A)(1) through (12) shall have ground-fault circuit-interrupter protection for personnel 
210.8(A) Dwelling Units. Modify this article by adding the following wording at the end of the article: 
"(11) All light fixtures above bathtub or in shower must be installed with Ground Fault Circuit Interrupter protection and approved for this type of installation. 
(12) Ground Fault Circuit Interrupter outlets shall be resettable at each individual outlet. 
Exception: A single GFCI may reset more than one (1) outlet if all affected outlets are located in the same room." 
210.11(C) Dwelling Units. Amend by adding the following new article 210.11(C)(4): 
" 210.11(C)(4) Other Required Branch Circuits. In addition to those branch circuits required above, separate branch circuits shall be provided as required below: 
1. Furnace or heating plant. 
2. Central air conditioning system. 
3. Electric range. 
a. Free standing ranges, two number 6 and one number 8 minimum size copper conductors. 
b. Built-in counter top and oven units. Connection shall be made by three number 10 (minimum) copper conductors. 
4. Built-in microwave oven. 
5. Through-wall air conditioners and heating units. 
6. Motors of 2 horsepower or larger. 
7. Electric water heaters. 
8. Electric dryers - 240 volt, minimum number 10 wire with "L" shaped receptacle. 
9. Sump pump. 
10. Sanitary ejector pump. 
11. Central vacuum system." 
210.21(B) Receptacles. Amend by adding the following new article 210.21(B)(5): 
" 210.21(B)(5) Only 20 amp receptacles shall be used on 20 amp circuits supplying cord connected disposals and dishwashers in residential kitchens." 
ARTICLE 210 Branch Circuits. Amend by adding the following new article 210.51: 
" 210.51 Commercial Office/Business Space Outlets. Receptacle location for offices and similar areas shall be the same as specified in Article 210.52(A), except that the wall area behind a fully opened door shall not be included in the measurement. Lobbies shall be required to have only one (1) receptacle when the area is fifty (50) square feet or less." 
230.2 Number of Services . Amend by adding the following sentence at the end of the paragraph: 
"In all cases, single family residential properties shall be permitted only one (1) service for all structures located thereon." 
230.42 Minimum Size and Rating. Modify by adding the following wording at the end of the article: 
" (D) Minimum size of residential service. The minimum size for residential services shall be as specified below: 
1. 100 amp, 20 circuit panel, for dwellings under 2,300 square feet. Minimum conductor size, #3 AWG. 
2. 200 amp, 30 circuit panel, for dwellings over 2,300 square feet. Minimum conductor size #3/0 AWG. 
(Square footage of dwellings is based on living space, excluding basements and garages.) In all cases, the service must be sized to accommodate the installation of central air conditioning. When an electric range is installed, the service must be no less than 200 amp." 
230.70 General. Amend by adding the following new language at the end of the article: 
" (D) Inside of Building. Where the disconnecting means is installed within a building and where the raceway of a service entrance is not covered by a suitable fireproofing material (such as two inch (2") concrete covering), the disconnecting means and/or service panel shall be located within five feet (5') of the point where such conduit enters the building." 
ARTICLE 250 Grounding. Amend by adding the following new article 250.123: 
" 250.123 Exterior Light Poles. Each new parking lot, drive lane, and street lighting pole shall be grounded by a separate grounding rod as well as an approved grounding conductor which shall originate in the electrical panelboard that supplies the power for the lighting pole. The grounding rods shall be a minimum of eight feet (8') in length and five-eighths inch (5/8") in diameter. All fixtures must be able to be serviced without dismantling the fixture hanging equipment." 
ARTICLE 300 Wiring Methods. Amend by adding the following new article 300.1(D): 
" 300.1(D) Where any wiring method or materials otherwise permitted by this code shall have been prohibited by this Article, such wiring methods or materials shall be considered to be prohibited when referred to in any other section or provision of this code." 
300.4 Protection Against Physical Damage. Amend by adding the following new article 300.4(I): 
" 300.4 (I) Low Voltage Circuits: All wiring for circuits under fifty (50) volts in non-accessible areas, or, accessible areas less than 8 feet above the finish floor shall be installed in electrical metallic tubing. Wiring may be run exposed in accessible areas such as, but not limited to, spaces above dropped ceilings, attic spaces, crawl spaces provided it has been properly fastened." 
(c)  General provisions. 
(1)  An electrical service inspection will be approved only after the service panel is adequately protected from the weather. This shall typically be provided by the installation of the decking of the floor above the service panel. 
(2)  Rough electrical inspection shall be approved only after all piping is completed and wires have been pulled unless otherwise approved in advance. 
(3)  For all new work, wiring shall be installed in rigid metallic tubing, or surface metal raceways. Underground wiring for commercial and industrial work will be in heavy wall conduit, IMC conduit or PVC Schedule 40 for exterior installations. Other wiring installations and/or methods for specialized non-residential building applications may be approved by the building official when requested in writing, when showing cause as to why such installation or method is necessary, and, when consistent with approved industry standards and practices. 
(4)  All raceway joints shall be made tight and shall provide a continuous electrical circuit for grounding purposes. 
(d)  Fees. 
(1)  A permit shall not be issued until the fees prescribed below have been paid, nor shall an amendment to a permit be released until the additional fee, if any, has been paid. 
(2)  Schedule of permit fees. A fee for each permit shall be paid as required, in accordance with the schedule as established by the applicable governing authority. 
(3)  Work commencing before permit issuance. Any person who commences any work before obtaining the necessary permits shall be subject to an additional fee established by the code official, which shall be in addition to the required permit fees. 
(4)  Related fees. The payment of the fee for the construction, alteration, removal or demolition of work done in connection to or concurrently with the work or activity authorized by a permit shall not relieve the applicant or holder of the permit from the payment of other fees that are prescribed by law. 
(5)  Refunds. The code official is authorized to establish a refund policy. 
(Ord. No. 04-O-0100, § 1(Exh. A), 12-6-2004; Ord. No. 11-O-0031, § 1, 8-1-2011; Ord. No. 15-O-0017, § 3(Exh. A), 7-6-2015) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 15-O-0017, § 3(Exh. A), adopted July 6, 2015, shall be in full force and effect on Aug. 1, 2015.  
Sec. 4-6. - Mechanical code. 
(a)  Adopted. There is hereby adopted by reference as if fully set out herein that certain code known as the "2015 International Mechanical Code," including Appendix A, as published by the International Code Council, together with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes hereinafter set forth, one (1) copy of which has been on file for a period of more than thirty (30) days prior to the adoption of this section and is now on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(b)  Amendments. The following additions, insertions, deletions and changes are hereby made to the above-adopted code: 
[A] 101.1 Title . Insert "City of West Chicago" where indicated. 
[A] 106.5 Fees. Delete this section and all subsections in their entirety and insert the following new sections 106.5 thru 106.5.4: 
"[A] 106.5 Fees. A permit shall not be issued until the fees prescribed in Section 106.5.1 have been paid, nor shall an amendment to a permit be released until the additional fee, if any, has been paid. 
[A] 106.5.1 Schedule of permit fees. A fee for each permit shall be paid as required, in accordance with the schedule as established by the applicable governing authority. 
[A] 106.5.2 Work commencing before permit issuance. Any person who commences any work before obtaining the necessary permits shall be subject to an additional fee established by the code official, which shall be in addition to the required permit fees. 
[A] 106.5.3 Related fees. The payment of the fee for the construction, alteration, removal or demolition of work done in connection to or concurrently with the work or activity authorized by a permit shall not relieve the applicant or holder of the permit from the payment of other fees that are prescribed by law. 
[A] 106.5.4 Refunds. The code official is authorized to establish a refund policy." 
[A] 108.4 Violation penalties. Delete this section in its entirety and substitute the following new Section 108.4. 
"[A] Violation penalties. Persons who shall violate a provision of this code, fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or erect, install, alter or repair work in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the code official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be subject to penalties as provided in Chapter 1, section 1-8 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of West Chicago". 
[A] 108.5 Stop work orders. Delete this section in its entirety and substitute the following new Section 108.5. 
"[A] 108.5 Stop work orders. Upon notice from the code official that work is being done contrary to the provisions of this code or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, such work shall immediately cease. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, the owner's agent, or the person doing the work. The notice shall state the conditions under which work is authorized to resume. Where an emergency exists, the code official shall not be required to give a written notice prior to stopping the work. Any person who shall continue any work on the system after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be subject to penalties as provided in Chapter 1, section 1-8 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of West Chicago". 
SECTION 109 MEANS OF APPEAL. Delete this section in its entirety and substitute the following new section 109: 
"SECTION 109 
MEANS OF APPEAL 
[A] 109.1 General. In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the building official relative to the application and interpretation of this code, there shall be and is hereby created a board of appeals. The board of appeals shall be appointed by the applicable governing authority and shall hold office at its pleasure. The board shall adopt rules of procedure for conducting its business. 
[A] 109.2 Limitations on authority. An application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this code or the rules legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this code do not fully apply or an equally good or better form of construction is proposed. The board shall have no authority to waive requirements of this code. 
[A] 109.3 Qualifications. The board of appeals shall consist of members who are qualified by experience and training to pass on matters pertaining to building construction and are not employees of the jurisdiction." 
(Ord. No. 04-O-0100, § 1(Exh. A), 12-6-2004; Ord. No. 11-O-0031, § 1, 8-1-2011; Ord. No. 15-O-0017, § 3(Exh. A), 7-6-2015) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 15-O-0017, § 3(Exh. A), adopted July 6, 2015, shall be in full force and effect on Aug. 1, 2015.  
Sec. 4-7. - Fuel gas code. 
(a)  Adopted. There is hereby adopted by reference, as if fully set out herein, that certain code known as the "2015 International Fuel Gas Code," including Appendix Chapters A—D inclusive, as prepared and published by the International Code Council, Inc., together with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes hereinafter set forth, one (1) copy of which has been [on file] for a period of more than thirty (30) days prior to the effective date hereof and now is on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(b)  Amendments. The following additions, insertions, deletions and changes are hereby made to the International Fuel Gas Code: 
101.1 Title . Insert "City of West Chicago" where indicated. 
106.6. Fees. Delete this section and all subsections in its entirety and insert the following sections 106.6 thru 106.6.4: 
"106.6 Fees. A permit shall not be issued until the fees prescribed in Section 106.6.1 have been paid, nor shall an amendment to a permit be released until the additional fee, if any, has been paid. 
106.6.1 Schedule of permit fees. A fee for each permit shall be paid as required, in accordance with the schedule as established by the applicable governing authority. 
106.6.2 Work commencing before permit issuance. Any person who commences any work before obtaining the necessary permits shall be subject to an additional fee established by the code official, which shall be in addition to the required permit fees. 
106.6.3 Related fees. The payment of the fee for the construction, alteration, removal or demolition of work done in connection to or concurrently with the work or activity authorized by a permit shall not relieve the applicant or holder of the permit from the payment of other fees that are prescribed by law. 
106.6.4 Refunds. The code official is authorized to establish a refund policy." 
108.4 Violation penalties. Delete this section in its entirety and substitute the following new Section 108.4. 
"108.4 Violation penalties. Persons who shall violate a provision of this code, fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or erect, install, alter or repair work in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the code official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be subject to penalties as provided in Chapter 1, section 1-8 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of West Chicago". 
108.5 Stop work orders. Delete this section in its entirety. 
"108.5 Stop work orders. Upon notice from the code official that work is being done contrary to the provisions of this code or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, such work shall immediately cease. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, the owner's agent, or the person doing the work. The notice shall state the conditions under which work is authorized to resume. Where an emergency exists, the code official shall not be required to give a written notice prior to stopping the work. Any person who shall continue any work on the system after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be subject to penalties as provided in Chapter 1, section 1-8 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of West Chicago". 
SECTION 109 MEANS OF APPEAL. Delete this section in its entirety and substitute the following new section 109: 
"SECTION 109 
MEANS OF APPEAL 
109.1 General. In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the building official relative to the application and interpretation of this code, there shall be and is hereby created a board of appeals. The board of appeals shall be appointed by the applicable governing authority and shall hold office at its pleasure. The board shall adopt rules of procedure for conducting its business. 
109.2 Limitations on authority. An application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this code or the rules legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this code do not fully apply or an equally good or better form of construction is proposed. The board shall have no authority to waive requirements of this code. 
109.3 Qualifications. The board of appeals shall consist of members who are qualified by experience and training to pass on matters pertaining to building construction and are not employees of the jurisdiction." 
(Ord. No. 04-O-0100, § 1(Exh. A), 12-6-2004; Ord. No. 11-O-0031, § 1, 8-1-2011; Ord. No. 15-O-0017, § 3(Exh. A), 7-6-2015) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 15-O-0017, § 3(Exh. A), adopted July 6, 2015, shall be in full force and effect on Aug. 1, 2015.  
Sec. 4-8. - Energy conservation code. 
See Exhibit "A" attached hereto [to Ord. No. 2013-O-0015] which is, by this reference, incorporated herein. 
(Ord. No. 04-O-0100, § 1(Exh. A), 12-6-2004; Ord. No. 11-O-0031, § 1, 8-1-2011; Ord. No. 2013-O-0015, § 1(Exh. A), 6-3-2013)  
Sec. 4-9. - Existing building code. 
(a)  Adopted. There is hereby adopted by reference, as if fully set out herein, that certain code known as the "2015 International Existing Building Code," as prepared and published by the International Code Council, Inc., together with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes hereinafter set forth, one (1) copy of which has been [on file] for a period of more than thirty (30) days prior to the effective date hereof and now is on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(b)  Amendments. The following additions, insertions, deletions and changes are hereby made to the above-adopted code: 
101.1 Title . Insert "City of West Chicago" where indicated. 
302.2 Additional codes. Substitute "Illinois Plumbing Code" for "International Plumbing Code" in one location. 
SECTION 302 GENERAL PROVISIONS. Amend this section by adding the following new sections 302.6 and 302.7: 
"302.6 Automatic sprinkler systems. Automatic fire sprinkler systems shall be provided in existing buildings as specified in sections 302.6.1 thru 302.6.2.1 
302.6.1 Additions to existing buildings . In other than one & two family residential structures and townhomes, an automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout existing buildings and new additions of all uses when the addition exceeds 1000 square feet in gross area. 
Exception: Sprinklers need only be provided to the addition, and not the existing building, when separated from the building by a 2-hour fire-separation assembly, and, provided the addition does not exceed 50% of the existing building area. 
302.6.2. Change of use in existing buildings. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout existing buildings when a change of use occurs if the new use is of an increased hazard. 
Exception : Group A-2 occupancies not exceeding 2,500 ft 2 in fire area and when located on the first floor only and when located in the B-1 zoned Central Business District. 
302.6.2.1 Increased hazard. An increased hazard exists if the allowable tabular area of the new use is less than the existing based on comparison of the type of construction and the tabular area as specified in Table 503 of the International Building Code. 
302.7 Automatic fire detection systems . In other than one & two family residential structures and townhomes, an approved addressable fire alarm system providing contact closure ID installed in accordance with the provisions of this code and NFPA 72 shall be provided in existing buildings and structures in accordance with Sections 907.2.1 through 907.2.23 of the International Building Code and provide occupant notification in accordance with Section 907.5, unless other requirements are provided by another section of this code. Fire alarm system shall only include that necessary for required operation of the system and not include other components for security or burglar alarm functions, etc." 
609.1 Materials. Substitute "Illinois Plumbing Code" for "International Plumbing Code" in one location. 
702.6 Materials and methods. Substitute "Illinois Plumbing Code" for "International Plumbing Code" in one location. 
810.1 Minimum fixtures. Substitute "Illinois Plumbing Code" for "International Plumbing Code" in one location. 
1010.1 Increased demand . Substitute "Illinois Plumbing Code" for "International Plumbing Code" in two locations. 
1010.2 Food-handling occupancies . Substitute "Illinois Plumbing Code" for "International Plumbing Code" in one location. 
1010.3 Interceptor required . Substitute "Illinois Plumbing Code" for "International Plumbing Code" in one location. 
1010.5 Group I-2. Substitute "Illinois Plumbing Code" for "International Plumbing Code" in one location. 
1401.2 Applicability. Insert [date] where indicated. 
1501.7 Facilities required. Substitute "Illinois Plumbing Code" for "International Plumbing Code" in one location. 
(Ord. No. 15-O-0017, § 3(Exh. A), 7-6-2015) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 15-O-0017, § 3(Exh. A), adopted July 6, 2015, shall be in full force and effect on Aug. 1, 2015.  
Sec. 4-10. - Life safety code. 
(a)  Adopted. There is hereby adopted by reference, as if fully set out herein, that certain code known as the "2000 NFPA 101 - Life Safety Code," as prepared and published by the National Fire Protection Association, Inc., together with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes hereinafter set forth, one (1) copy of which has been for a period of more than thirty (30) days prior to the effective date hereof and now is on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(b)  Amendments. The following additions, insertions, deletions and changes are hereby made to the above adopted life safety code. 
(1)  Child care facilities. 
a.  Day care centers. Those facilities regulated under Chapters 16 and 17 (Day-Care Centers) of the Life Safety Code shall include only: 
i.  Any facility licensed as a day care center by the department of children and family services; 
ii.  Any unlicensed facility that regularly provides day care for less than twenty-four (24) hours per day for more than eight (8) children in a family home, or more than three (3) children in a facility other than a family home; 
iii.  Part day child care facilities, as defined in the Child Care Act of 1969. 
b.  Day CARE HOMES. Those facilities regulated under Chapters 16 and 17 (Family Day-Care Homes) of the Life Safety Code shall include only: 
i.  Any facility licensed as a day care home by the department of children and family services; 
ii.  Any unlicensed facility that is a family home that receives more than three (3) up to a maximum of twelve (12) children for less than twenty-four (24) hours per day. The number counted includes the family's natural or adopted children and all other persons under the age of twelve (12). This subsection (b)(1)(B) does not affect facilities that receive only children from a single household. 
c.  Group day care homes. Those facilities regulated under Chapters 16 and 17 (Group Day-Care Homes) of the Life Safety Code shall include only: 
i.  Any facility licensed as a group day care home by the department of children and family services; or 
ii.  Any unlicensed facility that is a family home that receives more than 3 up to a maximum of sixteen (16) children for less than twenty-four (24) hours per day. The number counted includes the family's natural or adopted children and all other persons under the age of twelve (12). 
d.  For purpose of determining the classification of a child care facility, current department of children and family services guidelines will be applied. 
(2)  Child-to-staff ratios. Child-to-staff ratios in day care facilities shall comply with 89 Ill. Adm. Code 406 and 407 and with the Child Care Act of 1969. Any conflicting provisions of the Life Safety Code are inapplicable. 
(3)  One- and two-family dwellings. Chapter 24 (One- and Two-Family Dwellings) is adopted as recommended guidelines only. 
(4)  When clients occupy a level below the level of exit discharge in a day care home or group day care home occupancy, exiting shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of the applicable edition of the Life Safety Code, or with the following: 
a.  Primary means of egress. 
i.  If an exit discharging directly to the outside at the basement level is not provided, and therefore occupants must traverse another level of the home to exit, the path of egress through the level of exit discharge shall be separated from the remainder of that level of the home by construction providing a minimum fire resistance rating of one-hour, or 
ii.  The home shall be equipped with smoke detectors permanently powered by the building's electrical system and wired so that the actuation of one (1) detector will actuate all the detectors in the dwelling. At least one (1) such smoke detector shall be located on each level of the occupancy (excluding unoccupied attics), and the path of egress through the level of exit discharge (from the basement door to the exterior door of the home) must be protected by automatic fire sprinklers. Listed residential sprinklers shall be used and the installation shall be made in accordance with National Fire Protection Association Standard #13D, Installation of Sprinkler Systems in One- and Two-Family Dwellings and Manufactured Homes - 1994 edition. 
b.  Secondary means of egress. If a window is used where the size is not in accordance with the applicable edition of the Life Safety Code, the owner or operator of the day care or group day care home must demonstrate to an onsite representative of the Illinois State Fire Marshal that all occupants (staff and clients) can escape through the window to the exterior of the home in three (3) minutes or less. The bottom sill of any window used as a secondary means of escape shall be within forty-four (44) inches of the floor as required by the Life Safety Code, or a permanently fixed stair or ramp shall be installed at the window to allow occupants to be within forty-four (44) inches of the bottom window sill when standing atop the stair or ramp. 
(Ord. No. 2014-O-0022, § 1(Exh. A), 10-6-2014)  
Sec. 4-11. - Fire code. 
(a)  Adopted. There is hereby adopted by reference as if fully set out herein that certain code known as the "2015 International Fire Code," as published by the International Code Council, Inc., including Appendix Chapters B and E through J inclusive, together with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes hereinafter set forth, one (1) copy of which has been on file for a period of more than thirty (30) days prior to the adoption of this section and is now on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(b)  Amendments. The following additions, insertions, deletions and changes are hereby made to the above-adopted code: 
[A] 101.1 Title. Insert "City of West Chicago" where indicated. 
104.11 Authority at fires and other emergencies. Amend this section by adding the following new sub-sections: 
"104.11.4 Other assistance. If in the opinion of the Fire Code Official, when actual and immediate danger to life and property exists from the hazards of fire and explosion arising from the storage, handling and use of hazardous substances, materials and devices, and from conditions hazardous to life or property in the use of occupancy of buildings or premises, the Fire Code Official may employ such labor and machinery, equipment and devices and cause the necessary work to be done to render said occupants or property temporarily safe, whether the procedure prescribed in this section has been instituted or not. 
104.11.4.1 Notification. Where practical and time constraints permit, the owner, occupant or other person responsible for the emergency condition shall be notified of the emergency condition, in writing, and shall have the option of making the condition safe where practical. 
104.11.4.2 Liability. The owner and occupants of the premises shall be jointly and severely liable for any costs incurred in connection with same. 
104.11.4.3 Recovery of costs. The Fire Code Official shall cause proper action to be instituted against the owner of the premises, and the occupants if different than the owners, for the recovery of costs incurred by the West Chicago Fire Protection District or their agents in the performance of the emergency work." 
[A] 105.1 General. Amend by adding the following new subsection 105.1.7: 
" [A] 105.1.7 Permit Fees. Fees are per the applicable West Chicago Fire Protection District, City of West Chicago, or, DuPage County schedules." 
[A] 109.4 Violation Penalties. Delete the section in its entirety and insert the following new section: 
"[A] 109.4 Violation penalties. Persons who shall violate a provision of this code, fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or erect, install, alter or repair work in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the code official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be subject to penalties as provided in Chapter 1, section 1-8 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of West Chicago". 
111.4 Failure to Comply. Delete this section in its entirety. 
304.1.1 Waste material. Amend by adding thereto the following language: 
"No persons shall store in any building excess amounts of combustible empty packing cases, wooden or plastic pallets barrels, boxes, rubber tires, shavings, excelsior, rubbish, paper bags, litter, hay, straw and similar combustibles. Aisle ways and storage of the above mentioned combustibles necessary for the performance of business shall be kept in an orderly and neat manner. Combustible materials shall be removed daily or more often as necessary to suitable vaults, bins, dumpsters, compactors or separate buildings. Such practices shall be approved by the code official." 
304.2 Storage. Amend by adding thereto the following language: 
"Wherever and whenever stock is dispensed directly from a shipping container and combustible material is used as protective packing, such packing material shall be removed from the container and taken care of by removing to the outside in closed containers. Such container shall be kept closed at all times except when removing stock there from." 
307.1 General. Amend this section by adding the following wording at the end of the first paragraph: 
"When permitted, only untreated wood shall be burned. Leaves, compost, brush, waste materials of any kind, holiday decorations and/or Christmas trees shall be prohibited." 
307.4.3 Portable outdoor fireplaces. Delete the exception in its entirety. 
308.1.4 Open-flame cooking devices . Modify this section by deleting Exceptions 2 and 3. 
SECTION 316 HAZARDS TO FIREFIGHTERS . Amend by adding the following new section: 
"316.7 Truss construction. All buildings containing truss construction assemblies shall have signage permanently affixed to the building at a location which is approved by the Building/Fire Official. The sign shall be rectangular in shape measuring 18 inches horizontally and 12 inches vertically. The sign shall have a red reflective background containing a white reflective triangle measuring 13 inches on the sides having a ½" stroke with letters inside having a 1-¼" stroke as follows: 
'F' - for truss floor assemblies 
'R' - for truss roof assemblies 
'FR' - for truss floor and roof assemblies" 
CHAPTER 3 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS. Amend by adding thereto the following new section: 
"SECTION 319 
COOKING AND HEATING APPLIANCES 
319.1 Hotels and Motels. In Residential Use Group R-1, the use of any cooking or heating appliances other than those approved, permanently installed and inspected shall be prohibited." 
CHAPTER 3 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS, amend by adding thereto the following new section: 
"SECTION 320 
TRANSPORTATION 
320.1 Transportation routes . Routes for vehicles transporting explosives, blasting agents, and combustible & flammable liquids shall be approved by State or Federal governments." 
503.1.1 Buildings and facilities. Delete the second sentence and substitute the following language: 
"The fire apparatus access road shall comply with the requirements of this section and shall extend such that the responding fire apparatus pumper may be so located that all points of the interior of the building may be reached by one hundred fifty (150) feet of initial attack hose." 
503.2.1 Dimensions. Amend by deleting the language "an obstructed vertical clearance of not less than 13 feet 6 inches (4115 mm)" and substituting the following: 
"allowing proper operation of ladders and mechanically elevated mechanisms. Roads shall be at least fifteen (15) feet from the building, or further if the height of the building requires a greater set back to allow elevated access." 
503.2.3 Surface. Amend by adding the following language at the end of the section: 
"The minimum design shall be six (6) inches of granular stone base surfaced by at least two (2) inches of bituminous asphalt or concrete equivalent." 
503.2.4 Turning radius , modify by adding thereto the following language: 
"Approved turning templates shall be shown on all document submittals." 
503.2.5 Dead ends. Delete this section in its entirety and substitute the following new section 503.2.5: 
" 503.2.5 Continuity. Access routes shall be continuous around the building. 
Exceptions : 
1. Where approved by the fire code official, when building access openings spaced at a minimum 150 lineal feet and a complete fire suppression system are provided. 
2. Cul-de-sacs not less than ninety (90) feet in diameter with a maximum length of one thousand (1000) feet for other than detached single family developments." 
503.3 Marking. Modify by deleting the words "Where required by the fire code official," 
503.4 Obstruction of fire apparatus access roads . Amend by adding the following new section 503.4.2: 
" 503.4.2 Enforcement agreement required . Where required to ensure enforcement of parking restrictions the building owner and/or occupant shall enter into an enforcement agreement with the police department allowing issuance of citations. 
505.1 Address numbers . Amend by adding the following language at the end of the section: 
"Similar sized numbers or letters shall be located at all rear and side doors of all multi-tenant commercial structures." 
506.1 Where required. Amend by adding the following sentence to the end of the paragraph: 
"This rapid entry key box system shall be used for Fire Department emergencies only." 
507.3 Fire flow. Amend by adding the following new sections: 
" 507.3.1 Application. This section defines water supplies for fire department use for new construction. 
507.3.2 All buildings or structures shall be served by a public water supply system meeting these criteria. This system shall be under pressure with an average static pressure of not less than thirty-five (35) pounds per square inch (psi). Flows shall be calculated at twenty (20) psi residual pressure. The supplies shall be available for continuous four (4) hour duration except that flows less than two thousand (2,000) gpm need to be available for a two (2) hour duration. 
507.3.2.1 Buildings not exceeding ten thousand (10,000) square feet (gross area) may be served by a static water supply where access to this supply is maintained throughout the year and is approved by the fire code official. 
507.3.3 Consistent with proper fire prevention, the following water supplies shall be available commensurate with the hazards listed therein: 
Single family detached residential 	1,000 to 1,500 gpm 
Town/row or cluster housing 	1,500 to 2,000 gpm 
Apartment type construction 	3,000 to 4,000 gpm 
Industrial and storage 	3,000 to 5,000 gpm 
Research & development laboratories 	3,000 to 4,000 gpm 
Business and commercial areas 	3,000 to 4,500 gpm 
Mercantile center 	3,000 to 6,000 gpm 
Assembly and educational 	3,000 to 5,000 gpm 
Health care and institutional 	3,000 to 4,000 gpm 
 
Exception: If available water supplies listed cannot be met, then the water main must be looped around the development and/or provide additional fire hydrants as approved by the City and/or the Fire Protection District. 
507.5.1 Where required. Delete in entirety including exceptions and substitute following new language: 
" 507.5.1 Where required. Along public streets so that no portion of the building or structure to be protected will be over three hundred (300) feet from any required hydrant in multiple-housing, commercial or industrial developments as measured along an approved route and four hundred (400) feet in residential districts. Where this may not be possible, additional hydrants shall be located upon the premises accessible to motorized fire apparatus." 
507.5.1.1. Hydrant for standpipe systems. Delete this section and its exception in its entirety. 
507.5.1 Where required. Amend by adding the following new sub-sections: 
"507.5.1.1 Intersections. One (1) hydrant shall be located at each intersection and intermediate hydrants where distance between intersections exceeds four hundred (400) feet. 
507.5.1.2 Dead ends. Where streets, access routes or parking lots dead-end, hydrants shall be placed along the response routes. 
507.5.1.3 Minimum required. At least two (2) hydrants shall be located within three hundred (300) feet of each building. 
507.5.1.4 Additional fire hydrants shall be provided within five hundred (500) feet of each building so that the required fire flow divided by one thousand (1,000) will equal the number of hydrants available. 
507.5.1.5 Distance from pavement. Hydrants will be located approximately ten (10) feet from all-weather roadways. If this cannot be done, the closest part of the hydrant shall be set back a minimum of five (5) feet from the roadway curb line. 
507.5.1.6 Proximity to building. Hydrants shall be located no closer than twenty-five (25) feet from the building to be protected. 
507.5.1.7 Access. Access to fire hydrants shall be approved roadways, adequate in width (minimum twenty (20) feet), clearance and strength for firefighting purposes. Such routes shall be maintained accessible during all seasons of the year and identified as no parking with signs and pavement markings approved by the fire code official. Legal provisions or easements for access are required for private roads. 
507.5.1.8 Distance to fire department connection. No required fire department connection shall be located over seventy-five (75) feet from a fire hydrant." 
SECTION 507 FIRE PROTECTION WATER SUPPLIES. Amend by adding the following new section: 
" 507.5.7 Design standard. Fire hydrants used in conjunction with water supplies shall meet the standards of the American Water Works Association Standard No. C-502, and shall have two (2) 2-1/2 inch and one (1) 4-1/2 inch outlets with an auxiliary gate valve on the hydrant branch line. Threads shall be American National Standard. The 4-1/2 inch outlet shall face the roadway. Each fire hydrant shall supply one thousand (1,000) gpm. Where fire suppression systems are served by the same main, the system requirement shall be added to the total water supply requirement." 
901.6.2 Records. Amend by adding the following language to the end of the section: 
"Said records shall contain the following information: 
1. The date and time of all tests. 
2. The name of the person who conducted the test. 
3. The water pressure on the sprinkler riser gauge before and after each test (for sprinkler system tests only). 
4. The residual pressure during the main drain test. 
5. Any problems found before, during or after each test." 
901.7 Systems out of service. Amend by adding the following language to the end of the second paragraph: 
"When any fire suppression system must be taken out of service, for any length of time, a responsible person shall be stationed at the control valve(s) to immediately activate the system in case of fire." 
903.2.1 Group A. Delete this section, and all subsections in its entirety and substitute the following new sections: 
" 903.2.1 Group A. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all Group A-1, A-2, A-3 and A-4 occupancies. 
903.2.1.1 Group A-5. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for Group A-5 occupancies in the following areas: concession stands, retail areas, press boxes and other accessory use areas in excess of 1,000 square feet." 
903.2.2 Group B ambulatory health care facilities. Delete this section in its entirety and substitute the following new section: 
" 903.2.2 Group B. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all Group B occupancies." 
903.2.3 Group E. Delete this section in its entirety and substitute the following new section: 
" 903.2.3 Group E. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all Group E occupancies." 
903.2.4 Group F-1. Delete this section and all subsections in their entirety and insert the following new section: 
" 903.2.4 Groups F-1 & F-2. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all Group F-1 and F-2 occupancies." 
903.2.5.3 Pyroxylin plastics. Delete this section in its entirety. 
903.2.7 Group M. Delete this section in its entirety and substitute the following new section: 
"903.2.7 Group M. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all Group M occupancies." 
903.2.9 Group S-1. Delete this section and all subsections in their entirety and insert the following new section: 
" 903.2.9 Groups S-1 & S-2. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all Group S-1 and S-2 occupancies." 
"[B] 903.2.9 Groups S-1 & S-2. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all Group S-1 and S-2 occupancies. 
EXCEPTION: Buildings used primarily for the bulk storage of road salt." 
903.2.10 Group S-2. Delete this section and all subsections in their entirety and insert the following new section: 
" 903.2.10 Group U. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all occupiable spaces of Group U exceeding 1,000 square feet (93 m 2 )" 
"Exception: Group U agricultural buildings as identified in Appendix C of the 2015 International Building Code." 
903.2.11.3 Buildings over 55 feet in height. Delete this section in its entirety and substitute the following new section: 
903.2.11.3 Airport control towers. Automatic sprinkler systems are not required to be installed in airport control towers. 
SECTION 903 AUTOMATIC SPRINKLER SYSTEMS. Amend by adding thereto the following new sections: 
903.2.13 Additions to existing buildings . An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout existing buildings and new additions of all uses when the addition exceeds 1000 square feet in gross area. 
Exception: Sprinklers need only be provided to the addition, and not the existing building, when separated from the building by a 2-hour fire-separation assembly, and, provided the addition does not exceed 50% of the existing building area. 
903.2.14. Change of use in existing buildings. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout existing buildings when a change of use occurs if the new use is of an increased hazard. 
Exception : Group A-2 occupancies not exceeding 2,500 ft 2 in fire area and when located on the first floor only. 
903.2.14.1 Increased hazard. An increased hazard exists if the allowable tabular area of the new use is less than the existing based on comparison of the type of construction and the tabular area as specified in Table 503 of the International Building Code. 
903.4 Sprinkler system supervision and alarms. Exceptions: 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7. Delete in their entirety. 
905.3 Required installations. Amend by adding thereto the following new sections [F] 905.3.8 and [F] 905.3.8.1: 
" 905.3.9 All other buildings. Standpipes shall be installed in areas where horizontal or vertical access is more than one hundred fifty (150) feet beyond the level of fire department vehicle access. Distance is measured starting from the fire department apparatus' hose connection. 
905.3.9.1 Locations. Where a standpipe system is required by this section, there shall be hose connections at each required exit door on each floor. All other doors shall have an approved plaque or sign, measuring 12" square, permanently affixed next to the handle side of the door with plainly legible wording stating 'NO STANDPIPE CONNECTION.' The lettering shall white on a red background and easily readable." 
907.2 Where required—new buildings and structures . Delete the first paragraph in its entirety and substitute the following language: 
"907.2 Where required—new & existing buildings and structures . An approved addressable fire alarm system installed in accordance with the provisions of this code and NFPA 72 shall be provided in new and existing buildings and structures in accordance with Sections 907.2.1 through 907.2.23 and provide occupant notification in accordance with Section 907.5, unless other requirements are provided by another section of this code. Fire alarm system shall only include that necessary for required operation of the system and not include other components for security or burglar alarm functions, etc." 
907.2.1 Group A. Delete the first paragraph and the exception in its entirety and substitute the following language: 
" 907.2.1 Group A. An automatic fire alarm detection system shall be installed and maintained in all new and existing occupancies of Group A." 
907.2.1.1 System initiation in Group A occupancies with an occupant load of 1,000 or more. Delete the first paragraph in its entirety and substitute the following language: 
"907.2.1.1 System initiation in Group A occupancies with an occupant load of 500 or more. Activation of the fire alarm in Group A occupancies with an occupant load of 500 or more shall initiate a signal using an emergency voice/alarm communications system in accordance with Section 907.5.2.2." 
907.2.2 Group B. Delete the first paragraph and the exception in its entirety and substitute the following language: 
" 907.2.2 Group B. An automatic fire alarm detection system shall be installed and maintained in all new and existing occupancies of Group B with a total gross building area over five hundred (500) square feet." 
907.2.3 Group E. Delete the first paragraph and the exceptions in their entirety and substitute the following language: 
" 907.2.3 Group E. An automatic fire alarm detection system shall be installed and maintained in all new and existing occupancies of Group E." 
907.2.4 Group F. Delete this paragraph in its entirety and substitute the following language: 
" 907.2.4 Group F, S and U. An automatic fire alarm detection system shall be installed and maintained in all new and existing occupancies of Groups F, S and U with a total gross building area over five hundred (500) square feet." 
907.2.5 Group H. Delete the first sentence in its entirety and substitute the following language: 
" 907.2.5 Group H. An automatic fire alarm detection system shall be installed and maintained in all new and existing occupancies of Group H." 
907.2.6 Group I. Delete the first sentence in its entirety and substitute the following language: 
"907.2.6 Group I. An automatic fire alarm detection system shall be installed and maintained in all new and existing occupancies of Group I." 
907.2.6.1 Group I-1. Delete the first exception in its entirety. 
907.2.7 Group M. Delete this section in its entirety and substitute the following language: 
" 907.2.7 Group M. An automatic fire alarm detection system shall be installed and maintained in all new and existing occupancies of Group M." 
907.2.8 Group R-1. Delete this section in its entirety and substitute the following new section [B] 907.2.8: 
" 907.2.8 Group R-1. An automatic fire alarm detection system shall be installed and maintained in all new and existing occupancies of Group R-1." 
907.2.8.1 Manual fire alarm system. Delete this section in its entirety. 
907.2.9 Group R-2. Delete this section in its entirety and substitute the following new section [B] 907.2.9: 
" [B] 907.2.9 Group R-2. An automatic fire alarm detection system shall be installed and maintained in all new and existing occupancies of Group R-2." 
907.2.9.1 Manual fire alarm system. Delete this section in its entirety. 
907.5.1 Presignal feature. Delete this section in its entirety. 
907.5.2.3 Visible alarms. Delete this section in its entirety and substitute the following new paragraph: 
"907.5.2.3 Visible alarms. Visible alarm notification appliances shall be provided in accordance with Sections 907.6.2.3.1 through 907.6.2.3.6." 
907.5.2.3 Visible alarms. Amend by adding thereto the following language new sections 907.5.2.3.5 and 907.5.2.3.6: 
" 907.5.2.3.5 Tenant space light. Each tenant space in a multiple tenant building shall have an audio visual alarm visible in a public access area indicating which tenant space has the activated alarm. 
907.5.2.3.6 Outside alerting device. All fire alarm and fire suppression systems shall have outside alerting devices of a type and at a location approved by the building official. 
907.6.6 Monitoring. Delete the exceptions in their entirety. 
907.8 Inspection, testing and maintenance. Amend by adding the following new sections 907.9.6 and 907.9.7: 
" 907.8.6 Out of service. No alarm shall be out of service without the prior approval of the building official. 
907.8.7 Fire watch required. When a fire alarm system must be taken out of service for any length of time, a continuous fire watch with the capability of notifying the fire department shall be established at all times until service is re-established. Otherwise occupancy of the building or space shall not be permitted. 
907.9 Where required in existing buildings and structures . Delete this section in its entirety and insert the following new section. 
"907.9 Where required in existing buildings and structures. An approved fire alarm system complying with this Chapter shall be provided in all existing buildings and structures." 
909.1 Scope and purpose. Amend by adding the following new subsections 909.1.1 and 909.1.2: 
" 909.1.1 Required smoke control systems. In addition to that required elsewhere in this code, an emergency smoke control system shall also be provided in new construction as follows: 
1. In all buildings with a fire area exceeding forty thousand (40,000) square feet of floor area. Plenums and sub-floors enclosed within a defined fire area separation do not require separate smoke control or exhaust systems. 
2. In all buildings over three (3) stories or thirty-five (35) feet in height. 
3. In covered mall buildings including individual tenant spaces." 
Exception : Unlimited area buildings providing smoke and heat venting or a mechanical exhaust system as required by Section 910. 
909.1.2 Design parameters. Smoke control systems shall be designed to provide a minimum of 2 air changes per hour. 
910.4.5 Manual control location. Delete this section in its entirety and substitute the following new paragraph: 
910.4.5 Manual control location. Manual controls shall be at a location approved by the fire code official so as to be easily accessible to the fire service from an exterior door of the building and protected against interior fire exposure by not less than 1-hour fire barriers constructed in accordance with Section 707 or horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 711, or both. 
913.2 Protection against interruption of service. Amend by adding the following language: 
"Electrically powered fire pumps shall also have an adequately sized emergency generator complying with the electrical code." 
2003 General Precautions. Amend by adding the following new section 2003.8: 
" 2003.8 Aircraft Storage, Fueling, Maintenance and Operations. The storage, fueling, maintenance, construction of support facilities and operations, for aircraft, including helicopters, shall be in accordance with Table 2003.8." 
TABLE 2003.8 
NFPA 407 	Aircraft Fuel Servicing 
NFPA 409 	Aircraft Hangers 
NFPA 410 	Aircraft Maintenance 
NFPA 415-13 	Aircraft Fueling Ramp Drainage 
NFPA 418-11 	Construction And Protection Of Roof-Top-Heliports 
 
2304.3 Unattended self-service motor fuel-dispensing facilities. Amend this section by adding the following new section 2304.3.8: 
" 2304.3.8 Special dispensers. Special type dispensers such as coin, key or card operated devices, for self operation by the general public at unattended facilities are prohibited." 
Exception : Aviation fuel dispensers located in secure areas used for aviation purposes, only." 
2306.2.5 Portable Tanks. Amend by adding the following language at the end of the section: 
"Flammable and combustible fuel stored inside a building shall be in approved metal containers with self closing lids and the total amount shall not exceed ten (10) gallons. Storage in excess of this amount must be in approved fire-rated cabinets complying with Section 3404.3 of this code." 
3205.5 Pile dimension and height limitations. Amend by adding the following language at the end of the section: 
"In no instance shall pile storage be located within 2 feet of the ceiling, nor within eighteen (18) inches from any sprinkler head." 
CHAPTER 50 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS. Amend by adding thereto the following new section: 
"SECTION 5006 
TRANSPORTATION 
5006.1 Transportation routes . Routes for vehicles transporting hazardous materials, including, but not limited to, combustible and flammable liquids, shall be approved by State or Federal governments." 
5601.1.3 Fireworks. Delete this section in its entirety and substitute the following new section 5601.1.3: 
" 5601.1.3 Manufacture, sale and storage. The manufacture, sale or storage of explosives and fireworks is prohibited. Small fireworks containing any amount of pyrotechnic composition designed primarily to produce visible or audible effects by combustion are also included in this prohibition." 
5601.2 Permit required. Delete this section and substitute the following new section 5601.2: 
"5601.2 Permit required - city events and city property. Applications for firework displays and discharge shall be made in a form developed by the Fire Code Official and shall be submitted at least thirty (30) days in advance of an event. Firework displays either for city events or held on city property must meet the following requirements, as recommended by the city's risk management agency: 
(1) The applicant for a permit must provide an original commercial general liability certificate of insurance, from an insurance company in good standing with the city, with the following coverage limits: 
a. $5,000,000 combined single limit per occurrence for bodily injury and property damage, with the City of West Chicago, its officials, employees, agents and volunteers named as additional insureds; and 
b. The general aggregate shall be twice the required occurrence limit, or no less than $10,000,000 per occurrence. 
(2) The original certificate of insurance must be provided to the city directly by the insurance company. 
(3) The certificate of insurance must state that there is a no shooters exclusion and that a cross suits exclusion does not apply to those listed as additional insureds on the certificate." 
5601.2.4 Financial responsibility . Delete this section in its entirety and substitute the following new Section 5601.2.4: 
"5601.2.4 Permit required - private fireworks displays. For private fireworks displays not conducted on public property, before a permit is issued, as required by Section 5601.2, the applicant shall file with the city a commercial general liability insurance policy in the sum of $100,000 for the purpose of the payment of all damages to persons or property which arise from, or are caused by, the conduct of any act authorized by the permit upon which any judicial judgment results. Applications for private fireworks displays and discharge shall be made in a form developed by the Fire Code Official and shall be submitted at least thirty (30) days in advance of an event." 
5704.2.9.7 Additional requirements for protected above-ground tanks. Amend this section by adding the following new section 5704.2.9.7.10: 
" 5704.2.9.7.10 Other requirements. The above-ground storage of Class I flammable liquids, Class II, Class IIIA and Class IIIB combustible liquids and Class I, II, IIIA, and IIIB solvents in excess of the exempt amounts in the building code shall conform to the following: 
1. All containers shall have a 2-hour rating. 
2. All containers shall provide secondary containment. 
3. All containers shall conform to the requirements of NFPA 30, 30A, UL 142 and UL 2085. 
4. All installation shall comply with the requirements of the Illinois Fire Marshal. 
5. The maximum total gallons per tank shall be 2,500 gallons. 
6. The maximum number of tanks shall be 2. 
7. Multiple compartment tanks with different liquids are allowed with the maximum per tank of 2,500 gallons. 
8. The installation shall comply with all local codes, ordinances and standards. 
9. The tank installation shall have a permit from the fire district. 
10. The tank installation shall have a permit from the Illinois State Fire Marshal. 
Exception : Above ground storage tanks utilized solely for permanently affixed emergency generator-sets, fire-pumps installed with hard-piped connections need not comply with items 5, 6 and 7, listed above when approved by the Fire Code Official." 
SECTION 6106 DISPENSING AND OVERFILLING. Amend this section by adding the following new section 6106.4: 
" Section 6106.4 Tank vehicles. No tank vehicle shall be left unattended on any lot, street, highway, avenue, alley or any other location within the municipal limits unless located in a secured, tamper proof area and/or during emergency situations, such as loss of primary power, or as otherwise determined by the Fire Code Official. In all instances, such operations shall comply with all Federal, State and local regulations." 
Section 5704.2.9.6.1 Amend this section by inserting the following geographic limits in which the storage of Class I and Class II liquids in above-ground tanks outside of buildings is prohibited: 
"All residential zoned districts as established by the Code of Ordinances of the City of West Chicago." 
Section 5706.2.4.4 Amend this section by inserting the following geographic limits in which the storage of Class I and Class II liquids in above-ground tanks is prohibited: 
"All residential zoned districts as established by the Code of Ordinances of the City of West Chicago." 
Section 5806.2 Amend this section by inserting the following geographic limits in which the storage of flammable cryogenic fluids in stationary containers is prohibited: 
"All residential zoned districts as established by the Code of Ordinances of the City of West Chicago." 
Section 6104.2 Amend this section by inserting the following geographic limits in which the storage of liquefied petroleum gas is restricted for the protection of heavily populated or congested areas: 
"All residential zoned districts as established by the Code of Ordinances of the City of West Chicago." 
(Ord. No. 04-O-0100, § 1(Exh. A), 12-6-2004; Ord. No. 10-O-0101, § 1, 12-6-2010; Ord. No. 11-O-0031, § 1, 8-1-2011; Ord. No. 2013-O-0015, § 2, 6-3-2013; Ord. No. 15-O-0017, § 3(Exh. A), 7-6-2015; Ord. No. 18-O-0055, § 2, 12-17-2018; Ord. No. 19-O-0016, § 3, 5-6-2019) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 15-O-0017, § 3(Exh. A), adopted July 6, 2015, shall be in full force and effect on Aug. 1, 2015.  
Sec. 4-12. - Accessibility code. 
(a)  Adopted. There is hereby adopted by reference as if fully set out herein that certain code known as the "Illinois Accessibility Code, Effective, April 24, 1997", as published by the State of Illinois, three (3) copies of which have been on file for a period of more than thirty (30) days prior to the adoption of this section and are now on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 04-O-0100, § 1(Exh. A), 12-6-2004)  
Sec. 4-13. - Swimming pool and spa code. 
(a)  Adopted. There is hereby adopted by reference, as if fully set out herein, that certain code known as the "2015 International Swimming Pool and Spa Code," as prepared and published by the International Code Council, Inc., together with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes hereinafter set forth, one (1) copy of which has been [on file] for a period of more than thirty (30) days prior to the effective date hereof and now is on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(b)  Amendments. The following additions, insertions, deletions and changes are hereby made to the above-adopted code: 
[A] 101.1 Title. Insert: "City of West Chicago" where indicated. 
[A] 105.6.2. Fee schedule : Delete this section in its entirety and insert the following new section: 
"[A] 105.6.2 Schedule of permit fees. A fee for each permit shall be paid as required, in accordance with the schedule as established by the applicable governing authority." 
[A] 105.6.3 Fee refunds. Delete this section in its entirety and insert the following new section: 
"[A] 105.6.3 Fee refunds. The code official is authorized to establish a refund policy." 
[A] 107.4 Violation Penalties. Delete this section in its entirety and insert the following new section: 
"[A] 107.4 Violation Penalties. Any person who shall violate a provision of this Code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect, construct, alter or repair a building or structure in violation of an approved plan or directive of the building official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this Code, shall be subject to penalties as provided in Chapter 1, section 1-8 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of West Chicago." 
(Ord. No. 15-O-0017, § 5(Exh. B), 7-6-2015) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 15-O-0017, § 5(Exh. B), adopted July 6, 2015, shall be in full force and effect on Aug. 1, 2015.  
Sec. 4-14. - Application and permit fee schedule. 
The application and permit fees shall be as prescribed in Appendix G. 
(Ord. No. 04-O-0100, § 1(Exh. A), 12-6-2004; Ord. No. 05-O-0090, § 1, 11-21-2005; Ord. No. 06-O-0004, § 2n, 3-6-2006; Ord. No. 06-O-0076, § 2n, 9-5-2006; Ord. No. 07-O-0017, § 8, 4-16-2007; Ord. No. 07-O-0105, § 1, 12-7-2007, eff. 1-1-2008; Ord. No. 09-O-0025, § 1, 4-6-2009; Ord. No. 10-O-0039, § 3, 4-19-2010; Ord. No. 11-O-0007, § 45, 5-16-2011; Ord. No. 15-O-0017, § 4, 7-6-2015) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 15-O-0017, § 4, adopted July 6, 2015, shall be in full force and effect on Aug. 1, 2015.  
Secs. 4-15—4-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - DANGEROUS BUILDINGS 
 
Sec. 4-26. - Defined. 
The term "dangerous building" as used in this article, is hereby defined to mean and include: 
(1)  Any buildings, shed, fence, or other manmade structure which is dangerous to the public health because of its construction or condition, or which may cause or aid in the spread of disease or cause injury to the health of the occupants of it or of neighboring structures; 
(2)  Any building, shed, fence, or other manmade structure which, because of faulty construction, age, lack of proper repair or any other cause, is especially liable to fire and constitutes or creates a fire hazard; 
(3)  Any building, shed, fence, or other manmade structure which, by reason of faulty construction, age, lack of proper repair or any other cause, is liable to cause injury or damage by collapsing; 
(4)  Any building, shed, fence, or other manmade structure which because of its condition is frequented by persons who are not lawful occupants of such structure. 
(Ord. No. 811, § 1, 12-17-62)  
Sec. 4-27. - Declared a nuisance. 
Any dangerous building in the city is hereby declared to be a nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 811, § 2, 12-17-62) 
Cross reference— Nuisances generally, Ch. 10.  
Sec. 4-28. - Declared unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful to permit the existence or occupancy of any dangerous building in the city and no person in custody of any such building shall permit the same to remain in a dangerous condition. 
(Ord. No. 811, § 3, 12-17-62)  
Sec. 4-29. - Abatement. 
Whenever the zoning administrator or any other officer of the city shall find that any building or structure in the city is a dangerous building, he shall file a written statement to this effect with the city clerk. The clerk shall thereupon cause written notice to be served upon the owner and occupant thereof, by registered mail or by personal service. Such notice shall state that the building has been declared to be in a dangerous condition, and that such condition must be removed by repairing or altering the building or by demolishing it. Such notice shall be in substantially the following form: 
"To _______ owner-occupant of the premises known and described as _______. 
You are hereby notified that (describe building) on the premises above described has been declared to be in a dangerous condition and condemned as a nuisance and a dangerous building after inspection by _______. 
The cause for this condition is (here insert the facts as to the dangerous condition). 
You must remedy this condition or demolish the building on or before _______ or the city will proceed to do so." 
If the person receiving such notice has not complied therewith, the city may, after fifteen (15) days from the time when this notice is served upon such person, proceed to remedy the condition or demolish the dangerous building. 
(Ord. No. 811, § 4, 12-17-62; Ord. No. 2008, § 1, 2-16-88)  
Sec. 4-30. - Destruction of fire-damaged buildings; procedure. 
Any building or structure within the fire limits of the city which has been damaged by fire, decay, or other cause to the extent of fifty (50) per cent of its value, shall be demolished. 
Upon written notice by the building inspector, health commissioner, fire marshal, or any other city employee filed with the city clerk, the clerk shall notify the mayor of the receipt of such notice. The mayor shall then appoint three (3) persons to determine whether or not such building or structure has been damaged to the extent of fifty (50) per cent. A copy of the notice filed by the city officer, together with a notice of the appointment of the board of three (3) persons to determine the damage, shall be served upon the owner of the premises by personal service or by registered mail to his last-known address. 
Such notice may be in substantially the following form: 
To _______: 
"You are hereby notified that _______ has found that the building owned by you at _______, located within the fire limits of the city has been damaged by fire, decay or otherwise to the extent of fifty (50) per cent of its value; and that a board of three (3) members has been appointed to verify this finding, which board will hold its first meeting in the city hall on the _______ day of _______ at the hour of _______ o'clock, at which time it will determine whether this finding is correct. 
"If this finding is verified by the board, you may be required to demolish the said building." 
If the said board of three (3) members finds that the building in question has been damaged to the extent of fifty (50) per cent, it shall be the duty of the owner to demolish the said building within twenty (20) days after such finding of the board. It shall be unlawful to occupy or permit such building to be occupied after such finding. 
(Ord. No. 817, § 5, 12-17-62)  
Sec. 4-31. - Unknown owners. 
If the address of the owner is unknown, service of any notice provided for in this article may be made by posting a copy thereof on the premises and by publishing, not less than ten (10) nor more than thirty (30) days prior to the hearing date, one time a copy thereof in a newspaper published within the municipality. 
(Ord. No. 817, § 7, 12-17-62)  
Secs. 4-32—4-42. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - FLOOD HAZARD AREAS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Former §§ 4-42—4-56 were deleted by § 1 of Ord. No. 2271, adopted April 2, 1990, and § 2 of the ordinance enacted §§ 4-43—4-56 in lieu thereof. The deleted provisions pertained to flood hazard areas and derived from Ord. No. 2191, § 2, adopted Aug. 21, 1989. 
 
Sec. 4-43. - Purpose. 
This article is enacted pursuant to the police powers granted to this city by Illinois Revised Statutes, chapter 24, sections 1-2-1, 11-12-12m, 11-30-8, and 11-31-2. [The purpose of this article is to:] 
(1)  Meet the requirements of Chapter 19, paragraph 65 (g) of the Illinois Revised Statutes, "An Act in Relation to the Regulation of the Rivers, Lakes and Streams of the State of Illinois," approved June 10, 1911, as amended. 
(2)  Assure that new development does not increase the flood or drainage hazards to others, or creating unstable conditions susceptible to erosion; 
(3)  Protect new buildings and major improvements to buildings from flood damage; 
(4)  Protect human life and health from the hazards of flooding; 
(5)  Lessen the burden on the taxpayer for flood control projects, repairs to flood-damaged public facilities and utilities, and flood rescue and relief operations; 
(6)  Make federally subsidized flood insurance available for property in the city, by fulfilling the requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program; and 
(7)  Comply with the rules and regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program codified as 44 CFR 59-79, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 2191, § 2, 8-21-89; Ord. No. 2271, § 2, 4-2-90)  
Sec. 4-44. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following definitions are adopted: 
Act. "An Act in relation to the regulation of the rivers, lakes and streams of the State of Illinois," Illinois Revised Statutes 1987, chapter 19, paragraph 52 et seq. 
Applicant. Any person, firm, corporation or agency which submits an application. 
Appropriate use. Only uses of the regulatory floodway that are permissible and will be considered for permit issuance. The only uses that will be allowed are as specified in section 4-49(2). 
Base flood. The flood having a one-per-cent probability of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. The base flood is also known as the one hundred-year frequency flood event. Application of the base flood elevation at any location is as defined in section 4-47 of this article. 
Building. A structure that is principally above ground and is enclosed by walls and a roof. The term includes a gas or liquid storage tank, a manufactured home, mobile home or a prefabricated building. This term also includes recreational vehicles and travel trailers to be installed on a site for more than one hundred eighty (180) days. 
Channel. Any river, stream, creek, brook, branch, natural or artificial depression, ponded area, flowage, slough, ditch, conduit, culvert, gully, ravine, wash, or natural or man-made drainage, which has a definite bed and banks or shoreline, in or into which surface or groundwater flows, either perennially or intermittently. 
Channel modification. Alteration of a channel by changing the physical dimensions or materials of its bed or banks. Channel modification includes damming, rip-rapping or other armoring, widening, deepening, straightening, relocating, lining and significant removal of bottom or woody vegetation. Channel modification does not include the clearing of dead or dying vegetation, debris, or trash from the channel. Channelization is a sever form of channel modification involving, typically, relocation of the existing channel (e.g. straightening). 
Compensatory storage. An artificially excavated, hydraulically equivalent volume of storage within the SFHA used to balance the loss of natural flood storage capacity when artificial fill or structures are placed with the floodplain. The uncompensated loss of natural floodplain storage can increase off-site floodwater elevations and flows. 
Conditional approval of a regulatory floodway map change. Preconstruction approval by DWR and the Federal Emergency Management Agency of a proposed change to the floodway map. This preconstruction approval, pursuant to this part, gives assurances to the property owner that once an appropriate use is constructed according to permitted plans, the floodway map can be changed, as previously agreed, upon review and acceptance of as-built plans. 
Conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR). A letter which indicates that the Federal Emergency Management Agency will revise base flood elevations, flood insurance rate zones, flood boundaries or floodway as shown on an effective flood hazard boundary map or flood insurance rate map, once the as-built plans are submitted and approved. 
Control structure. A structure designed to control the rate of flow that passes through the structure, given a specific upstream and downstream water surface elevation. 
Dam. All obstructions, wall embankments or barriers, together with their abutments and appurtenant works, if any, constructed for the purpose of storing or diverting water or creating a pool. Underground water storage tanks are not included. 
Development. Any man-made change to real estate, including: 
(1)  Construction, reconstruction, repair, or placement of a building or any addition to a building. 
(2)  Installing a manufactured home on a site, preparing a site for a manufactured home, or installing a travel trailer on a site for more than one hundred eighty (180) days. 
(3)  Drilling, mining, installing utilities, construction of roads, bridges, or similar projects. 
(4)  Construction or erection of levees, walls, fences, filling, dredging, grading, excavation, paving, or other nonagricultural alterations of the ground surface and storage of materials. 
(5)  Any other activity of man that might change the direction, height, or velocity of flood or surface water. 
Development does not include maintenance of existing buildings and facilities such as reroofing or resurfacing of roads when there is no increase in elevation, or gardening, plowing, and similar agricultural practices that do not involve filling, grading, or construction of levees. 
DWR. Illinois Department of Transportation, Division of Water Resources. 
Elevation certificates. A form published by the Federal Emergency Management Agency that is used to certify the elevation to which a building has been elevated. 
Exempt organizations. Organizations which are exempt from this article per the Illinois Revised Statutes including state, federal or local units of government. 
FEMA. Federal Emergency Management Agency and its regulations at 44 CFR 59-79 effective as of October 1, 1986. This incorporation does not include any later editions or amendments. 
Flood. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from overflow of inland or tidal waves, or the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood frequency. A period of years, based on a statistical analysis, during which a flood of a state magnitude may be expected to be equaled or exceeded. 
Flood fringe. That portion of the floodplain outside of the regulatory floodway. 
Flood insurance rate maps (FIRM). A map prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency that depicts the special flood hazard area (SFHA) within a community. This may include insurance rate zones and floodplains and may or may not depict floodways. 
Floodplain. That land typically adjacent to a body of water with ground surface elevations at or below the base flood or the one hundred-year frequency flood elevation. Floodplains may also include detached special flood hazard areas, ponding areas, etc. The floodplain is also known as the special flood hazard area (SFHA). The floodplains are those lands within the jurisdiction of the city, that are subject to inundation by the base flood or one hundred-year frequency flood. The SFHA's of the city are generally identified as such on the flood insurance rate map of the city prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (or the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development) and dated August 19, 1987. The SFHA's of those parts of unincorporated that are within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city or that may be annexed into the city are generally identified as such on the flood insurance rate map prepared for the county by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (or the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development) and dated October 18, 1988. 
Floodproofing. Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
Floodproofing certificates. A form published by the Federal Emergency Management Agency that is used to certify that a building has been designed and constructed to be structurally dry floodproofed to the flood protection elevation. 
Flood protection elevation (FPE). The elevation of the base flood or one hundred-year frequency flood, plus one (1) foot of freeboard at any given location in the SFHA. 
Freeboard. An increment of elevation added to the base flood elevation to provide a factor of safety for uncertainties in calculations, unknown localized conditions, wave actions and unpredictable effects such as those caused by ice or debris jams. 
Hydrologic and hydraulic calculations. Engineering analysis which determine expected flood flows and flood elevations based on land characteristics and rainfall events. 
Letter of map amendment (LOMA) Official determination by FEMA that a specific structure is not in a one hundred-year flood zone; amends the effective flood hazard boundary map or FIRM. 
Letter of map revision (LOMR). Letter that revises base flood or one hundred-year frequency flood elevations, flood insurance rate zones, flood boundaries or floodways as shown on an effective FHBM or FIRM. 
Manufactured home. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designated for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term manufactured homes also includes park trailers, travel trailers and other similar vehicles placed on site for more than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days. 
Manufactured home park or subdivision. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
Mitigation. Mitigation includes those measures necessary to minimize the negative effects which floodplain development activities might have on the public health, safety, and welfare. Examples of mitigation include compensatory storage, soil erosion and sedimentation control, and channel restoration. 
NGVD. National geodetic vertical datum of 1929. Reference surface set by the national geodetic survey deduced from a continental adjustment of all existing adjustments in 1929. 
Public flood control project. A flood control project which will be operated and maintained by a public agency to reduce flood damages to existing buildings and structures which includes a hydrologic and hydraulic study of the existing and proposed conditions of the watershed. Nothing in this definition shall preclude the design, engineering, construction or financing, in whole or in part, of a flood control project by persons or parties who are not public agencies. 
Publicly navigable waters. All streams and lakes capable of being navigated by watercraft. 
Registered land surveyor. A land surveyor registered in the state under the Illinois Land Surveyors Act (Illinois Revised Statutes 1987, chapter 111, paragraphs 3201 through 3234). 
Registered professional engineer. An engineer registered in the state under The Illinois Professional Engineering Act (Illinois Revised Statutes 1987, chapter 111, paragraphs 5101 through 5137). 
Regulatory floodway. The channel, including on-stream lakes, and that portion of the floodplain adjacent to a stream or watercourse as designated by DWR, which is needed to store and convey the existing and anticipated future one hundred-year frequency flood discharge with no more than a one tenth (0.1) foot increase in stage due to the loss of flood conveyance or storage, and no more than a ten (10) percent increase in velocities. The regulatory floodways are designated for the West Branch Dupage River, Kress Creek, and Unnamed Tributary to Kress Creek on the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map prepared by FEMA (or Department of Housing and Urban Development) and dated August 19, 1987. The regulatory floodways for those parts of the unincorporated county that are within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city, that may be annexed into the city are designated for West Branch of DuPage River, Kress Creek and Unnamed Tributary to Kress Creek on the flood boundary and floodway map prepared by FEMA (or Department of Housing and Urban Development) and dated April 15, 1982. To locate the regulatory floodway boundary on any site, the regulatory floodway boundary should be scaled off the regulatory floodway map and located on a site plan, using reference marks common to both maps. Where interpretation is needed to determine the exact location of the regulatory floodway boundary, the division should be contacted for the interpretation. 
Repair, remodeling or maintenance. Development activities which do not result in any increases in the outside dimensions of a building or any changes to the dimensions of a structure. 
Retention/detention facility. A retention facility stores stormwater runoff without a gravity release. A detention facility provides for storage of stormwater runoff and controlled release of this runoff during and after a flood or storm. 
Riverine SFHA. Any SFHA subject to flooding from a river, creek, intermittent stream, ditch, on stream lake system or any other identified channel. This term does not include areas subject to flooding from lakes, ponding areas, areas of sheet flow, or other areas not subject to overbank flooding. 
Runoff. The water derived from melting snow or rain falling on the land surface, flowing over the surface of the ground or collected in channels or conduits. 
Sedimentation. The processes that deposit soils, debris, and other materials either on other ground surfaces or in bodies of water or watercourses. 
Special flood hazard area (SFHA). Any base flood area subject to flooding from a river, creek, intermittent stream, ditch, or any other identified channel or ponding and shown on a flood hazard boundary map or flood insurance rate map as zone A, AO, A1—30, AE, A99, AH, VO, V30, VE, V, M, or E. 
Structure. The results of a man-made change to the land constructed on or below the ground, including the construction, reconstruction or placement of a building or any addition to a building; installing a manufactured home on a site; preparing a site for a manufactured home or installing a travel trailer on a site for more than one hundred eighty (180) days. 
Substantial improvement. Any repair, reconstruction or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure either, (a) before the improvement or repair is started, or (b) if the structure has been damaged, and is being restored, before the damage occurred. For the purposes of this definition "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however, include either (1) any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions or (2) any alteration of a structure listed on the national register of historic places or a state inventory of historic places. 
Transition section. Reaches of the stream or floodway where water flows from a narrow cross-section to a wide cross-section or vice versa. 
(Ord. No. 2191, § 2, 8-21-89; Ord. No. 2271, § 2, 4-2-90)  
Sec. 4-45. - Enforcement official—Generally. 
(a)  The building commissioner shall be responsible for fulfilling all of the duties listed in section 4-46. 
(b)  To fulfill those duties, the building commissioner first should use the criteria listed in section 4-47, base flood elevations, to determine whether the development site is located within a floodplain. Once it has been determined that a site is located within a floodplain, the building commissioner must determine whether the development site is within a flood fringe, a regulatory floodway, or within a SFHA or flood plain on which no floodway has been identified. If the site is within a flood fringe, the building commissioner shall require that the minimum requirements of section 4-48 be met. If the site is within a floodway, the building commissioner shall require that the minimum requirements of section 4-49 be met. If the site is located within a SFHA or floodplain for which no detailed study has been completed and approved, the building commissioner shall require that the minimum requirements of section 4-50 be met. 
(c)  In addition, the general requirements of section 4-51 shall be met for all developments meeting the requirements of sections 4-48, 4-49 or 4-50. The building commissioner shall assure that all subdivision proposals shall meet the requirements of section 4-52. 
(d)  If a variance is to be granted for a proposal, the building commissioner shall review the requirements of section 4-53 to make sure they are met. In addition, the building commissioner shall complete all notification requirements. 
(e)  In order to assure that property owners obtain permits as required in this article, the building commissioner may take any and all actions as outlined in section 4-55. 
(Ord. No. 2191, § 2, 8-21-89; Ord. No. 2271, § 2, 4-2-90)  
Sec. 4-46. - Same—Duties. 
The building commissioner shall be responsible for the general administration and enforcement of this article which shall include the following: 
(1)  Determining the floodplain designation. Check all new development sites to determine whether they are in a special flood hazard area (SFHA). If they are in a SFHA, determine whether they are in a floodway, flood fringe or in a floodplain on which a detailed study has not been conducted which drains more than one (1) square mile. 
(2)  Professional engineer review. If the development site is within a floodway or in a floodplain on which a detailed study has not been conducted which drains more than one (1) square mile then the permit shall be referred to a registered professional engineer (P.E.) under the employ or contract of the city for review to ensure that the development meets the requirements of section 4-49. In the case of an appropriate use, the P.E. shall state in writing that the development meets the requirements of section 4-49. 
(3)  Dam safety requirements. Ensure that an DWR dam safety permit has been issued or a letter indicating no dam safety permit is required, if the proposed development activity includes construction of a dam as defined in section 4-44. Regulated dams may include weirs, restrictive culverts or impoundment structures. 
(4)  Other permit requirements. Ensure that any and all required federal, state and local permits are received prior to the issuance of a floodplain development permit. 
(5)  Plan review and permit issuance. Ensure that all development activities with in SFHAs of the jurisdiction of the city meet the requirements of this article and issue a floodplain development permit in accordance with the provisions of this article and other regulations of this community when the development meets the conditions of this article. 
(6)  Inspection review. Inspect all development projects before, during and after construction to assure proper elevation of the structure and to ensure they comply with the provisions of this article. 
(7)  Elevation and floodproofing certificates. Maintain in the permit files an elevation certificate certifying the elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) of a residential or nonresidential building or the elevation to which a nonresidential building has been floodproofed, using a floodproofing certificate, for all buildings subject to section 4-51 of this article for public inspection and provide copies of same. 
(8)  Records for public inspection. Maintain for public inspection and furnish upon request base flood data, SFHA and regulatory floodway maps, copies of federal or state permit documents, variance documentation, conditional letter of map revision, letter of map revision, letter of map amendment and "as-built" elevation and floodproofing or elevation and floodproofing certificates for all buildings constructed subject to this article. 
(9)  State permits. Ensure that construction authorization has been granted by the Illinois Division of Water Resources, for all development projects subject to sections 4-49 and 4-50 of this article, unless enforcement responsibility has been delegated to the city. Upon acceptance of this article by DWR and FEMA, responsibility is hereby delegated to the city as per 92 I1. Adm. Code 708 for construction in the regulatory floodway and floodplain when floodways have not been defined in sections 4-49 and 4-50 of this article. However, the following review approvals are not delegated to the city and shall require review or permits from DWR: 
a.  Organizations which are exempt from this article, as per the Illinois Revised Statutes; 
b.  Department of transportation projects, dams or impoundment structures as defined in section 4-44 and all other state, federal or local unit of government projects, including projects of the city and county, except for those projects meeting the requirements of section 4-49(7); 
c.  An engineer's determination that an existing bridge or culvert crossing is not a source of flood damage and the analysis indicating the proposed flood profile, per section 4-49(2); 
d.  An engineer's analysis of the flood profile due to section 4-49(2); 
e.  Alternative transition sections and hydraulically equivalent compensatory storage as indicated in section 4-49(2); 
f.  Permit issuance of structures within or over publicly navigable rivers, lakes and streams; 
g.  Any changes in the base flood elevation or floodway locations; and 
h.  Base flood elevation determinations where none now exist. 
(10)  Cooperation with other agencies. Cooperate with state and federal floodplain management agencies to improve base flood or one hundred-year frequency flood and floodway data and to improve the administration of this article. Submit data to DWR and the Federal Emergency Management Agency for proposed revisions of a regulatory map. Submit reports as required for the national flood insurance program. Notify the Federal Emergency Management Agency of any proposed amendments to this article. 
(11)  Promulgate regulations. Promulgate rules and regulations as necessary to administer and enforce the provisions of this article, subject however to the review and approval of DWR and FEMA for any article changes. 
(Ord. No. 2191, § 2, 8-21-89; Ord. No. 2271, § 2, 4-2-90)  
Sec. 4-47. - Base flood elevation. 
This article protection standard is based on the flood insurance study for the city. If a base flood elevation or one hundred-year frequency flood elevation is not available for a particular site, then the protection standard shall be according to the best existing data available in the Illinois State Water Survey's Floodplain Information Repository. When a party disagrees with the best available data, he/she may finance the detailed engineering study needed to replace existing data with better data and submit it to DWR and FEMA. 
(1)  The base flood or one hundred-year frequency flood elevation for the SFHAs of West Branch of DuPage River and Kress Creek and unnamed tributary to Kress Creek shall be as delineated on the one hundred-year flood profiles in the flood insurance study of the city prepared by the FEMA (or the Department of Housing and Urban Development) and dated August 19, 1987, and such amendments to such study and maps as may be prepared, from time to time. 
(2)  The base flood or one hundred-year frequency flood elevation for the SFHAs of those parts of the unincorporated county that are within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city or that may be annexed into the city shall be as delineated on the one hundred-year flood profiles in the flood insurance study of county prepared by FEMA (or the Department of Housing and Urban Development) and dated October 15, 1981, and such amendments or revisions to such study and maps as may be prepared, from time to time. 
(3)  The base flood or one hundred-year frequency flood elevation for each SFHA delineated as an "AH zone" or "AO zone" shall be that elevation delineated on the flood insurance rate map of the city. 
(4)  The base flood or one hundred-year frequency flood elevation for each of the remaining SFHAs delineated as an "A zone" on the flood insurance rate map of the city shall be according to the best existing data available in the Illinois State Water Survey Floodplain Information Repository. When no base flood or one hundred-year frequency flood elevation exists, the base flood or one hundred-year frequency flood elevation exists, the base flood or one hundred-year frequency flood elevation for a riverine SFHA shall be determined from a backwater model, such as HEC-11, WSP-2, or a dynamic model such as HIP. The flood flows used in the hydraulic models shall be obtained from a hydrologic model, such as HEC-1, TR-20, or HIP, or by techniques presented in various publications prepared by the United States Geological Survey for estimating peak flood discharges. Flood flows should be based on anticipated future land use conditions in the watershed as determined from adopted local and regional land use plans. Along any watercourses draining more than one (1) square mile, the above analysis shall be submitted to DWR for approval, once approved it must be submitted to the Illinois State Water Survey Floodplain Information Repository for filing. For a nonriverine SFHA, the base flood elevation shall be the historic flood of record, plus three (3) feet, unless calculated by a detailed engineering study and approved by the Illinois State Water Survey. 
(Ord. No. 2191, § 2, 8-21-89; Ord. No. 2271, § 2, 4-2-90)  
Sec. 4-48. - Occupation and use of flood fringes areas. 
Development in and/or filling of the flood fringe will be permitted if protection is provided against the base flood or one hundred-year frequency flood by proper elevation, and compensatory storage and other provisions of this article are met. No use will be permitted which adversely affects the capacity of drainage facilities or systems. Developments located within the flood fringe shall meet the requirements of this section, along with the requirements of section 4-51. 
(1)  Development permit; application; contents. 
a.  No person, firm, corporation, or governmental body not exempted by state law shall commence any development in the SFHA without first obtaining a development permit from the building commissioner. 
b.  Application for a development permit shall be made on a form provided by the building commissioner. The application shall be accompanied by drawings of the site, drawn to scale, showing property line dimensions and legal description for the property and sealed by a licensed engineer, architect or land surveyor; existing grade elevations in M.S.L., 1929 adj. datum or NGVD and all changes in grade resulting from excavation or filling; the location and dimensions of all buildings and additions to buildings. For all proposed buildings, the elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) and lowest adjacent grade shall be shown on the submitted plans and the development will be subject to the requirements of section 4-51 this article. 
c.  Upon receipt of a development permit application, the building commissioner shall compare the elevation of the site to the base flood or one hundred-year frequency flood elevation. Any development located on land that can be shown to have been higher than the base flood elevation as of the sites first flood insurance rate map identification is not in the SFHA and, therefore, not subject to the requirements of this article. The building official shall maintain documentation of the existing ground elevation at the development site and certification that this ground elevation existed prior to the date of the site's first flood insurance rate map identification. 
d.  The building commissioner shall be responsible for obtaining from the applicant, copies of all other local, state and federal permits, approvals or permit-not-required letters that may be required for this type of activity. The building commissioner shall not issue a permit unless all other local, state and federal permits have been obtained. 
(2)  Preventing increased damages. No development in the flood fringe shall create a threat to public health and safety. If fill is being used to elevate the site above the base flood or one hundred-year frequency flood elevation, the applicant shall submit sufficient data and obtain a letter of map revision (LOMR) from FEMA for the purpose of removing the site from the floodplain. 
(3)  Compensatory storage. Whenever any portion of a flood plain is authorized for use, the volume of space which will be occupied by the authorized fill or structure below the base flood or one hundred-year frequency flood elevation shall be compensated for and balanced by a hydraulically equivalent volume of excavation taken from below the base flood or one hundred-year frequency flood elevation. The excavation volume shall be at least equal to the volume of storage lost due to the fill or structure. In the case of streams and watercourses, such excavation shall be made opposite or adjacent to the areas so filled or occupied. All floodplain storage lost below the existing ten-year flood elevation shall be replaced below the proposed ten-year flood elevation. All floodplain storage lost above the existing ten-year flood elevation shall be replaced above the proposed ten-year flood elevation. All such excavations shall be constructed to drain freely and openly to the watercourse. 
(Ord. No. 2191, § 2, 8-21-89; Ord. No. 2271, § 2, 4-2-90)  
Sec. 4-49. - Occupation and use of identified floodways. 
This section applies to proposed development, redevelopment, site modification or building modification within a regulatory floodway. The regulatory floodway for West Branch DuPage River, Kress Creek, and unnamed tributary of Kress Creek shall be as delineated on the regulatory floodway maps designated by DWR according and referenced in section 4-44. Only those uses and structures will be permitted which meet the criteria in this section. All floodway modifications shall be the minimum necessary to accomplish the purpose of the project. The development shall also meet the requirements of section 4-51. 
(1)  Development permit. No person, firm, corporation or governmental body not exempted by state law shall commence any development in a flood way without first obtaining a development permit from the building commissioner. Application for a development permit shall be made on a form provided by the building commissioner. The application shall include the following information: 
a.  Name and address of applicant; 
b.  Site location (including legal description) of the property, drawn to scale, on the regulatory floodway map, indicating whether it is proposed to be in an incorporated or unincorporated area; 
c.  Name of stream or body of water affected; 
d.  Description of proposed activity; 
e.  Statement of purpose of proposed activity; 
f.  Anticipated dates of initiation and completion of activity; 
g.  Name and mailing address of the owner of the subject property if different from the applicant; 
h.  Signature of applicant or the applicant's agent; 
i.  If the applicant is a corporation, the president or other authorized officer shall sign the application form; 
j.  If the applicant is a partnership, each partner shall sign the application form; and 
k.  If the applicant is a land trust, the trust officer shall sign the name of the trustee by him (her) as trust officer. A disclosure affidavit shall be filed with the application, identifying each beneficiary of the trust by name and address and defining the respective interests therein. 
l.  Plans of the proposed activity shall be provided which include as a minimum: 
(i)  A vicinity map showing the site of the activity, name of the waterway, boundary lines, names of roads in the vicinity of the site, graphic or numerical scale, and north arrow; 
(ii)  A plan view of the project and engineering study reach showing existing and proposed conditions including principal dimensions of the structure or work, elevations in mean sea level (1929 adjustment) datum or NGVD, adjacent property lines and ownership, drainage and flood control easements, distance between proposed activity and navigation channel (when the proposed construction is near a commercially navigable body of water), regulatory floodway limit, floodplain limit, location and orientation of cross-sections, north arrow, and a graphic or numerical scale; 
(iii)  Cross-section views of the project and engineering study reach showing existing and proposed conditions including principal dimensions of the work as shown in plan view, existing and proposed elevations, normal water elevation, ten-year frequency flood elevation, one hundred-year frequency flood elevation, and graphic or numerical scales (horizontal and vertical); 
(iv)  A copy of the regulatory floodway map, marked to reflect any proposed change in the regulatory floodway location. 
m.  Any and all other local, state and federal permits or approval letters that may be required for this type of development. 
n.  Engineering calculations and supporting data shall be submitted showing that the proposed work will meet the permit criteria of (2), below. 
o.  If the regulatory floodway delineation, base flood or one hundred-year frequency flood elevation will change due to the proposed project, the application will not be considered complete until DWR has indicated conditional approval of the regulatory floodway map change. No structures may be built until a letter of map revision has been approved by FEMA. 
p.  The application for a structure shall be accompanied by drawings of the site, drawn to scale showing property line dimensions and existing ground elevations and all changes in grade resulting from any proposed excavation or filing, and floodplain and floodway limits; sealed by a registered professional engineer, licensed architect or registered land surveyor; the location and dimensions of all buildings and additions to buildings; and the elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) of all proposed buildings subject to the requirements of section 4-51 of this article. 
q.  If the proposed project involves a channel modification, the applicant shall submit the following information: 
(i)  A discussion of the purpose of and need for the proposed work; 
(ii)  A discussion of the feasibility of using alternative locations or methods to accomplish the purpose of the proposed work; 
(iii)  An analysis of the extent and performance of the impacts the project would have on the physical and biological conditions of the body of water affected; 
(iv)  An analysis of the extent and permanence of the impacts each feasible alternative identified in subsection (3)h., below, of this section would have on the physical and biological conditions of the body of water affected; 
The building commissioner shall be responsible for obtaining from the applicant copies of all other local, state, and federal permits and approvals that may be required for this type of activity. The building commissioner shall not issue the development permit unless all required federal and state permits have been obtained. A registered professional engineer, under the employ or contract of the city shall review and approve applications reviewed under this section. 
(2)  Preventing increased damages; list of appropriate uses. The only development in a floodway which will be allowed are appropriate uses, which will not cause a rise in the base flood elevation, and which will not create a damaging or potentially damaging increase in flood heights or velocity or be a threat to public health and safety. Only those appropriate uses listed in 92 Illinois Administrative Code 708 will be allowed. Appropriate uses do not include the construction or placement of any new structures, fill, building additions, buildings on stilts, excavation or channel modifications done to accommodate otherwise nonappropriate uses in the floodway, fencing (including landscaping or planting designed to act as a fence) and storage of materials except as specifically defined above as an appropriate use. The approved appropriate uses are as follows: 
a.  Flood control structures, dikes, dams and other public works or private improvements relating to the control of drainage, flooding, erosion, or water quality of habitat for fish and wildlife. 
b.  Structures or facilities relating to the use of, or requiring access to, the water or shoreline, such as pumping and treatment facilities, and facilities and improvements related to recreational boating, commercial shipping and other functionally water dependent uses; 
c.  Storm and sanitary sewer outfalls; 
d.  Underground and overhead utilities; 
e.  Recreational facilities such as playing fields and trail systems including any related fencing (at least fifty (50) percent open when viewed from any one direction) built parallel to the direction of flood flows, and including open air pavilions; 
f.  Detached garages, storage sheds, or other nonhabitable accessory structures without toilet facilities to existing buildings that will not block flood flows, nor reduce floodway storage; 
g.  Bridges, culverts, roadways, sidewalks, railways, runways and taxiways and any modification thereto; 
h.  Parking lots and any modifications thereto (where depth of flooding at the one hundred-year frequency flood event will not exceed one (1) foot) and aircraft parking aprons build at or below ground elevation; 
i.  Regulatory floodway regrading, without fill, to create a positive nonerosive slope toward a watercourse. 
j.  Floodproofing activities to protect previously existing lawful structures including the construction of watertight window wells, elevating structures, or construction of floodwalls around residential, commercial or industrial principal structures where the outside toe of the floodwall shall be no more than ten (10) feet away from the exterior wall of the existing structure, and which are not considered substantial improvements to the structure. 
k.  In the case of damaged or replacement buildings, reconstruction or repairs made to a building that are valued at less than fifty (50) percent of the market value of the building before it was damaged or replaced, and which do not increase the outside dimensions of the building. 
l.  Additions to existing buildings above the BFE that do not increase the building's foot print and are valued at less than fifty (50) percent of the market value of the building. 
(3)  Construction of appropriate use. Within the regulatory floodway as identified on the regulatory floodway maps designated by DWR, the construction of an appropriate use, will be considered permissible provided that the proposed project meets the following engineering criteria and is so stated in writing with supporting plans, calculations and data by a registered professional engineer and provided that any structure meets the protection requirements of section 4-51 of this article: 
a.  Preservation of flood conveyance so as not to increase flood stages upstream. For appropriate uses other than bridge or culvert crossings, on-stream structures or dams, all effective regulatory floodway conveyance lost due to the project will be replaced for all flood events up to and including the one hundred-year frequency flood. In calculating effective regulatory floodway conveyance, the following factors shall be taken into consideration: 
1.  Regulatory floodway conveyance, 
K = 1.486 / n A R 2/3 
where "n" is Manning's roughness factor, "A" is effective area of the cross-section, and "R" is the ratio of the area to the wetted perimeter. (See Open Channel Hydraulics, Ven Te Chow, 1959, McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York.) 
2.  The same Manning "n" value shall be used for both existing and proposed conditions unless a recorded maintenance agreement with a federal, state, or local unit of government can assure the proposed conditions will be maintained or the land cover is changing from a vegetative to a nonvegetative land cover. 
3.  Transition sections shall be provided and used in calculations of effective regulatory floodway conveyance. The following expansion and contraction ratios shall be used unless an applicant's engineer can prove to DWR through engineering calculations or model tests that more abrupt transitions may be used with the same efficiency: 
i.  When water is flowing from a narrow section to a wider section, the water should be assumed to expand no faster than at a rate of one (1) foot horizontal for every four (4) feet of the flooded stream's length. 
ii.  When water is flowing from a wide section to a narrow section, the water should be assumed to contract no faster than at a rate of one (1) foot horizontal for every one (1) foot of the flooded stream's length. 
iii.  When expanding or contracting flows in a vertical direction, a minimum of one (1) foot vertical transition for every ten (10) feet of stream length shall be used. 
iv.  Transition sections shall be provided between cross-sections with rapid expansions and contractions and when meeting the regulatory floodway delineation on adjacent properties. 
v.  All cross-sections used in the calculations shall be located perpendicular to flood flows. 
b.  Preservation of floodway storage so as not to increase downstream flooding. Compensatory storage shall be provided for any regulatory floodway storage lost due to the proposed work from the volume of fill or structures placed and the impact of any related flood control projects. Compensatory storage for fill or structures shall be equal to at least the volume of floodplain storage lost. Artificially created storage lost due to a reduction in head loss behind a bridge shall not be required to be replaced. The compensatory regulatory floodway storage shall be placed between the proposed normal water elevation and the proposed one hundred-year flood elevation. All regulatory floodway storage lost below the existing ten-year flood elevation shall be replaced below the proposed ten-year flood elevation. All regulatory floodway storage lost above the existing ten-year flood elevation shall be replaced above the proposed ten-year flood elevation. All such excavations shall be constructed to drain freely and openly to the watercourse. If the compensatory storage will not be placed at the location of the proposed construction, the applicant's engineer shall demonstrate to DWR through a determination of flood discharges and water surface elevations that the compensatory storage is hydraulically equivalent. Finally, there shall be no reduction in floodway surface area as a result of a floodway modification, unless such modification is necessary to reduce flooding at existing structure. 
c.  Preservation of floodway velocities so as not to increase stream erosion or flood heights. For all appropriate uses, except bridges or culverts or on stream structures, the proposed work will not result in an increase in the average channel or regulatory floodway velocities. However, in the case of bridges or culverts or on stream structures built for the purpose of backing up water in the stream during normal or flood flows, velocities may be increased at the structure site if scour, erosion and sedimentation will be avoided by the use of rip-rap or other design measures. 
d.  Construction of new bridges or culvert crossings and roadway/approaches. The proposed structure shall not result in an increase of upstream flood stages greater than one tenth (0.1) foot when compared to the existing conditions for all flood events up to and including the one hundred-year frequency event; or the upstream flood stage increases will be contained within the channel banks (or within existing vertical extensions of the channel banks) such as within the design protection grade of existing levees or floodwalls or within recorded flood easements. If the proposed construction will increase upstream flood stages greater than one tenth (0.1) feet, the developer must contact DWR, Dam Safety Section for a Dam Safety permit or waiver. 
1.  The engineering analysis of upstream flood stages must be calculated using the flood study flows, and corresponding flood elevations for tailwater conditions for the flood study specified in section 4-47 of this article. Culverts must be analyzed using the U.S. DOT, FHWA Hydraulic Chart for the Selection of Highway Culverts. Bridges must be analyzed using the U.S. DOT/Federal Highway Administration Hydraulics of Bridge Waterways calculation procedures. 
2.  Lost floodway storage must be compensated for per subsection (3) above. 
3.  Velocity increases must be mitigated per subsection (3) above. 
4.  If the crossing is proposed over a public water that is used for recreational or commercial navigation, a department of transportation permit must be received. 
5.  The hydraulic analysis for the backwater caused by the bridge showing the existing condition and proposed regulatory profile must be submitted to DWR for concurrence that a CLOMR is not required by subsection (2). 
6.  All excavations for the construction of the crossing shall be designed per section 4-49(3)h. 
e.  Reconstruction or modification of existing bridges, culverts, and approach roads. 
1.  The bridge or culvert and roadway approach reconstruction or modification shall be constructed with no more than one tenth (0.1) foot increase in backwater over the existing flood profile for all flood frequencies up to and including the one hundred-year event, if the existing structure is not a source of flood damage. 
2.  If the existing bridge or culvert and roadway approach is a source of flood damage to buildings or structures in the upstream floodplain, the applicant's engineer shall evaluate the feasibility of redesigning the structure to reduce the existing backwater, taking into consideration the effects on flood stages on upstream properties. 
3.  The determination as to whether or not the existing crossing is a source of flood damage and should be redesigned must be prepared in accordance with the Department of Transportation Rules 92 Illinois Administrative Code 708 (Floodway Construction in Northeastern Illinois) and submitted to the division for review and concurrence before a permit is issued. 
f.  On-stream structures built for purpose of backing up water. Any increase in upstream flood stages greater than zero (0.0) feet when compared to the existing conditions, for all flood events up to and including the one hundred-year frequency event shall be contained with the channel banks (or within existing vertical extensions of the channel banks) such as within the design protection grade of existing levees or floodwalls or within recorded flood easements. A permit or letter indicating a permit is not required must be obtained from DWR, dam safety section for a dam safety permit or waiver for any structure built for the purpose of backing up water in the stream during normal or flood flow. All dams and impoundment structures as defined in section 4-44 shall meet the permitting requirements of 92 Illinois Administrative Code 702 (Construction and Maintenance of Dams). If the proposed activity involves a modification of the channel or floodway to accommodate an impoundment, it shall be demonstrated that: 
1.  The impoundment is determined to be in the public interest by providing flood control, public recreation, or regional stormwater detention; 
2.  The impoundment will not prevent the migration of indigenous fish species, which require access to upstream areas as part of their life cycle, such as for spawning; 
3.  The impoundment will not cause or contribute to degraded water quality or habitat conditions. Impoundment design should include gradual bank slopes, appropriate bank stabilization measures, and a presedimentation basin. 
4.  A nonpoint source control plan has been implemented in the upstream watershed to control the effects of sediment runoff as well as minimize the input of nutrients, oil and grease, metals, and other pollutants. If there is more than one municipality in the upstream watershed, the municipality in which the impoundment is constructed should coordinate with upstream municipalities to ensure comprehensive watershed control; 
5.  The project otherwise complies with the requirements of section 4-49. 
g.  Floodproofing of existing habitable, residential and commercial structures. If construction is required beyond the outside dimensions of the existing building, the outside perimeter of the floodproofing construction shall be placed no further than ten (10) feet from the outside of the building. Compensation of lost storage and conveyance will not be required for floodproofing activities. 
h.  Excavation in floodway. When excavation is proposed in the design of bridges and culvert openings, including the modification to and replacement of existing bridge and culvert structures, or to compensate for lost conveyance for other appropriate uses, transition sections shall be provided for the excavation. The following expansion and contraction ratios shall be used unless an applicant's engineer can prove to DWR through engineering calculations or model tests that more abrupt transitions may be used with the same efficiency: 
1.  When water is flowing from a narrow section to a wider section, the water should be assumed to expand no faster than at a rate of one (1) foot horizontal for every four (4) feet of the flooded stream's length; 
2.  When water is flowing from a wide section to a narrow section, the water should be assumed to contract no faster than at a rate of one (1) foot horizontal for every one (1) foot of the flooded stream's length; and 
3.  When expanding or contracting flows in a vertical direction, a minimum of one (1) foot vertical transition for every ten (10) feet of stream length shall be used. 
4.  Erosion/scour protection shall be provided inland upstream and downstream of the transition sections. 
i.  Seeding and stabilization plan. For all activities located in a floodway, a seeding and stabilization plan shall be submitted by the applicant. 
j.  Public flood control projects. For public flood control projects, the permitting requirements of this section will be considered met if the applicant can demonstrate to DWR through hydraulic and hydrologic calculations that the proposed project will not singularly or cumulatively result in increased flood heights outside the project right-of-way or easements for all flood events up to and including the one hundred-year frequency event. 
k.  General criteria for analysis of flood elevations. 
1.  The flood profiles, flows and floodway data in the regulatory floodway study, referenced in section 4-47, must be used for analysis of the base conditions. If the study data appears to be in error or conditions have changed, DWR shall be contacted for approval and concurrence on the appropriate base conditions data to use. 
2.  If the one hundred-year regulatory floodway elevation at the site of the proposed construction is affected by backwater from a downstream receiving stream with a larger drainage area, the proposed construction shall be shown to meet the requirements of this section for the one hundred-year frequency flood elevations of the regulatory floodway conditions and conditions with the receiving stream at normal water elevations. 
3.  If the applicant learns from DWR, local governments, or a private owner that a downstream restrictive bridge or culvert is scheduled to be removed, reconstructed, modified, or a regional flood control project is scheduled to be built, removed, constructed or modified within the next five (5) years, the proposed construction shall be analyzed and shown to meet the requirements of this section for both the existing conditions and the expected flood profile conditions when the bridge, culvert or flood control project is built. 
l.  Conditional letter of map revision. If the appropriate use would result in a change in the regulatory floodway location or the one hundred-year frequency flood elevation, the applicant shall submit to DWR and to FEMA all the information, calculations and documents necessary to be issued a conditional regulatory floodway map revision and received from DWR a conditional approval of the regulatory floodway change before a permit is issued. However, the final regulatory floodway map will not be changed by DWR until as-built plans or record drawings are submitted and accepted by FEMA and DWR. In the case of non-government projects, the municipality in incorporated areas and the county in unincorporated areas shall concur with the proposed conditional regulatory floodway map revision before DWR approval can be given. No filling, grading, dredging or excavating shall take place until a conditional approval is issued. No further development activities shall take place until a final letter of map revision (LOMR) is issued by FEMA and DWR. 
m.  Professional engineer's supervision. All engineering analyses shall be performed by or under the supervision of a registered professional engineer. 
After receipt of conditional approval of the regulatory floodway change and issuance of a permit and a conditional letter of map revision, construction as necessary to change the regulatory floodway designation may proceed but no buildings or structures or other construction that is not an appropriate use may be placed in that area until the regulatory floodway map is changed and a final letter of map revision is received. The regulatory floodway map will be revised upon acceptance and concurrence by DWR and FEMA of the "as-built" plans. 
(4)  State review. For those projects listed below located in a regulatory floodway, the following criteria shall be submitted to DWR for their review and concurrence prior to the issuance of a permit: 
a.  DWR will review an engineer's analysis of the flood profile due to a proposed bridge pursuant to subsection (3)d., above. 
b.  DWR will review an engineer's determination that an existing bridge or culvert crossing is not a source of flood damage and the analysis indicating the proposed flood profile, pursuant to subsection (3)e., above. 
c.  The DWR will review alternative transition sections and hydraulically equivalent storage pursuant to subsection (3) a., b. and h. 
d.  The DWR will review and approve prior to the state of construction any department projects, dams (as defined in section 4-44) and all other state, federal or local units of government projects, including projects of the municipality or county. 
(5)  Other permits. In addition to the other requirements of this article, a development permit for a site located in a floodway shall not be issued unless the applicant first obtains a permit or written documentation that a permit is not required from DWR, issued pursuant to Illinois Revised Statutes, chapter 19, section 52 et seq. No permit from DWR shall be required if the division has delegated this responsibility to the city. 
(6)  Dam safety permits. Any work involving the construction, modification or removal of a dam as defined in section 4-44 per 92 Illinois Administrative Code 702 (Rules for Construction of Dams) shall obtain an Illinois Division of Water Resources Dam Safety permit prior to the start of construction of a dam. If the building commissioner finds a dam that does not have a DWR permit, the building commissioner shall immediately notify the dam safety section of the division of water resources. If the building commissioner finds a dam which is believed to be in unsafe condition, the building commissioner shall immediately notify the owner of the dam, DWR, Dam Safety Section in Springfield and the Illinois Emergency Services and Disaster Agency (ESDA). 
(7)  Activities that do not require registered professional engineer's review. The following activities may be permitted without a registered professional engineer's review. Such activities shall still meet the other requirements of this article, including the mitigation requirements. 
a.  Underground and overhead utilities that: 
1.  Do not result in any increase in existing ground elevations; 
2.  Do not require the placement of above-ground structures in the floodway; 
3.  In the case of underground stream crossings, the top of the pipe or encasement is buried a minimum of three (3) feet below the existing stream bed; and 
4.  In the case of overhead utilities, no supporting towers are placed in the watercourse and designed in such a fashion as not to catch debris. 
b.  Storm and sanitary sewer outfalls that: 
1.  Do not extend riverward or lakeward of the existing adjacent natural bank slope, and 
2.  Do not result in an increase in ground elevation, and 
3.  Are designed so as not to cause stream erosion at the outfall location. 
c.  Construction of sidewalks, athletic fields (excluding fences), properly anchored playground equipment and patios at grade. 
d.  Construction of shoreline and streambank protection that: 
1.  Does not exceed one thousand (1,000) feet in length. 
2.  Materials are not placed higher than the existing top of bank. 
3.  Materials are placed so as not to reduce the cross-sectional area of the stream channel or bank of the lake. 
e.  Temporary stream crossings in which: 
1.  The approach road will be five tenths (0.5) foot or less above natural grade. 
2.  The crossing will allow stream flow to pass without backing up the water above the stream bank vegetation line or above any drainage tile or outfall invert. 
3.  The top of the roadway fill in the channel will be at least two (2) feet below the top of the lowest bank. Any fill in the channel shall be non-erosive material, such as rip-rap or gravel. 
4.  All distributed stream banks will be seeded or otherwise stabilized as soon as possible upon installation and again upon removal of construction. 
5.  The access road and temporary crossings will be removed within one (1) year after authorization. 
(Ord. No. 2191, § 2, 8-21-89; Ord. No. 2271, § 2, 4-2-90)  
Sec. 4-50. - Occupation and use of SFHA areas where floodways are not identified. 
In SFHA floodplains, where no floodways have been identified and no base flood or one hundred-year frequency flood elevations have been established by FEMA, and draining more than a square mile, no development shall be permitted unless the cumulative effect of the proposals, when combined with all other existing and anticipated uses and structures, shall not significantly impede or increase the flow and passage of the floodwaters nor significantly increase the base flood or one hundred-year frequency flood elevation. 
(1)  Development permit. No person, firm, corporation, or governmental body, not exempted by state law, shall commence any development in an SFHA or floodplain without first obtaining a development permit from the building commissioner. Application for a development permit shall be made on a form provided by the building commissioner. The application shall be accompanied by drawings of the site, drawn to scale showing property line dimensions; and existing grade elevations and all changes in grade resulting from excavation or filling, sealed by a licensed engineer, architect or surveyor; the location and dimensions of all buildings and additions to buildings; and the elevator at the lowest floor (including basement) of all proposed buildings subject to the requirements of section 4-51 of this article. The application for a development permit shall also include the following information: 
a.  A detailed description of the proposed activity, its purpose, and intended use; 
b.  Site location (including legal description) of the property, drawn to scale, on the regulatory floodway maps, indicating whether it is proposed to be in an incorporated or unincorporated area; 
c.  Anticipated dates of initiation and completion of activity; 
d.  Plans of the proposed activity shall be provided which includes as a minimum: 
1.  A vicinity map showing the site of the activity, name of the waterway, boundary lines, names of roads in the vicinity of the site, graphic or numerical scale, and north arrow; 
2.  A plan view of the project and engineering study reach showing existing and proposed conditions including principal dimensions of the structure or work, elevations in mean sea level (1929 adjustment) datum or NGVD, adjacent property lines and ownership, drainage and flood control easements, distance between proposed activity and navigation channel (when the proposed construction is near a commercially navigable body of water), flood plain limit, location and orientation of cross-sections, north arrow, and a graphical or numerical scale; 
3.  Cross-section views of the project and engineering study reach showing existing and proposed conditions including principal dimensions of the work as shown in plan view, existing and proposed elevations, normal water elevation, ten-year frequency flood elevation, one hundred-year frequency flood elevation, and graphical or numerical scales (horizontal and vertical). 
e.  Engineering calculations and supporting data shall be submitted showing that the proposed work will meet the criteria of subsection (4), below. 
f.  Any and all other local, state and federal permits or approvals that may be required for this type of development. 
(2)  Elevation information. Based on the best available existing data according to the Illinois State Water Survey's floodplain information repository, the building commissioner shall compare the elevation of the site to the base flood or one hundred-year frequency flood elevation. Should no elevation information exist for the site, the developer's engineer shall calculate the elevation according to section 4-47(4). Any development located on land that can be shown to have been higher than the base flood elevation as of the sites first flood insurance rate map identification is not in the SFHA and, therefore, not subject to the requirements of this article. The building official shall maintain documentation of the existing ground elevation at the development site and certification that this ground elevation existed prior to the date of the site's first flood insurance rate map identification. 
(3)  Other required documents. The building commissioner shall be responsible for obtaining from the applicant copies of all other local, state, and federal permits, approvals or permit-not-required letters that may be required for this type of activity. The building commissioner shall not issue the development permit unless all required local, state and federal permits have been obtained. 
(4)  Preventing increased damages. No development in the SFHA, where a floodway has not been determined shall create a damaging or potentially damaging increase in flood heights or velocity or threat to public health, safety and welfare. Within all riverine SFHA's where the floodway has not been determined, the following standards shall apply: 
a.  The developer shall have a registered professional engineer state in writing and show through supporting plans, calculations, and data that the project meets the engineering requirements of section 4-49(3)a. through 1. for the entire floodplain as calculated under the provisions of section 4-47(4) of this article. As an alternative, the developer should have an engineering study performed to determine a floodway and submit that engineering study to DWR for acceptance as a regulatory floodway. Upon acceptance of their floodway by the department, the developer shall then demonstrate that the project meets the requirements of section 4-49 for the regulatory floodway. The floodway shall be defined according to the definition in section 4-44 of this article. 
b.  A development permit shall not be issued unless the applicant first obtains a permit from DWR or written documentation that a permit is not required from DWR. 
c.  No permit from DWR shall be required if the division has delegated permit responsibility to the city per 92 Illinois Administrative Code, Part 708 for regulatory floodways, per DWR's statewide permit entitled "Construction in Flood Plains with No Designated Floodways in Northeastern Illinois." 
d.  Dam safety permits. Any work involving the construction modification or removal of a dam or an on-stream structure to impound water as defined in section 4-44 shall obtain an Illinois Division of Water Resources dam safety permit or letter indicating a permit is not required prior to the start of construction of a dam. If the building commissioner finds a dam that does not have a DWR permit, the building commissioner shall immediately notify the dam safety section of the division of water resources. If the building commissioner finds a dam which is believed to be in unsafe condition, the building commissioner shall immediately notify the owner of the dam and the Illinois Emergency Services and District Agency (ESDA), and the DWR, Dam Safety Section, in Springfield. 
e.  The following activities may be permitted without a registered professional engineer's review or calculation of a base flood elevation and regulatory floodway. Such activities shall still meet the other requirements of this article. 
1.  Underground and overhead utilities that: 
a.  Do not result in any increase in existing ground elevations; 
b.  Do not require the placement of above-ground structures in the floodway; 
c.  In the case of underground stream crossings, the top of the pipe or encasement is buried a minimum of three (3) feet below the existing stream bed; and 
d.  In the case of overhead utilities, no supporting towers are placed in the watercourse and are designed in such a fashion as not to catch debris. 
2.  Storm and sanitary outfalls that: 
a.  Do not extend riverward or lakeward of the existing adjacent natural bank slope and, 
b.  Do not result in an increase in ground elevation, and 
c.  Are designed so as not to cause stream bank erosion at the outfall location. 
3.  Construction of shoreline and streambed protection that: 
a.  Does not exceed one thousand (1,000) feet in length or two (2) cubic yards per lineal foot of streambed. 
b.  Materials are not placed higher than the existing top of bank. 
c.  Materials are placed so as not to reduce the cross-sectional area of the stream channel by more than ten (10) percent. 
4.  Temporary stream crossings in which: 
a.  The approach roads will be five tenths (0.5) foot or less above natural grade. 
b.  The crossing will allow stream flow to pass without backing up the water above the stream bank vegetation line or above any drainage tile or outfall invert. 
c.  The top of the roadway fill in the channel will be at least two (2) feet below the top of the lowest bank. 
d.  All disturbed stream banks will be seeded or otherwise stabilized as soon as possible upon installation and again upon removal of construction. 
e.  The access road and temporary crossings will be removed within one (1) year after authorization. 
5.  The construction of light poles, sign posts and similar structures; 
6.  The construction of sidewalks, driveways, athletic field (excluding fences) patios and similar surfaces which are built at grade; 
7.  The construction of properly anchored, unwalled, open structures such as playground equipment, pavilions, and carports built at or below existing grade that would not obstruct the flow of floodwaters; 
8.  The placement of properly anchored buildings not exceeding seventy (70) square feet in size, nor ten (10) feet in any one (1) dimension (e.g., animal shelters and tool sheds); 
9.  The construction of additions to existing buildings which do not increase the first floor area by more than twenty (20) percent, which are located on the upstream or downstream side of the existing building, and which do extend beyond the sides of the existing building that are parallel to the flow of floodwaters; 
10.  Minor maintenance dredging of a stream channel where: 
a.  The affected length of stream is less than one thousand (1,000) feet. 
b.  The work is confined to reestablishing flows in natural stream channels; or 
c.  The cross-sectional area of the dredged channel conforms to that of the natural channel upstream and downstream of the site. 
f.  The flood-carrying capacity within any altered or relocated watercourse shall be maintained. 
(5)  Compensatory storage. Whenever any portion of a floodplain is authorized for use, the volume of space which will be occupied by the authorized fill or structure below the base flood or one hundred-year frequency flood elevation shall be compensated for and balanced by a hydraulically equivalent volume of excavation taken from below the base flood or one hundred-year frequency flood elevation. The excavation volume shall be at least equal to the volume of storage lost due to the fill or structure. In the case of streams and watercourse, such excavation shall be made opposite or adjacent to the areas so filled or occupied. All floodplain storage lost below the existing ten-year elevation shall be replaced below the proposed ten-year flood elevation. All floodplain storage lost above the existing ten-year flood elevation shall be replaced above the proposed ten-year flood elevation. All such excavations shall be constructed to drain freely and openly to the watercourse. 
(Ord. No. 2191, § 2, 8-21-89; Ord. No. 2271, § 2, 4-2-90)  
Sec. 4-51. - Permitting requirements for all floodplain areas. 
In addition to the requirements found in sections 4-48, 4-49 and 4-50 for development in flood fringes, regulatory floodways, and SFHA or floodplains where no floodways have been identified (zones A, AO, AH, AE, A1—A30, A99, VO, V1—30, VE, V, M or E), the following requirements shall be met: 
(1)  Public health standards. 
a.  No developments in the SFHA shall include locating or storing chemicals, explosives, buoyant materials, animal wastes, fertilizers, flammable liquids, pollutants, or other hazardous or toxic materials below the FPE. 
b.  New and replacement water supply systems, wells, sanitary sewer lines and on-site waste disposal systems may be permitted providing all manholes or other above-ground openings located below the FPE are watertight. 
(2)  Carrying capacity and notification. For all projects involving channel modification, fill, or stream maintenance (including levees), the flood-carrying capacity of the watercourse shall be maintained. In addition, the city shall notify adjacent communities in writing thirty (30) days prior to the issuance of a permit for the alteration or relocation of the watercourse. 
(3)  Protecting buildings. All buildings located within a one hundred-year floodplain, also known as a SFHA, shall be protected from flood damage below the flood protection elevation. However, existing buildings located within a regulatory floodway shall also meet the more restrictive appropriate use standards included in section 4-49. This building protection criteria applies to the following situation: 
a.  Construction or placement of a new building. 
b.  A structural alteration to an existing building that either increases the first floor area by more than twenty (20) percent or the building's market value by more than fifty (50) percent. 
c.  Installing a manufactured home on a new site or a new manufacturing home on an existing site. This building protection requirements does not apply to returning a mobile home to the same site it lawfully occupied before it was removed to avoid flood damage; and 
d.  Installing a travel trailer on a site for more than one hundred eighty (180) days. 
(4)  Methods of protection. This building protection requirement may be met by one (1) of the following methods: 
a.  A residential or nonresidential building, when allowed, may be constructed on permanent land fill in accordance with the following: 
1.  The lowest floor, (including basement) shall be at least one (1) foot above the flood protection elevation. 
2.  The fill shall be placed in layers no greater than one (1) foot deep before compaction and should extend at least ten (10) feet beyond the foundation of the building before sloping below the flood protection elevation. The top of the fill shall be above the flood protection elevation. However, the ten (10) foot minimum may be waived if a structural engineer certifies an alternative method to protect the building from damages due to hydrostatic pressures. The fill shall be protected against erosion and scour. The fill shall not adversely effect the flow or surface drainage from or onto neighboring properties. 
b.  A residential or nonresidential building may be elevated in accordance with the following: 
1.  The building or improvements shall be elevated on crawl space, stilts, piles, walls, or other foundation that is permanently open to floodwaters and not subject to damage by hydrostatic pressures of the base flood or one hundred-year frequency flood. The permanent openings shall be no more than one (1) foot above grade, and consists of a minimum of two (2) openings. The openings must have a total net area of not less than one (1) square inch for every one (1) square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding below the base flood elevation. 
2.  The foundation and supporting members shall be anchored and aligned in relation to flood flows and adjoining structures so as to minimize exposure to known hydrodynamic forces such as current, waves, ice and floating debris. 
3.  All areas below the flood protection elevation shall be constructed of materials resistant to flood damage. The lowest flood (including basement) and all electrical, heating, ventilating, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and utility meters shall be located at least one (1) foot above the flood protection elevation. Water and sewer pipes, electrical and telephone lines, submersible pumps, and other waterproofed service facilities may be located below the flood protection elevation. 
4.  No area below the flood protection elevation shall be used for storage of items or materials. 
5.  Manufactured homes and travel trailers to be installed on a site for more than one hundred eighty (180) days, shall be elevated to or above the flood protection elevation; and, shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement by being tied down in accordance with the Rules and Regulations for the Illinois Mobile Home Tie-Down Act issued pursuant to 77 Illinois Administrative Code 870. 
c.  Only a nonresidential building may be structurally dry floodproofed (in lieu of elevation) provided that a registered professional engineer shall certify that the building has been structurally dry floodproofed below the flood protection elevation, the structure and attendant utility facilities are watertight and capable of resisting the effects of the base flood or one hundred-year frequency flood. The building design shall take into account flood velocities, duration, rate of rise, hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces, the effects of buoyancy, and impacts from debris or ice. Floodproofing measures shall be operable without human intervention and without an outside source of electricity (levees, berms, floodwalls and similar works are not considered floodproofing for the purpose of this subsection). 
(5)  Nonconforming structures located in a regulatory floodway may remain in use, but may not be enlarged, replaced or structurally altered. A nonconforming structure damaged by flood, fire, wind or other natural or man-made disaster may be restored unless the damage exceeds fifty (50) percent of its market value before it was damaged, in which case it shall conform to this article. 
(Ord. No. 2191, § 2, 8-21-89; Ord. No. 2271, § 2, 4-2-90)  
Sec. 4-52. - Other development requirements. 
(a)  The city council shall take into account flood hazards, to the extent that they are known in all official actions related to land management, use and development. 
(b)  New subdivisions, manufactured home parks, annexation agreements, and planned unit developments (PUDs) within the SFHA shall be reviewed to assure that the proposed developments are consistent with sections 4-48, 4-49, 4-50, and 4-51 of this article and the need to minimize flood damage. Plats or plans for new subdivisions, mobile home parks and planned unit developments (PUDs) shall include a signed statement by a registered professional engineer that the plat or plans account for changes in the drainage of surface waters in accordance with the Plat Act (Illinois Revised Statutes, chapter 109, section 2). 
(c)  Proposals for new subdivisions, manufactured home parks, travel trailer parks, planned unit developments (PUDs) and additions to manufactured home parks and additions to subdivisions shall include base flood or one hundred-year frequency flood elevation data and floodway delineations. Where this information is not available from an existing study filed with the state water survey, the applicant's engineer shall be responsible for calculating the base flood or one hundred-year frequency flood elevation per section 4-47(4) and the floodway delineation per the definition in section 4-44 and submitting it to the state water survey and DWR for review and approval as best available regulatory data. 
(d)  Streets, blocks, lots, parks and other public grounds shall be located and laid out in such a manner as to preserve and utilize natural streams and channels. Wherever possible, the floodplains shall be included within parks or other public grounds. 
(e)  The city council shall not approve any planned unit development (PUD) or plat of subdivision located outside the corporate limits unless such agreement or plat is in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2191, § 2, 8-21-89; Ord. No. 2271, § 2, 4-2-90)  
Sec. 4-53. - Variances. 
(a)  No variances shall be granted to any development located in a regulatory floodway as defined in section 4-44. However, when a development proposal is located outside of a regulatory floodway, and whenever the standards of this article place undue hardship on a specific development proposal, the applicant may apply to the building commissioner for a variance. The building commissioner shall review the applicant's request for a variance and shall submit its recommendation to the city council. 
(b)  No variance shall be granted unless the applicant demonstrates that: 
(1)  The development activity cannot be located outside the SFHA; 
(2)  An exceptional hardship would result if the variance were not granted; 
(3)  The relief requested is the minimum necessary; 
(4)  There will be no additional threat to public health, safety, or creation of a nuisance; 
(5)  There will be no additional public expense for flood protection, rescue or relief operations, policing, or repairs to roads, utilities, or other public facilities; 
(6)  The provisions of sections 4-48(2) and 4-50(4) shall still be met; 
(7)  The activity is not in a regulatory floodway; 
(c)  The building commissioner shall notify an applicant in writing that a variance from the requirements of section 4-51 that would lessen the degree of protection to a building will: 
(1)  Result [in] increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for one hundred dollars ($100.00) of insurance coverage; 
(2)  Increase the risks to life and property; and 
(3)  Require that the applicant proceed with knowledge of these risks and that he will acknowledge in writing that he assumes the risk and liability. 
(d)  Variances requested in connection with restoration of a site or building listed on the national register of historical places or documented as worthy of preservation by the Illinois Historic Preservation Agency may be granted using criteria more permissive than the requirements of sections 4-52(b) and 4-52(c). 
(Ord. No. 2191, § 2, 8-21-89; Ord. No. 2271, § 2, 4-2-90)  
Sec. 4-54. - Disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on available information derived from engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger floods may occur or flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This article does not imply that development, either inside or outside of the SFHA, will be free from flooding or damage. This article does not create liability on the part of the city or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damage that results from reliance on this article or any administrative decision made lawfully thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 2191, § 2, 8-21-89; Ord. No. 2271, § 2, 4-2-90)  
Sec. 4-55. - Penalty. 
(a)  Failure to comply with the requirements of a permit or conditions of a variance shall be deemed to be a violation of this article. Upon due investigation, the building commissioner may determine that a violation of the minimum standards of this article exist. The building commissioner shall notify the owner in writing of such violation. 
(b)  If such owner fails after ten (10) days notice to correct the violation: 
(1)  The city may make application to the circuit court for an injunction requiring conformance with this article or make such other order as the court deems necessary to secure compliance with the article. 
(2)  Any person who violates this article shall upon conviction thereof, be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) or more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each offense. 
(3)  A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. 
(4)  The city may record a notice of violation on the title to the property. 
(c)  The building commissioner shall inform the owner that any such violation is considered a willful act to increase flood damages and, therefore may cause coverage by a standard flood insurance policy to be suspended. 
(d)  Nothing herein shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful action to prevent or remedy any violations. All costs connected therewith shall accrue to the person or persons responsible. 
(Ord. No. 2191, § 2, 8-21-89; Ord. No. 2271, § 2, 4-2-90)  
Sec. 4-56. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. Where this article and other ordinances, easements, covenants, or deed restrictions conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. This article is intended to repeal the original ordinance or resolution which was adopted to meet the National Flood Insurance Program regulations, but is not intended to repeal the resolution which the city passed in order to establish initial eligibility for the program. 
(Ord. No. 2191, § 2, 8-21-89; Ord. No. 2271, § 2, 4-2-90)  
Secs. 4-57—4-69. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - STREET LIGHTING REGULATIONS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1401, § 1, adopted March 5, 1979, specifically amended the Code by adding Art. IV, §§ 4-70—4-74, as herein set out. 
 
Sec. 4-70. - Street lighting installations initiated or authorized by corporate authorities; prohibitions. 
All street lighting installations shall be made in accordance with the provisions hereof. No person, firm or corporation shall construct, install, remove, change, reconstruct, damage or otherwise alter any street lighting improvement within the right-of-way of any public street, within the right-of-way of any land dedicated for public street or other public purposes, without permission being granted by the city, or without permission being given pursuant to some ordinance or other authorization provided by said city. No person, firm or corporation shall maintain any installation made in violation of the provisions hereof in the absence of any acceptance or approval thereof by said city, and such installation shall be removed promptly by the person, firm or corporation making same when demanded to do so by the city. 
(Ord. No. 1401, § 1, 3-5-79)  
Sec. 4-71. - General provisions regarding the initiation and making of street lighting improvements by private parties. 
The following regulations shall govern the installation of street lighting improvements: 
(1)  Five (5) copies of the street lighting plans shall be submitted to the city engineer for approval; three (3) of which will be returned, stamped with the approval of the city engineer. One approved copy shall be made available to the construction crews; and one copy to the field inspector, at the job site during the installation. Upon completion of the work, a marked set of plans, showing the improvements as built, shall be supplied to the city, by the private party's engineer. 
(2)  The private party's engineer shall be responsible for coordinating the work, correcting faulty construction and consulting with the city engineer on all matters concerning the improvement. 
(3)  The private party and/or his engineer shall familiarize himself with the existing improvements in the areas where underground work is proposed, and shall direct its contractor to exercise due precaution to protect such facilities. All parkways or other areas disturbed by the contractor shall be restored to the condition they were in prior to commencement of the work. 
(4)  Notification of the commencement of construction must be given to the city engineer twenty-four (24) hours prior to such commencement, and all work must meet his approval in accordance with ordinances, rules and regulations of the city. Construction shall not begin until all other public improvements and buildings in the subdivision are completed, or at such other time as directed by the city engineer. 
(5)  A minimum easement of ten (10) feet shall be granted to the city wherever cables are planned to cross privately owned land. A properly recorded document granting this easement shall be furnished to the city, and shall be approved by the city attorney. 
(6)  In any case where physical condition or some circumstance renders it impractical to provide any lamp, pole or bracket arm of the exact size specified herein, or would defeat the objectives to be served, such variance in size shall be allowed as will be practical or as will fulfill such objectives. The variance must be approved by the city engineer. 
(Ord. No. 1401, § 1, 3-5-79)  
Sec. 4-72. - Regulations applicable to all street lighting installations. 
The following regulations shall apply to all street lighting installations: 
(1)  Spacing. Space between street lights on one side of a street shall not exceed: 
Feet 
Collector streets ..... 250 
Noncollector streets: 
Residential areas ..... 400 
Commercial areas ..... 320 
Industrial areas ..... 480 
(2)  Location. There shall be at least one luminaire at each street intersection, curve and cul-de-sac; provided, however, if physical conditions renders it impractical or undesirable to be served to install or maintain a luminaire at such location, or, if it will serve no useful purpose, then such installation may be waived, or relocated by the city engineer. 
Street lights shall be installed on both side of streets so that each luminaire shall be located at one-half (½) the distance between luminaires on the opposite side of the street. 
(3)  Light distribution. I.E.S. Type II, III or IV distribution, as approved by the city engineer, shall be used, except at corner locations where I.E.S. Type II 4-way shall be used. I.E.S. Type V and I.E.S. Type IV shall be used wherever the city engineer designates a special design. 
(4)  Individual control. The photoelectric control shall be mounted on top of the pole, or directly on the unit. 
(5)  Group control. Group control shall not exceed four (4) units unless a relay is used. The photoelectric control shall be mounted on the pole nearest the power supply. 
(6)  Length of circuit. No circuit shall be greater than one thousand (1,000) feet from the power supply to the most distant luminaire in the circuit. 
(7)  Line drop. Voltage drop shall not be greater than three (3) per cent from the power supply to the most distant luminaire. 
(8)  Power supply location. Connection to the power supply shall be made as near to the secondary supply of the distribution transformer as practical. 
(9)  Cable, power supply to pole base. All cables used as a part of street lighting installation shall be placed underground, and shall be in a dedicated right-of-way or in an easement dedicated to the city, as herein provided. 
(10)  Conduit. All driveways, streets and sidewalk crossovers shall have two-inch galvanized rigid steel conduit as raceway for the underground cable. All underground conduits shall be terminated with insulated bushings and sealed to prevent the entrance of debris. All conduit ends shall be reamed with a flaring tool to remove sharp edges that could cause damage to the wire insulation. 
(11)  Underground cable. All underground cable shall be buried to a minimum depth of twenty-four (24) inches below the normal finished grade, and shall be surrounded in the trench by at least three (3) inches of new clean sand. 
(12)  Underground cable location. Underground cable shall be run in a trench one foot from the back edge or curb. The trench shall not be run under a sidewalk. 
(Ord. No. 1401, § 1, 3-5-79)  
Sec. 4-73. - Materials and equipment. 
The materials and equipment to be incorporated in street lighting installations shall be as listed below or the equivalent: 
(a)  Residential streets: 
(1)  Luminaire. McGraw Edison, Traditionaire, or equal, mercury vapor, with polycarbonate refractor panels, post top mounted. 
(2)  Pole. Pfaff & Kendall, #U7412/DB/HH brushed aluminum or equal, butt base with standard handhold, and mounting height of twelve (12) feet. Pole butts shall be set in a twelve-inch diameter hole three (3) feet deep, backfilled with compacted limestone screenings. 
(3)  Lamp. Westinghouse Mercury Vapor, or equal, ANSI designation H39KC-175/R, 175 watts, rated life 24,000 hours. 
(4)  Cable, power supply to luminaire. Both conductors shall be single conductor, underground feeder and branch circuit cable, Type UF, insulated copper conductor, 600 volts direct burial cable, a minimum AWG, size 12 or of the size required based on the use of 175 watt luminaires. 
(b)  Commercial and industrial streets: 
(1)  Luminaire. McGraw Edison #CS12521-120 VP-BZ, or equal. 
(2)  Pole and bracket. McGraw Edison #PA3006-(1) P-BZ, or equal, square nontapered extruded aluminum poles, anchor base type. Poles shall be mounted on a concrete base twenty-four (24) inches in diameter and four (4) to six (6) feet deep. 
(3)  Lamps. Westinghouse Catalogue #C250S50, General Electric #LU250/BU/S, or equal. 
(4)  Cable, power supply to luminaire. Shall be the same as required for residential street lighting, except that conductor size shall be as required. 
(Ord. No. 1401, § 1, 3-5-79)  
Sec. 4-74. - Determinations, variances, appeals, etc. 
Whenever the equivalent or equal is used, the city engineer shall determine whether it is the equivalent or equal to that specified as aforesaid. The decision made by the city engineer shall, on request, be reduced to writing and be signed by him. A signed copy, on request, shall be furnished to any person affected thereby. Within seven (7) days after requesting the copy such person may, by notice in writing, signed and filed with the city clerk, appeal such decision to the city council who shall then make a full and final determination of the issue involved. The city council shall have the power to review any decision by the city engineer under this article and determine the correctness of his decision. In case of undue hardship, or undesirable [effects] if this [article's requirements are enforced], the city council shall have the power to authorize variances hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 1401, § 1, 3-5-79)  
Secs. 4-75—4-89. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - LANDMARK AND HISTORIC DISTRICT REGULATIONS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Historical preservation commission, § 2-278 et seq.; Turner Junction Historic District, § 7-51 et seq. 
 
Sec. 4-90. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to promote the educational, cultural, economic and general welfare of the community by: 
(1)  Providing a mechanism to identify and preserve the special distinctive historic, aesthetic, architectural, and/or landscaping characteristics of West Chicago, which represent elements of the city's cultural, social, economic, political and architectural history. 
(2)  Fostering civic pride in the beauty and noble accomplishment of the past as presented in West Chicago's landmarks and historic districts. 
(3)  Stabilizing and improving the property value of West Chicago's landmarks and historic districts, and encouraging continued utilization of such properties and their adaptation for current use. 
(4)  Protecting and enhancing the attractiveness of the city to its homebuyers, homeowners, residents, tourists, visitors and shoppers, and thereby, supporting and promoting business, commerce, industry and providing economic benefit to the city. 
(5)  Fostering and encouraging preservation, restoration and historically sensitive rehabilitation. 
(6)  Ensuring that all of the economic benefits resulting from preservation, including tax incentives, new jobs and renewed buildings are available to our citizens. 
(7)  Encouraging new or rehabilitated buildings and developments that will be harmonious in scale, color, form, texture, and materials with existing historic structures, sites and neighborhoods. 
(Ord. No. 2365, § 3, 11-5-90)  
Sec. 4-91. - Definitions. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
Alteration. Any act or process which changes one or more of the "exterior architectural features" of a structure. 
Area. A specific geographic division of the city. 
Certificate of appropriateness. A certificate issued by the commission authorizing the performance of alterations, construction and demolition on property and improvements which have been designated for preservation. 
Commission. West Chicago Historical Preservation Commission, as appointed and defined in sections 2-278 to 2-283 of this Code. 
Commissioners. Members of the West Chicago Historical Preservation Commission. 
Construction. Any act or process whereby a new improvement is built, an existing improvement is expanded in size or area, or a demolished improvement is rebuilt. 
Council. West Chicago City Council. 
Demolition. Any act or process which destroys in part, or in whole, a designated landmark or an improvement within a designated historic district. 
Design criteria. A standard that will preserve the historic and architectural character of an improvement or area. 
Exterior architectural appearance. The architectural character and general composition of the exterior of an improvement, including but not limited to the kind, color and/or texture of the building material and the type, design and character of all windows, doors, light fixtures, ornamental details, signs and appurtenant elements. 
Historic district. An area designated as a "historic district" by ordinance of the city council and which may contain within definable geographic boundaries one (1) or more landmarks and which may have within its boundaries other properties or improvements which, not of such historic and/or architectural significance to be designated as landmarks, nevertheless contribute to the overall visual characteristics of the landmark or landmarks located within the district. 
Improvement. Any building, structure, work of art, place, parking facility, fence, gate, wall or other object constituting a physical addition to real property, or any part of such addition. 
Landmark. A property or structure designated as a "landmark" by ordinance of the city council according to criteria and pursuant to procedures prescribed herein and which is therefore worthy of rehabilitation, restoration, and preservation because of its historic and/or architectural significance to the city. 
Landscape. A significant natural feature or group of natural features or a combination of natural features and buildings or improvements. 
Owner of record. The person or corporation or other legal entity whose name appears on the records of the county recorder of deeds, or address as shown on the tax assessor's rolls. 
Property. A distinct parcel of real property which is assigned a separate tax parcel number by the county supervisor of assessments. 
Restoration. The process of returning a property to a state of utility, through repair or alteration, which makes possible an efficient contemporary use while preserving portions and features of the property which are significant to its historic, architectural and cultural values. 
Relocation. Any removal of an improvement on site to another site or any relocation of an improvement on its site, or any portion of an improvement. 
Repair. Any change that does not require a building permit that is not construction, removal or alteration, where the purpose and effect of such work or replacement is to correct any deterioration or decay of or a damage to such improvement or any part thereof and to restore the same, as nearly as may be practicable to its condition prior to the occurrence of such deterioration, decay or damage. 
Structure. See "improvement". 
(Ord. No. 2365, § 3, 11-5-90; Ord. No. 2749, §§ 1, 2, 4-4-94)  
Sec. 4-92. - Landmark and historic district designation—Standards. 
(a)  Landmarks. The commission shall consider the following in reviewing property and improvements for designation as landmarks: 
(1)  Significant value as part of the historical, cultural, artistic, social, ethnic or other heritage of the nation, state or community. 
(2)  Its location as a site of a significant local, county, state or national event that may be likely to yield historical information. 
(3)  Significant association with an important person or event in national, state or local history. 
(4)  Representative of the distinguishing characteristics of an architectural type inherently valuable for the study of a period, style, craftsmanship, method of construction or use of indigenous materials and which may render it architecturally significant. 
(5)  Notable work of master builder, designer, architect or artist whose individual genius has influenced an era. 
(6)  Identifiable as an established and familiar visual feature in the community owning to its unique location or physical characteristics. 
(7)  Any improvement that meets one or more of the above criteria shall also have sufficient integrity of location, design, materials, and workmanship to make it worthy of preservation or restoration. 
(b)  Historic district. The commission shall consider the following in reviewing property and improvements for designation as historical districts: 
(1)  Any of the standards listed in subsection (a). 
(2)  Homogeneity of architectural design or dates of construction throughout the area. 
(3)  Identifiable by clear and distinctive boundaries. 
(4)  Repetition of distinguishing architectural or land use characteristics throughout the area. 
(Ord. No. 2365, § 3, 11-5-90)  
Sec. 4-93. - Same—Procedures. 
(a)  Application. 
(1)  The commission by a three-fifths (3/5) vote of all members, or any person, group of persons or association, may apply for a landmark or historic district designation for property and improvements located within the corporate limits of the city. 
(2)  Any landmark or historic district nominations shall be made to the community development department on forms provided by the city. The application shall include or be accompanied by the following: 
a.  The name and address, as shown on the tax assessor's rolls, of the owner of the property proposed for designation. 
b.  The legal description and common street address of the property proposed for designation. 
c.  A map delineating the boundaries and location of the property proposed for designation. 
d.  A written statement describing the property and setting forth reasons in support of the proposed designation. 
e.  An indication of whether or not the property owner consents to the proposed designation. 
f.  The application fee and deposit, as established in Appendix G of the Municipal Code. 
An application shall be considered complete when all items (a. through f. above) are submitted to the community development department. 
(b)  Notification of nomination and preliminary review. Upon receipt of a complete application for designation, the commission shall schedule a preliminary review to be held within forty-five (45) days. The applicant and property owner of the subject property shall be notified of the time and place of the preliminary review. The appropriate city departments shall also be notified requesting that each department report to the commission on any matters affecting the subject property or surrounding area. 
(c)  Preliminary review decision. If the commission finds that an application merits further consideration, then property owner consent shall be obtained by the applicant as follows: 
(1)  Landmark. A notarized statement of consent of the nomination from the property owner of record. If the property owner does not consent to the nomination, the nomination process shall be terminated without any further action by the city. Government taxing entities shall be exempt from the requirements of this subsection. 
(2)  Historic district. Notarized statement(s) of consent of the nomination from at least sixty-six (66) percent of the property owners of record. If at least sixty-six (66) percent of the property owners do not consent to the nomination, the nomination process shall be terminated without any further action by the city. Government taxing entities shall be exempt from the requirements of this subsection. 
(d)  Public hearing. A public hearing shall be scheduled to be held within sixty (60) days of the applicant submitting to the community development department the property owner consent documentation outlined in subsection (c). In cases of a nomination of a structure as a landmark, notice of the date, time, place and purpose of the public hearing and a copy of the completed nomination form shall be sent by certified mail to the property owner of record at least thirty (30) days prior to the date of the public hearing. In cases of a nomination of an area as a historic district, notice of the date, time, place and purpose of the public hearing and a copy of the completed nomination form shall be sent by certified mail to the property owners of record of each structure located within the boundaries of a nominated historic district at least thirty (30) days prior to the date of the public hearing. Notice of the nomination shall also be published at least once in a newspaper having general circulation in the city, stating the common street address and legal description of a nominated landmark or legal description and boundaries of a nominated historic district along with the date, time, place and purpose of the public hearing. The applicant shall produce at the time of the hearing such information as the commission may require including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  All information required with the application. 
(2)  A visual presentation of the significant improvements on the property proposed for designation, together with information as to the age, condition and use of each. 
(3)  Proposals for preservation and enhancement of the property proposed for designation. 
The applicant and the property owner shall be entitled to speak at the public hearing and the commission will accept comments from all other interested parties. The commission shall review and evaluate all available information according to the applicable standards set forth in section 4-92. A record of the proceedings shall be made and retained as a public record. 
The commission shall recommend, reject or modify the requested designation within thirty (30) days after the public hearing; provided, however, that the commission may not modify a designation to extend beyond the property described in the application unless a new application is filed and the procedure repeated. 
Following the public hearing, the commission shall prepare the commission's evaluation, recommendation and all available information for submission to the city council within thirty (30) days. 
If the commission recommends the landmark or historic district should be designated, it shall do so by a majority vote of the commission. 
The property owner shall be notified promptly by a letter containing information on the commission's decision. 
A simple majority vote by the city council is necessary for the approval of an ordinance to designate a landmark or historic district. If the city council approves the application for a designation, a copy of said ordinance shall be sent to the property owner and be recorded against the property with the county recorder of deeds. If the city council denies the petition, notification of said denial shall be sent to the property owner and no petitioner or applicant can file for ninety (90) days to the community development department to consider this same request. 
Buildings designated as historic landmarks shall be subject to the issuance of certificates of appropriateness. 
A designation may be amended or rescinded by the same procedure and according to the same standards and considerations set forth for designation. 
(e)  After the date of filing a complete application, as outlined in section 4-93(a)(2), until the date of either a final decision by the commission, or a reversal or affirmation by the city council, no building permit shall be issued for the alteration, construction, demolition, or removal of the nominated property unless such alteration, removal, or demolition is necessary for public health, welfare, or safety. In no event shall the delay so imposed exceed two hundred ten (210) days. 
(Ord. No. 2365, § 3, 11-5-90; Ord. No. 2505, §§ 1—4, 2-3-92; Ord. No. 15-O-0013, § 1, 3-16-2015)  
Sec. 4-94. - Alteration, construction and demolition of buildings in historic preservation district or with landmark status. 
Work on property and improvements shall be regulated as follows: 
(1)  Landmarks. No alterations, interior construction which affects structural members, exterior construction or exterior demolition may be performed on property and improvements which have been designated under this article as landmarks, except as shall be approved by a certificate of appropriateness. 
(2)  Historic districts. No alterations, exterior construction or exterior demolition may be performed on property and improvements located within an area which has been designated under this article as an historical district, except as shall be approved by a certificate of appropriateness. 
(3)  All public improvement work within any right-of-way shall be exempt from the requirements of this subsection. 
(Ord. No. 2365, § 3, 11-5-90; Ord. No. 16-O-0007, § 1, 3-21-2016)  
Sec. 4-95. - Certificate of appropriateness, procedure. 
(a)  Generally. A certificate of appropriateness shall be required before the following actions affecting the exterior architectural appearance of any landmark or property within a historic district may be undertaken: 
(1)  Any construction, alteration, removal or demolition requiring a building permit from the city. 
(2)  Any construction, alteration, removal or demolition affecting a significant exterior architectural feature as specified in this article designating the landmark or historic district. 
(3)  All public improvement work within any right-of-way shall be exempt from the requirements of this subsection. 
(b)  Application. An application for a certificate of appropriateness shall be made at the city hall on forms from the preservation commission which are provided by the building department to the applicant. Each application shall be accompanied by such plans and specifications as required by West Chicago building ordinance. The building department, within seven (7) working days, shall submit copies of all applications to the commission. 
(c)  Review process. Any applicant may request a meeting with the commission before submitting an application and may consult with the commission during the review of the application. 
At the next regular meeting, the commission shall review the application and may grant a certificate of appropriateness if it finds that the proposed work is clearly appropriate and in accordance with the applicable criteria set for subsection (e). The granting of a certificate of appropriateness shall be the final administrative decision. Copies of the certificate of appropriateness shall be forwarded to the owner(s) of record and the building department. An owner may request a special meeting if the next regular commission meeting is scheduled fifteen (15) days or more after the receipt of the building permit application by the building department. 
Upon disapproval of an application, the commission shall notify the applicant in writing of the disapproval, with reasons for denial, and shall recommend changes in the application with respect to the criteria and standards set forth in subsection (e), which if made, would make the application acceptable to the commission. Within thirty (30) days of receipt of the notification of disapproval, the applicant must either file a written modification of his application in conformity with the commission's recommended changes or request in writing that the commission schedule a public hearing on his application. 
(d)  Public hearing. Within thirty (30) days of the receipt of a written modification or request for public hearing the commission must either issue the certificate of appropriateness, or hold a public hearing. 
The applicant shall be notified of the time, date, place and purpose of such hearing by mail, properly addressed as shown on the tax assessor's rolls. Notice shall also by given by mail in the manner herein specified to the owners of record in the subject designation within two hundred fifty (250) feet, in each direction of the applicant's location. Notification may also be given by certified mail to owners or occupants of other properties which may be affected as determined by the historical preservation commission in accordance with the criteria standard set forth in subsection (e) herein. Failure to send such notice where no address appears on the tax assessor's rolls shall not invalidate the proceedings of the commission. Also notice shall be published at least once in advance of such hearing in a paper of general circulation in the city. The hearing may be continued from time to time without further notice. 
The applicant and all owners of property within the subject designation shall be entitled to speak at the public hearing and the commission will accept comments from all other interested parties. A record of the proceedings shall be made and maintained by the commission. 
Subject to the provisions of section 4-96, the commission shall render a decision to issue, deny or modify the requested certificate of appropriateness on the basis of the criteria set forth in subsection (e) within thirty (30) days after the public hearing. The commission's decision shall be in writing and shall include findings of fact in support thereof. Copies of the decision shall be mailed to the applicant. 
Following a denial, the application shall not be resubmitted within the next twelve (12) months except upon the written request of an applicant indicating the incorporation of changes in plans and specifications as may have been recommended by the commission. 
After the issuance of a certificate, no change may be made in the proposed work without resubmittal of an application. 
(e)  Criteria. In making a determination whether to issue or deny a certificate of appropriateness, the commission shall consider, among other things, the effect of the proposed construction, alteration, removal or demolition upon historic, esthetic or architectural value, characteristics and significance of the landmark or of the historic district. The criteria to be used by the commission in making its determination shall include, but is not limited to: 
(1)  The maintenance of the significant original qualities or character of the structure or property, including, if significant, its landscape. The removal or alteration of any historic or distinctive architectural features should be avoided when possible. 
(2)  The compatibility of the architectural style and design detailing the proposed construction, alteration, addition or repair with the original architecture of the landmark or styles within the historic district. 
(3)  The compatibility of the general design, arrangement, scale, texture or materials of the construction or alteration, with the historic, esthetic or architectural values, characteristics and significance of the historic district and/or landmark. 
(4)  The relationship of the location of the construction, alteration, or demolition to the streets, public or semipublic ways and any other improvement or property within a historic district. 
(5)  It is recommended that construction, alteration and demolition shall be done in accordance with the following: 
a.  All buildings, structures, and sites should be recognized as products of their own time. Alterations that have no historical basis and which seek to create an earlier appearance should be discouraged. 
b.  Exterior physical changes which may have taken place in the course of time are evidence of the history and development of a building, structure, or site and its environment. These changes may have acquired significance in their own right, and this significance should be recognized and respected. 
c.  Distinctive stylistic features or examples of skilled craftsmanship which characterize a building, structure, or site should be treated with sensitivity. 
d.  Deteriorated architectural features should be repaired rather than replaced, wherever possible. In the event replacement is necessary, the new material need not be identical to but should match the material being replaced in composition, design, color, texture and other visual qualities. 
e.  The surface cleaning of structures should be undertaken with the gentlest means possible. Abrasive cleaning and other cleaning methods that will damage the historic building materials should not be undertaken. 
f.  Every reasonable effort should be made to protect and preserve archaeological resources affected by, or adjacent to, any project. 
g.  Contemporary design for alterations and additions to existing properties should not be discouraged when such alterations and additions do not destroy significant historical, architectural or cultural materials, and such design is compatible with the size, scale, color, material and character of the property, neighborhood or environment as outlined: 
1.  Height. The height of the proposed structure or additions or alterations should be compatible with surrounding structures. 
2.  Proportions of structure's front facade. The proportions and relationships between the width and height of the proposed structure should be compatible with nearby structures. 
3.  Proportions of openings into facility. The proportions and relationships between doors and windows should be compatible with existing structures. 
4.  Relationship of building masses and spaces. The relationship of a structure to the open space between it and adjoining structures should be compatible. 
5.  Roof shapes. The design of the roof should be compatible with adjoining structures. 
6.  Landscape and appurtenances. Landscaping and the use of appurtenances should be sensitive to the individual structures, its occupants and their needs. Further, the landscape treatment should be compatible with surrounding structures and landscapes. 
7.  Scale of structure. The scale of the structure should be compatible with surrounding structures. 
8.  Directional expression of front elevation. Street facades should blend with other structures with regard to directional expression. When adjacent structures have a dominant horizontal or vertical expression, this should be carried over and reflected. 
9.  Architectural details. Architectural details and materials should be incorporated as necessary to relate the new with the old and to preserve and enhance the inherent characteristics of that area. 
h.  Wherever possible, new additions or alterations to structures should be done in such manner that if such additions or alterations were to be removed in the future, the essential form and integrity of the structure would not be impaired. 
(Ord. No. 2365, § 3, 11-5-90; Ord. No. 16-O-0007, § 2, 3-21-2016)  
Sec. 4-96. - Certificate of economic hardship. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any of the provisions of this article to the contrary, the commission may issue a certificate of economic hardship to allow the performance of work for which a certificate of appropriateness would have been denied. 
(b)  Economic hardship shall be considered by the commission if an applicant, at the time of the public hearing, has produced the following formation in an affidavit signed by the owner of the subject property and improvements; 
(1)  The amount paid for the property, the date of purchase and the party from whom purchased (including description of the relationship, if any, between the owner and the person from whom the property was purchased). 
(2)  The assessed value of the land and improvements thereon according to the two (2) most recent assessments. 
(3)  Real estate taxes for the previous two (2) years. 
(4)  Annual debt service, if any, for the previous two (2) years. 
(5)  All appraisals obtained within the previous two (2) years by the owner or applicant in connection with his purchase, financing or ownership of property. 
(6)  Any listing of the property for sale or rent, price asked and offers received, if any. 
(7)  Any consideration by the owner as to profitable adaptive uses for the property. 
(8)  If the property is income-producing, the annual gross income from the property for the previous two (2) years, itemized operating and maintenance expenses for the previous two (2) years, and annual cash flow, if any, during the same period. 
(c)  If the commission finds that, without approval of the proposed work, the property and improvements cannot be put to a reasonable beneficial use or the owner cannot obtain a reasonable economic return therefrom, then the application shall be delayed for a period not to exceed six (6) months. During this period of delay, the commission shall investigate plans to allow for a reasonably beneficial use or a reasonable economic return, or to otherwise preserve the subject property and improvements. Such plans may include, but are not limited to, a relaxation of the provisions of this chapter. 
(d)  If, by the end of this six-month period, the commission has found that, without approval of the proposed work, the property and improvements cannot be put to a reasonable beneficial use or the owner cannot obtain a reasonable economic return therefrom, then the commission shall issue a certificate of economic hardship approving the proposed work. If the commission finds otherwise, it shall issue, deny or modify the requested certificate of appropriateness as provided in section 4-95. 
(Ord. No. 2365, § 3, 11-5-90)  
Sec. 4-97. - Appeals of denials of certificate of appropriateness or economic hardship. 
(a)  Upon receipt of a final denial of a certificate of appropriateness or a certificate of economic hardship for either a landmark, property or a structure within a historic district, the applicant may, within fifteen (15) days, appeal the commission's decision to the city council. The city council may affirm or modify the decision, after due consideration of the facts contained in the record submitted to the council by the commission. Upon a decision by the city council that a certificate of appropriateness or a certificate of economic hardship shall-be issued, the city clerk shall notify the commission, the applicant and the building department within seven (7) days. 
(b)  If the city council concurs with a decision of the commission not to issue a certificate of appropriateness or a certificate of economic hardship, the city clerk shall notify the commission, the applicant and the building department within seven (7) days. 
(Ord. No. 2365, § 3, 11-5-90)  
Sec. 4-98. - Miscellaneous provisions. 
(a)  Notice to preservation commission. The director of the planning department shall provide notice in writing to the president of the preservation commission at least fifteen (15) days in advance of forthcoming public hearings regarding zoning, special use or variation petitions involving designated properties. Additionally, the building official shall provide notice in writing to the president of the preservation commission at least sixty (60) days in advance of plans by the city to alter or demolish a designated property owned by the city. 
(b)  Affirmation of existing codes and ordinances. Nothing contained in this article shall supersede the powers of other local legislative or regulatory bodies, or relieves any property owner from complying with the requirements of any other applicable codes and ordinances. Specifically, this article shall not be construed to modify any applicable code or ordinance. 
(c)  Severability. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this article is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2365, § 3, 11-5-90)  
Sec. 4-99. - Penalties. 
(a)  Fine. Any person who fails to perform any act required herein within thirty (30) days of written notice of such failure, or performs any act prohibited herein, shall be fined, upon conviction, not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. Each day such violation exists shall constitute a separate violation and separate offense. 
(b)  Injunction. In addition to the penalty provided above, the city may bring an appropriate action in the circuit court to enjoin any action by any person in violation of this article and to restore any property to its condition prior to such unauthorized action. 
(Ord. No. 2365, § 3, 11-5-90)  
ARTICLE VI. - FACADE PROGRAM[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 4301, § 1, adopted Apr. 3, 2000 amended §§ 4-100—4-106 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former §§ 4-100—4-106 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2795, § 2, adopted Feb. 5, 1994; Ord. No. 3034, § 1, adopted June 3, 1996; Ord. No. 4043, §§ 1—3, adopted Dec. 15, 1997. 
 
Sec. 4-100. - Facade program purpose. 
The purpose of the facade program is to encourage the rehabilitation of the exteriors of commercial property in the City of West Chicago Downtown Redevelopment Project Area by establishing a program where the city will provide a limited match of private funds in the form of grants to be used for building facade renovation. 
(Ord. No. 4301, § 1, 4-3-2000)  
Sec. 4-101. - Eligible properties. 
Commercial properties within the downtown redevelopment project area are eligible for participation in this program. Residential properties, including apartment buildings, are not eligible. Dwelling units, when accessory to a commercial building, are eligible. 
(Ord. No. 4301, § 1, 4-3-2000)  
Sec. 4-102. - Eligible applicants. 
(a)  Facade program applications may be submitted by: 
(1)  The owner of property to be rehabilitated. 
(2)  A contract purchaser or holder of an option to purchase the property to be rehabilitated, with written permission of the owner, provided that no grant funds shall be distributed to such applicant prior to its closing on the purchase of the property. 
(3)  A lessee of the property to be rehabilitated, under a lease with an unexpired term of not less than five (5) years and with written permission of the owner. 
(b)  No facade improvement grant shall be awarded, or grant funds distributed, to any applicant who is in default on its mortgage, installment land sale contract or lease with respect to the property, or who is delinquent in the payment of any tax, fine, fee or special assessment owed the city, the county, the state or the United States of America, as indicated by the records of the county recorder. 
(Ord. No. 4301, § 1, 4-3-2000)  
Sec. 4-103. - Eligible improvements. 
(a)  In order to be eligible for a grant under the facade program, improvements must relate to a building facade that is visible from a public way, must be permanently fixed to the real estate, and must not restrict any future use of the building. Eligible improvements include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Architectural services relating to eligible improvements. 
(2)  Chimney and flue repair, when it improves the overall appearance of a building. 
(3)  Exit door (exterior) and hardware installation, repair and replacement, where current doors do not meet the building code or it will improve the overall appearance of the building. 
(4)  Exterior permanent lighting. 
(5)  Exterior handicap accessibility improvements not including sidewalks pursuant to the Illinois Accessibility Code. 
(6)  Gutters. 
(7)  Landscaping and permanent planters. 
(8)  Painting of the exterior surface of buildings. 
(9)  Removal of nonoriginal siding. 
(10)  Repair or restoration of original exterior. 
(11)  Retaining wall, on Turner Court. 
(12)  Roofing replacement and repairs within the Turner Junction Historic District that are part of the historical facade. 
(13)  Shutter and awning repair, replacement or additions. 
(14)  Signs (permanent), new exterior signs or repair and replacement of existing exterior signs. 
(15)  Stair, porch, railing and exit repair, replacement or installation. 
(16)  Terraces, on Turner Court. 
(17)  Wall (exterior) repair and rebuilding, including cleaning, sealing, tuckpointing and painting. 
(18)  Windows, repair of frames, sills, glazing, replacement of glass, and installation of new windows. 
(b)  Upon the request of an applicant, the city staff shall review improvements not specifically listed as eligible or ineligible under this article and make a recommendation to the city council. Upon receipt of the recommendation of city staff, the city council may, in its discretion, approve facade program funding with respect to such improvements. 
(Ord. No. 4301, § 1, 4-3-2000)  
Sec. 4-104. - Ineligible improvements. 
The following are ineligible for funding under the facade program: 
(1)  Acquisition of property. 
(2)  Air conditioning and heating facilities. 
(3)  Within the Turner Junction Historic District, artificial architectural elements including, but not limited to, applied mansard fronts and applied facades that would cover existing significant architectural elements or materials. 
(4)  Bartered work or services, direct or indirect, including, but not limited to, labor, architectural services, consulting, and acquisition of materials. 
(5)  Electrical wiring or service upgrades. 
(6)  Elevators—Repair or installation. 
(7)  Extermination of insects, rodents, vermin, and other pests in interior or exterior areas. 
(8)  Improvements completed or in progress prior to notification of grant approval. 
(9)  Interior floor or ceiling replacement or repair. 
(10)  Interior improvements including, but not limited to, remodeling and structural repairs. 
(11)  Loading docks. 
(12)  New facilities, building additions, or expansion outside the Turner Junction Historic District. 
(13)  Plumbing. 
(14)  Purchase of furnishings, equipment, or other personal property which does not become a part of the real estate. 
(15)  Refinancing existing debt. 
(16)  Resurfacing of parking lots. 
(17)  Security grilles and screens. 
(18)  Sidewalks. 
(19)  Sprinklers, fire or smoke alarm systems. 
(20)  Improvements which are required to comply with a violation of the City of West Chicago Code of Ordinances including, but not limited to, the zoning ordinance and International Property Maintenance Code. Except that the cost of improvements that provide additional upgrade beyond the minimum code requirement shall be eligible. 
(21)  Title reports and legal fees. 
(22)  Ventilation systems. 
(23)  Working capital. 
(24)  Improvements made by contractor not approved by the city council. 
(25)  Improvements that do not comply with the approved certificate of appropriateness, if required, and/or building plans. 
(26)  Worked performed by construction or other companies that are owned wholly or in part by the building owner or his family. 
(Ord. No. 4301, § 1, 4-3-2000; Ord. No. 03-O-0011, § 1, 3-17-2003; Ord. No. 03-O-0107, § 1, 11-17-2003)  
Sec. 4-105. - Project costs. 
The city council may, in its discretion, approve the facade program grants for eligible improvements to properties within the downtown redevelopment project area, provided however: 
(1)  That no grant shall be approved if the amount of such grant, together with the amount of all other grant approved in the same fiscal year, would exceed the amount appropriated for the facade program for that fiscal year; 
(2)  That no grant shall exceed the lesser of (a) fifty (50) percent of the project cost; or (b) ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), except as provided below: 
a.  That an individual may be granted up to three (3) years of matching funding at any one time, so long as the total grant does not exceed thirty thousand dollars ($30,000.00) and the property is not eligible for additional funding during that three-year period; and/or 
b.  That an individual may be granted sixty-five (65) percent of the cost for the equipment and materials only, so long as he provides necessary documentation via three (3) detailed estimates for the work, with the labor, equipment and materials components associated with the project listed separately so it can be evaluated. 
(3)  That the total amount of all grants approved with respect to any building shall not exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) in any fiscal year or thirty thousand dollars ($30,000.00) over three (3) fiscal years. 
(4)  An applicant may submit a phasing plan for a period not to exceed one (1) year from the date of approval delineating the timing of various components of the overall project. Grant funding may be reimbursed in increments up to the facade grant total. 
(Ord. No. 4301, § 1, 4-3-2000; Ord. No. 02-O-0061, § 1, 5-20-2002; Ord. No. 03-O-0011, § 2, 3-17-2003; Ord. No. 06-O-0007, § 1, 1-16-2006)  
Sec. 4-106. - Rehabilitation guidelines and project application; approval. 
(a)  Each applicant for a grant under the facade program shall submit an application on approved forms available from the community development department, including: 
(1)  Plans for the exterior improvements, which to the extent required by applicable law, shall be prepared by a licensed architect; 
(2)  An elevation drawing, plat of survey or site plan; 
(3)  Material and color sample(s) of improvements; 
(4)  Three (3) written estimates for each component of the entire project to include the contractor's name, address, telephone number and list of references; 
(5)  Two (2) photographs of each existing facade proposed for improvements; 
(6)  A tract search report identifying the property's owners of record and all mortgages, liens and other encumbrances of record, from a title insurance company qualified to business in the state; 
(7)  If applicable, a copy of the written consent from the property owner, signed installment sales contract and/or current lease; and 
(8)  A filing fee in the amount of two hundred dollars ($200.00), refundable upon satisfactory completion of the project. 
(b)  If the property is within the Turner Junction Historic District, the applicant shall concurrently file an application for a certificate of appropriateness with the historical preservation commission. The applicant shall obtain any necessary certificate of appropriateness as a precondition to the city council's consideration of the facade program application. 
(c)  Facade program applications will be accepted each fiscal year, until budgeted and appropriated amounts are exhausted. The community development department may, in its discretion, establish application deadlines from time to time. 
(d)  The community development department shall review applications in the order received and recommend for funding projects which have (1) completed the applications; (2) met any applicable application deadlines; (3) met the guidelines for funding; and (4) a commitment from, and the demonstrated ability of, the applicant pay the portion of the project costs that are not covered by the grant. 
(e)  Upon completion of the community development department's review, and the issuance of any necessary certificate of appropriateness, the department shall forward the application to the city council, together with its recommendation. 
(f)  The city council shall determine whether, and the extent to which, the city will provide facade program funds for the proposed project. If the city council approves the application, the city council shall approve the amount of funding of the qualified contractor having submitted the lowest estimate, but that the applicant may use any of the three (3) contractors submitting estimates. The applicant shall be responsible for paying the difference between the lowest estimate from the qualified contractor and the estimate from the contractor utilized. 
(g)  All rehabilitation work shall be completed in conformance with the codes and ordinances of the city. If the project requires a building permit, the city shall issue such building permit at fifty (50) percent of the regular permit fee. Construction shall be monitored by building inspectors. 
(h)  Upon completion of the project, which shall be evidenced by final approval from the community development department or the issuance of an occupancy permit, the city shall pay the amount authorized by the city council, provided that: (1) the contractor selected by the city council was used for the entire project; (2) the plan approved by the city council was strictly adhered to; and (3) there was strict compliance with the terms of any applicable certificate of appropriateness. 
(i)  The city reserves the right to reject any or all applications received. 
(j)  The city reserves the right to withdraw a commitment for funding or recall a grant for any project which is not completed within six (6) months of the issuance of the building permit for the project or, if no building permit is required for the project, within six (6) months of the approval of the grant by the city council. 
(k)  The city reserves the right to withdraw a commitment for funding or recall a grant if any of the eligibility requirements are violated, including, but not limited to, the use of the contractor selected by the city council and strict compliance with the terms of the plan approved by the city council and the certificate of appropriateness, if any. 
(l)  All proposed exterior improvements within the Turner Junction Historic District shall be compatible with the downtown area; specifically, these improvements should: 
(1)  Focus on restorative construction; 
(2)  Be compatible with original building material and style; 
(3)  Be compatible with predominant color schemes and window configurations; and 
(4)  Be compatible with the general architectural theme of the historic district. 
(Ord. No. 4301, § 1, 4-3-2000; Ord. No. 03-O-0011, § 3, 3-17-2003; Ord. No. 06-O-0007, § 2, 1-16-2006)  
Secs. 4-107—4-109. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - REGISTRATION OF DEFAULTED MORTGAGE AND VACANT PROPERTY 
 
Sec. 4-110. - Purpose and intent. 
It is the purpose and intent of the city to establish a process to address the deterioration, crime, and decline in value of city neighborhoods caused by property with defaulted mortgages located within the city, and to identify, regulate, limit and reduce the number of these properties located within the city. It has been determined that owner-occupied structures are generally better maintained when compared to vacant structures, even with a diligent off-site property owner. Vacant structures or structures owned by individuals who are economically strained and unable to meet their mortgage obligations are often not properly or diligently maintained, which contribute to blight, declined property values, and have a negative impact on social perception of the residential areas where they are located. It is the city's further intent to establish a registration program as a mechanism to help protect neighborhoods from becoming blighted through the lack of adequate maintenance of properties that are in default or defaulted, and to provide a mechanism to avert foreclosure actions through timely intervention, education, or counseling of property owners. 
(Ord. No. 18-O-0030, § 2, 6-18-2018)  
Sec. 4-111. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
Default shall mean that the mortgagor has not complied with the terms of the mortgage on the property, or the promissory note, or other evidence of the debt, referred to in the mortgage. 
Enforcement officer shall mean any law enforcement officer, building official, zoning inspector, code enforcement officer, fire inspector, building inspector, or other person authorized by the city to enforce the applicable code(s). 
Evidence of vacancy shall mean any condition that on its own, or combined with other conditions present, would lead a reasonable person to believe that the property is vacant. Such conditions may include, but are not limited to: overgrown and/or dead vegetation; past due utility notices and/or disconnected utilities; accumulation of trash junk or debris; abandoned vehicles, auto parts and/or materials; the absence of furnishings and/or personal items consistent with habitation or occupancy; the presence of an unsanitary, stagnant swimming pool; the accumulation of newspapers, circulars, flyers and/or mail; statements by neighbors, passers-by, delivery agents or government agents; and/or the presence of boards over doors, windows or other openings in violation of applicable code. 
Foreclosure or foreclosure action shall mean the legal process by which a mortgagee, or other lien holder, terminates or attempts to terminate a property owner's equitable right of redemption to obtain legal and equitable title to the real property pledged as security for a debt or the real property subject to the lien. The legal process is not concluded until the property obtained by the mortgagee, lien holder, or their designee, by certificate of title, or any other means, is sold to a non-related bona fide purchaser in an arm's length transaction to satisfy the debt or lien. 
Mortgagee shall mean the creditor, including but not limited to, trustees; mortgage servicing companies; lenders in a mortgage agreement; any agent, servant, or employee of the creditor; any successor in interest; or any assignee of the creditor's rights, interests or obligations under the mortgage agreement; or any other person or entity with the legal right to foreclose on the real property, excluding governmental entities. 
Owner shall mean every person, entity, or mortgagee, who alone or severally with others, has legal or equitable title to any real property as defined by this article; has legal care, charge, or control of any such property; is in possession or control of any such property; and/or is vested with possession or control of any such property. The property manager shall not be considered the owner. 
Property manager shall mean any party designated by the owner as responsible for inspecting, maintaining and securing the property as required in this article. 
Real property shall mean any residential or commercial land and/or buildings, leasehold improvements and anything affixed to the land, or portion thereof identified by a property parcel identification number, located in the city limits. 
Registrable property shall mean: 
(1)  Any real property located in the city, whether vacant or occupied, that is encumbered by a mortgage in default, is subject to an ongoing foreclosure action by the mortgagee or trustee, has been the subject of a foreclosure action by a mortgagee or trustee and a judgement has been entered, or has been the subject of a foreclosure sale where the title was transferred to the beneficiary of a mortgage involved in the foreclosure and any properties transferred under a deed in lieu of foreclosure/sale. The designation of a "default/foreclosure" property as "registrable" shall remain in place until such time as the property is sold to a non-related bona fide purchaser in an arm's length transaction or the foreclosure action has been dismissed and any default on the mortgage has been cured; or 
(2)  Any property that is vacant for more than thirty (30) days or any cancellation of utility or service, whichever occurs first. 
Registry shall mean a web-based electronic database of searchable real property records, used by the city to allow mortgagees and owners the opportunity to register properties and pay applicable fees as required in this article. 
Semi-annual registration shall mean six (6) months from the date of the first action that requires registration, as determined by the city, or its designee, and every subsequent six (6) months. The date of the initial registration may be different than the date of the first action that required registration. 
Utilities and services shall mean any utility and/or service that is essential for a building to be habitable and/or perform a service necessary to comply with all city codes. This includes, but is not limited to, electrical, gas, water, sewer, lawn maintenance, pool maintenance, and snow removal. 
Vacant shall mean any parcel of land in the city that contains any building or structure that is not lawfully occupied. 
(Ord. No. 18-O-0030, § 2, 6-18-2018)  
Sec. 4-112. - Applicability and jurisdiction. 
This article applies to defaulted and vacant property within the city. 
(Ord. No. 18-O-0030, § 2, 6-18-2018)  
Sec. 4-113. - Establishment of a registry. 
Pursuant to the provisions of section 4-114 the city, or its designee, shall establish a registry cataloging each registrable property within the city, containing the information required by this article. 
(Ord. No. 18-O-0030, § 2, 6-18-2018)  
Sec. 4-114. - Inspection and registration of defaulted mortgage. 
(a)  Any mortgagee who holds a mortgage on real property located within the city shall perform an inspection of the property upon it being in default or defaulted by the mortgagor or prior to the issuance of a notice of default. 
(b)  Property inspected pursuant to subsection (a) above that remains in default or defaulted, shall be inspected every thirty (30) days by the mortgagee or mortgagee's designee. If an inspection shows a change in the property's occupancy status the mortgagee shall, within ten (10) days of that inspection, update the occupancy status of the property registration. 
(c)  Within ten (10) days of the date any mortgagee declares its mortgage to be in default or defaulted, the mortgagee shall register the real property with the city registry, and, at the time of registration, indicate whether the property is vacant, and if so shall designate in writing a property manager to inspect, maintain and secure the real property subject to the mortgage in default or defaulted. A separate registration is required for each defaulted property. 
(d)  Initial registration pursuant to this section shall contain at a minimum the name of the mortgagee, the mailing address of the mortgagee, e-mail address, telephone number and name of the property manager and said person's address, e-mail address, and telephone number. 
(e)  At the time of initial registration each registrant shall pay a non-refundable semi-annual registration fee of three hundred dollars ($300.00) for each defaulted property. Subsequent semi-annual registrations of defaulted properties and fees in the amount of three hundred dollars ($300.00) are due within ten (10) days of the expiration of the previous registration. Said fees shall be used to offset the costs of: (1) registration and registration enforcement; (2) code enforcement and mitigation related to defaulted properties; (3) post-closing counseling and foreclosure intervention limited to owner-occupied persons in default, which may not include cash and mortgage modification assistance; and (4) for any related purposes as may be adopted in the policy set forth in this article. Said fees shall be deposited to a special account in the city's department dedicated to the cost of implementation and enforcement of this article, and fulfilling the purpose and intent of this article. None of the funds provided for in this section shall be utilized for the legal defense of foreclosure actions. 
(f)  If the defaulted mortgage and/or servicing on a property is sold or transferred, the new mortgagee is subject to all the terms of this article. Within ten (10) days of the transfer, the new mortgagee shall register the property or update the existing registration. The previous mortgagee(s) will not be released from the responsibility of paying all previous unpaid fees, fines, and penalties accrued during that mortgagee's involvement with the defaulted property. 
(g)  If the mortgagee sells or transfers the defaulted property in a non-arm's length transaction to a related entity or person, the transferee is subject to all the terms of this article. Within ten (10) days of the transfer, the transferee shall register the property or update the existing registration. Any and all previous unpaid fees, fines, and penalties, regardless of who the mortgagee was at the time registration was required, including but not limited to unregistered periods during the foreclosure process, are the responsibility of the transferee and are due and payable with the updated registration. The previous mortgagee will not be released from the responsibility of paying all previous unpaid fees, fines, and penalties accrued during that mortgagee's involvement with the defaulted property. 
(h)  If the defaulted property is not registered, or the registration fee is not paid within thirty (30) days of when the registration is required pursuant to this section, a late fee equivalent to ten (10) percent of the semi-annual registration fee shall be charged for every thirty-day period, or portion thereof, the property is not registered and shall be due and payable with the registration. This section shall apply to the initial registration and registrations required by subsequent transferees, owners and mortgagees of the defaulted property. 
(i)  This section shall also apply to properties that have been the subject of a foreclosure sale where title is transferred to the mortgagee as well as any properties transferred to the mortgagee under a deed in lieu of foreclosure or by any other legal means. 
(j)  Properties subject to this section shall remain subject to the semi-annual registration requirement, and the inspection, security, and maintenance standards of this section as long as the property remains defaulted. 
(k)  Failure of the mortgagee and/or property owner of record to properly register or to modify the registration to reflect a change of circumstances as required by this article is a violation of this article and shall be subject to enforcement by any of the enforcement means available to the city. 
(l)  If any property is in violation of this article the city may take the necessary action to ensure compliance with and/or place a lien on the property for the cost of the outstanding obligation and any additional cost incurred to the property into compliance. 
(m)  Properties registered as a result of this section are not required to be registered again pursuant to the real property that is not subject to a mortgage in default section. 
(Ord. No. 18-O-0030, § 2, 6-18-2018)  
Sec. 4-115. - Inspection and registration of real property that is not subject to a mortgage in default. 
(a)  Any owner of vacant property located within the city shall within ten (10) days after the property becomes vacant, or within ten (10) days after assuming ownership of the property, whichever is later, register the real property with the city registry. 
(b)  Initial registration pursuant to this section shall contain at a minimum the name of the owner, the mailing address of the owner, e-mail address, and telephone number of the owner, and if applicable, the name and telephone number of the property manager and said person's address, e-mail address, and telephone number. 
(c)  At the time of initial registration each registrant shall pay a non-refundable semi-annual registration fee of three hundred dollars ($300.00) for each vacant property. Subsequent semi-annual registrations of vacant properties and fees in the amount of three hundred dollars ($300.00) are due within ten (10) days of the expiration of the previous registration. Said fees shall be used to offset the costs of: (1) registration and registration enforcement; (2) code enforcement and mitigation related to vacant properties; and (3) for any related purposes as may be adopted in the policy set forth in this article. Said fees shall be deposited to a special account in the city's department dedicated to the cost of implementation and enforcement of this article, and fulfilling the purpose and intent of this article. 
(d)  If the property is sold or transferred, the new owner is subject to all the terms of this article. Within ten (10) days of the transfer, the new owner shall register the vacant property or update the existing registration. The previous owner(s) will not be released from the responsibility of paying all previous unpaid fees, fines, and penalties accrued during that owner's involvement with the vacant property. 
(e)  If the vacant property is not registered, or either the registration fee or the semi-annual registration fee is not paid within thirty (30) days of when the registration or semi-annual registration is required pursuant to this section, a late fee shall be equivalent to ten (10) percent of the semi-annual registration fee shall be charged for every thirty (30) day period, or portion thereof, the property is not registered and shall be due and payable with the registration. This section shall apply to the initial registration and registrations required by subsequent owners of the vacant property. 
(f)  Properties subject to this section shall remain subject to the semi-annual registration requirement, and the inspection, security, and maintenance standards of this section as long as the property is vacant. 
(g)  Failure of the owner to properly register or to modify the registration to reflect a change of circumstances as required by this article is a violation of this article and shall be subject to enforcement by any of the enforcement means available to the city. 
(h)  If any property is in violation of this article the city may take the necessary action to ensure compliance with and place a lien on the property for the cost of the outstanding obligation and any additional cost incurred to the property into compliance. 
(i)  Properties registered as a result of this section are not required to be registered again pursuant to the defaulted mortgage property section. 
(Ord. No. 18-O-0030, § 2, 6-18-2018)  
Sec. 4-116. - Maintenance requirements. 
(a)  Properties subject to this article shall be kept free of weeds, overgrown brush, dead vegetation, trash, junk, debris, building materials, any accumulation of newspaper circulars, flyers, notices, except those required by federal, state or local law, discarded personal items including, but not limited to, furniture, clothing, large and small appliances, printed material, or any other items that give the appearance that the property is abandoned. 
(b)  Registrable property shall be maintained free of graffiti or similar markings by removal or painting over with an exterior grade paint that matches the color of the exterior structure. 
(c)  Front, side, and rear yards, including landscaping, of registrable property shall be maintained in accordance with the applicable code(s) at the time registration is required. 
(d)  Registrable yard maintenance shall include, but not be limited to, grass, ground covers, bushes, shrubs, hedges or similar plantings, decorative rock or bark or artificial turf/sod. Acceptable maintenance of yards and/or landscape shall not include weeds, gravel, broken concrete, asphalt or similar material. 
(e)  Maintenance shall include, but not be limited to, watering, irrigation, cutting and mowing of required ground cover or landscape and removal of all trimmings. 
(f)  Pools and spas of shall be maintained so the water remains free and clear of pollutants and debris and shall comply with the regulations set forth in the applicable code(s). 
(g)  Failure of the mortgagee, owner, and transferee(s) to properly maintain the property as required by this article may result in a violation of the applicable code(s) and issuance of a citation or notice of violation in accordance with the applicable code of the city. Pursuant to a finding and determination by the city sheriff, magistrate or a court of competent jurisdiction, the city may take the necessary action to ensure compliance with this section. 
(h)  In addition to the above, the property is required to be maintained in accordance with the applicable code(s) of the city. 
(Ord. No. 18-O-0030, § 2, 6-18-2018)  
Sec. 4-117. - Security requirements. 
(a)  Properties subject to these sections shall be maintained in a secure manner so as not to be accessible to unauthorized persons. 
(b)  A "secure manner" shall include, but not be limited to, the closure and locking of windows, doors, gates and other openings of such size that may allow a child to access the interior of the property or structure. Broken windows, doors, gates, and other openings of such size that may allow a child to access the interior of the property or structure must be repaired. Broken windows shall be secured by re-glazing of the window. 
(c)  If a property is registrable, and the property has become vacant or blighted, a property manager shall be designated by the mortgagee and/or owner to perform the work necessary to bring the property into compliance with the applicable code(s), and the property manager must perform regular inspections to verify compliance with the requirements of this article, and any other applicable laws. 
(d)  In addition to the above, the property is required to be secured in accordance with the applicable code(s) of the city. 
(e)  When a property subject to this article becomes vacant, it shall be posted with the name and twenty-four-hour contact telephone number of the property manager. The property manager shall be available to be contacted by the city Monday through Friday between 8:00 a.m. and 4:30 p.m., legal holidays excepted. The sign shall be placed in a window facing the street and shall be visible from the street. The posting shall be no less than eighteen (18) inches by twenty-four (24) inches and shall be of a font that is legible from a distance of forty-five (45) feet. The posting shall contain the following language with supporting information: 
THIS PROPERTY IS MANAGED BY ___________. 
AND IS INSPECTED ON A REGULAR BASIS. 
THE PROPERTY MANAGER CAN BE CONTACTED 
BY TELEPHONE AT ___________ 
OR BY EMAIL AT ___________. 
(f)  The posting required in subsection (e) above shall be placed on the interior of a window facing the street to the front of the property so that it is visible from the street, or secured to the exterior of the building/structure facing the street to the front of the property so that it is visible from the street or if no such area exists, on a stake of sufficient size to support the posting in a location that is at all times visible from the street to the front of the property but not readily accessible to vandals. Exterior posting shall be constructed of and printed with weather-resistant materials. 
(g)  Failure of the mortgagee and/or property owner of record to properly inspect and secure a property subject to this article, and post and maintain the signage noted in this section, is a violation and shall be subject to enforcement by any of the enforcement means available to the city. The city may take the necessary action to ensure compliance with this section, and recover costs and expenses in support thereof. 
(Ord. No. 18-O-0030, § 2, 6-18-2018)  
Sec. 4-118. - Provisions supplemental. 
The provisions of this article are cumulative with and in addition to other available remedies. Nothing contained in this article shall prohibit the city from collecting on fees, fines, and penalties in any lawful manner; or enforcing its codes by any other means, including, but not limited to, injunction, abatement, or as otherwise provided by law or ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 18-O-0030, § 2, 6-18-2018)  
Sec. 4-119. - Public nuisance. 
All registrable property is at risk of being a public nuisance and if vacant or blighted can constitute a public nuisance, the abatement of which pursuant to the police power is hereby declared to be necessary for the health, welfare, and safety of the residents of the city. 
(Ord. No. 18-O-0030, § 2, 6-18-2018)  
Sec. 4-120. - Additional authority. 
(a)  If the enforcement officer has reason to believe that a property subject to the provisions of this article is posing a serious threat to the public health, safety, and welfare, the code enforcement officer may temporarily secure the property at the expense of the mortgagee or owner, and may bring the violations before the code enforcement city or special magistrate as soon as possible to address the conditions of the property. Nothing herein shall limit the city from abating any nuisance or unsafe condition by any other legal means available to it. 
(b)  The sheriff, code enforcement city or special magistrate shall have the authority to require the mortgagee or owner affected by this section, to implement additional maintenance and/or security measures including, but not limited to, securing any and all doors, windows or other openings, employment of an on-site security guard or other measures as may be reasonably required to help prevent further decline of the property. 
(c)  If there is a finding that the condition of the property is posing a serious threat to the public health, safety, and welfare, then the sheriff, code enforcement city or special magistrate may direct the city to abate the violations and charge the mortgagee or owner with the cost of the abatement. 
(d)  If the mortgagee or owner does not reimburse the city for the cost of temporarily securing the property, or of any abatement directed by the sheriff, code enforcement officer, code enforcement city or special magistrate, within thirty (30) days of the city sending the mortgagee or owner the invoice then the city may lien the property with such cost, along with an administrative fee as determined in the city's fee ordinance to recover the administrative personnel services. In addition to filing a lien the city may pursue financial penalties against the mortgagee or owner. 
(Ord. No. 18-O-0030, § 2, 6-18-2018)  
Sec. 4-121. - Opposing, obstructing enforcement officer; penalty. 
Whoever opposes obstructs or resists any enforcement officer or any person authorized by the enforcement office in the discharge of duties as provided in this article shall be punishable as provided in the applicable code(s) or a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 18-O-0030, § 2, 6-18-2018)  
Sec. 4-122. - Immunity of enforcement officer. 
Any enforcement officer or any person authorized by the city to enforce the sections here within shall be immune from prosecution, civil or criminal, for reasonable, good faith entry upon real property while in the discharge of duties imposed by this article. 
(Ord. No. 18-O-0030, § 2, 6-18-2018)  
Sec. 4-123. - Penalties. 
Unless otherwise provided for in this article, a violation of this article is declared unlawful and subject to the fines detailed in section 1-8 of the Code. 
(Ord. No. 18-O-0030, § 2, 6-18-2018)  
Sec. 4-124. - Amendments. 
Registration and penalty fees outlined in this article may be modified by administrative order, passed and adopted by the city. 
(Ord. No. 18-O-0030, § 2, 6-18-2018)  
Chapter 5 - EMERGENCY SERVICES DISASTER AGENCY[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 12-O-0032, § 1, adopted September 4, 2012, amended Ch. 5 in its entirety to read as herein set out. The former Ch. 5 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 1834, § 2, 3-3-86; Ord. No. 2849, §§ 1—6, 12-5-94. 
Cross reference— Flood hazard areas, § 4-42 et seq. 
 
Sec. 5-1. - Establishments. 
(a)  There is hereby created the City of West Chicago Emergency Services Disaster Agency (ESDA) to mitigate injury or damage resulting from a disaster caused by foreign or domestic acts of terrorism or other hostile action, or from natural or manmade disaster, in accordance with "The Illinois Emergency Management Agency Act, 20 ILCS 3305/1, et seq., as amended." 
(b)  This ESDA shall consist of the emergency management coordinator, ESDA director, and such additional members as may be selected by the director. 
(c)  The ESDA will be responsible for all emergency planning, emergency preparedness exercises, and activities relating to the emergency operating center as well as the ESDA field response unit, which will support emergency activities as set forth is this ordinance. 
(d)  The ESDA will function under the general supervision and direction of the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 12-O-0032, § 1, 9-4-2012)  
Sec. 5-2. - Emergency management coordinator and ESDA director. 
(a)  The emergency management coordinator shall be a city employee, who has experience and/or training in emergency management activities. He shall be designated by the city administrator with input of the chief of police and serve until removed by same. 
(1)  The emergency management coordinator has the day-to-day authority and responsibility for overseeing emergency management programs and activities. 
(2)  The emergency management coordinator shall coordinate the city's capabilities and ensure that there are unified objectives with regard to the city's emergency plans and activities. 
(3)  The emergency management coordinator shall comply with the training and educational requirements in accordance with "Emergency Services, Disasters, and Civil Defense, 29 of the Illinois Administrative Code, 301, et seq., as amended." 
(4)  The emergency management coordinator shall be responsible for drafting and updating the city's emergency preparedness plan as approved by the city administrator or his designee. 
(b)  The ESDA director shall be appointed by the chief of police and shall serve until removed by same. 
(1)  The ESDA director shall have direct responsibility for the administration, training and preparation of the ESDA field response unit. 
(2)  The ESDA director shall have the authority to appoint and remove volunteer members from the ESDA, with the consent of the chief of police or his designee. 
(3)  In the event of the ESDA director's absence, resignation, death or inability to serve in said position, the emergency management coordinator, or any person designated by the chief of police, shall be and act as the ESDA director until a new appointment is made as prescribed in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1834, § 2, 3-3-86; Ord. No. 12-O-0032, § 1, 9-4-2012)  
Sec. 5-3. - Functions. 
(a)  The ESDA shall perform such functions with the city as shall be prescribed in and by the local, county and state emergency operations plan and programs, orders, rules and regulations as may be promulgated by the Illinois Emergency Management Agency and, in addition, shall conduct such functions outside the corporate limits as may be required under mutual aid agreements or compacts as are entered into as provided by the Illinois Emergency Management Agency Act. These functions include, but are not limited to, coordination and performance of emergency management functions relating to explosions, fires, floods, earthquakes, telecommunications failures, winds, storms, releases of hazardous materials, contaminations of water supplies, epidemics, air contaminations, blights, extended periods of severe and inclement weather, droughts, infestations, critical shortages of essential fuels and energy, riots and hostile military or paramilitary actions, or other natural or technological causes, and assistance of police, fire and other public service agencies in connection with traffic accidents, aircraft accidents, railroad accidents, utility disruptions, other manmade or natural hazardous events, search and rescue operations and civic events. Such assistance shall include traffic control, crowd control, security, first response first aid and/or other functions necessary or appropriate to the circumstances. 
(b)  The emergency management coordinator shall prepare and submit to the DuPage County Office of Homeland Security and Emergency Management for review and certification an "Emergency Operations Plan" describing the organization, mission and functions of the city and supporting services for responding to and recovering from disasters. 
(c)  The chief of police may, in his discretion, authorize one (1) or more vehicles operated by members of the city ESDA to use oscillating, rotating or flashing lights, in accordance with the Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/1-101, et seq., as amended, in connection with the performance of ESDA related duties. 
(Ord. No. 12-O-0032, § 1, 9-4-2012)  
Sec. 5-4. - Service as mobile support team. 
(a)  All or any members of the ESDA organization may be designated as members of a mobile support team created by the Director of the Illinois Emergency Management Agency as provided by law. 
(b)  The leader of such mobile support team shall be designated by the emergency management coordinator. 
(c)  Any member of a mobile support team who is a city employee or officer while serving on call to duty by the governor, or the state director, shall receive the compensation and have the powers, duties, rights and immunities incident to such employment or office. Any such member who is not a paid officer or employee of the city, while so serving, shall receive from the state reasonable compensation as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 12-O-0032, § 1, 9-4-2012)  
Sec. 5-5. - Agreements with other political subdivisions. 
The city administrator, with input from the emergency management coordinator, may negotiate mutual aid agreements with other cities or political subdivisions of the state, but no such agreement shall be effective until it has been approved by the city council or as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 12-O-0032, § 1, 9-4-2012)  
Sec. 5-6. - Emergency action. 
If the governor proclaims that a disaster emergency exists in the event of actual enemy attack upon the United States or the occurrence within the State of Illinois of a major disaster resulting from enemy sabotage or other hostile action, or from man-made or natural disaster, it shall be the duty of the city ESDA to cooperate fully with the Illinois Emergency Management Agency and with the governor in the exercise of emergency powers as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 12-O-0032, § 1, 9-4-2012)  
Sec. 5-7. - Compensation. 
Members of the ESDA who are paid employees or officers of the city, if called for training by the Director of the Illinois Emergency Management Agency, shall receive for the time spent in such training the same rate of pay as is attached to the position held; members who are not such city employees or officers shall receive for such training time such compensation as may be established by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 12-O-0032, § 1, 9-4-2012)  
Sec. 5-8. - Reimbursement by state. 
The state treasurer may receive and allocate to the appropriate fund any reimbursement by the state to the city for expenses incident to training members of the ESDA as prescribed by the Director of the Illinois Emergency Management Agency, compensation for services and expenses of members of a mobile support team while serving outside the city in response to a call by the governor or Director of the Illinois Emergency Management Agency, as provided by law, and any other reimbursement made by the state incident to ESDA activities as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 12-O-0032, § 1, 9-4-2012)  
Sec. 5-9. - Emergency spending. 
In carrying out the provisions of the Illinois Emergency Management Act, the city, under the city administrator's emergency spending authority, may exercise the powers vested hereunder in the light of the exigencies of the disaster and, excepting mandatory constitutional requirements, without regard to the procedures and formalities normally prescribed by law pertaining to the performance of public work, entering into contracts, the incurring of obligations, the employment of temporary workers, the rental of equipment, the purchase of supplies and materials, and the appropriation, expenditure and disposition of public funds and property. 
(Ord. No. 12-O-0032, § 1, 9-4-2012)  
Sec. 5-10. - Oath. 
Every person appointed to serve in any capacity in the city ESDA organization shall, before entering upon his duties, subscribe to the following oath, which shall be filed with the emergency management coordinator: 
"I, _______, do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support and defend and bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of the State of Illinois, and the territory, institutions, and facilities thereof, both public and private, against all enemies, foreign and domestic; that I take this obligation freely, without any mental reservation or purpose of evasion; and that I will well and faithfully discharge the duties upon which I am about to enter. And I do further swear (or affirm) that I do not advocate, nor am I nor have I been a member of any political party or organization that advocates the overthrow of the government of the United States or of this State by force or violence; and that during such time as I am affiliated with the city ESDA organization, I will not advocate nor become a member of any political party or organization that advocates the overthrow of the government of the United States or of this State by force or violence." 
(Ord. No. 12-O-0032, § 1, 9-4-2012)  
Chapter 6 - ELECTIONS 
 
Sec. 6-1. - Election of city officers. 
A general municipal election shall be held on the first Tuesday in April of each odd-numbered year, or such other date as shall be provided by applicable state law, for the purpose of electing city officers. 
(Code 1954, Ch. I, Art. IV, § 1; Ord. No. 4151, § 1, 1-18-99)  
Sec. 6-2. - Time polls open. 
Except as otherwise provided by applicable state law, the polls shall be continuously open from 6:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. for each general municipal election. 
(Code 1954, Ch. I, Art. IV, § 2; Ord. No. 4151, § 2, 1-18-99)  
Sec. 6-3. - Canvass of returns. 
The returns of each general municipal election shall be canvassed and the results thereof declared, by the city canvassing board in accordance with applicable state law, as soon as practicable after such election, and on or before the day of the next regular city council meeting. 
(Code 1954, Ch. I, Art. IV, § 3; Ord. No. 4151, § 3, 1-18-99)  
Sec. 6-4. - Notification of election; bond; oath. 
The clerk shall within the time required by law, notify all persons elected to office of their election, and all persons so elected shall qualify by taking the oath of office and filing the requisite bond within the time required by law. 
(Code 1954, Ch. I, Art. IV, § 4)  
Chapter 7 - HOUSING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 4; nuisances, Ch. 10; pollution control, Ch. 14; water and sewer services, Ch. 18. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 7-1—7-15. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - EXISTING PROPERTY AND HOUSING CODE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 04-O-0100, § 2(Exh. B), adopted Dec. 6, 2004, deleted the former Art. II, §§ 7-16, 7-16.1, and enacted a new Art. II as set out herein. The former Art. II pertained to similar subject matter. For complete derivation see the Code Comparative Table at the end of this volume. 
 
Sec. 7-16. - Property maintenance code. 
(a)  Adopted. There is hereby adopted by reference as if fully set out herein that certain code known as the "2015 International Property Maintenance Code," as published by the International Code Council, together with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes hereinafter set forth, one (1) copy of which has been on file for a period of more than thirty (30) days prior to the adoption of this section and is now on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(b)  Amendments. The following additions, insertions, deletions and changes are hereby made to the above-adopted code: 
[A] 101.1 Title. Insert "City of West Chicago" where indicated. 
[A] 102.3 Application of other codes. Delete this section in its entirety and substitute the following new section 102.3: 
" [A] 102.3 Application of other codes. Repairs, additions or alterations to a structure, or changes of occupancy, shall be done in accordance with the procedures and provisions adopted in Chapter 4, Article I of the code of ordinances of the City of West Chicago." 
[A] 103.5 Fees . Delete this section in its entirety and substitute the following new section 103.5: 
"[A] 103.5 Fees. The fees for activities and services performed by the department in carrying out its responsibilities under this code shall be as indicated in Appendix G of the code of ordinances of the City of West Chicago." 
[A] 106.4 Violation penalties . Delete in its entirety and substitute the following new section: 
" [A] Section 106.4 Violation penalties . Any person who shall violate a provision of this Code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect, construct, alter or repair a building or structure in violation of an approved plan or directive of the building official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this Code, shall be subject to penalties as provided in Chapter 1, section 1-8 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of West Chicago. 
[A] Section 106.4.1 Violation penalties first time violation(s) . Any person who shall be subject to penalties as provided for in Section 106.4 and who (1) receives a first violation(s) in connection with a particular parcel; and (2) has submitted adequate proof of full compliance with the City Code and proof that the subject violation(s) has been remedied, as determined by an administrative law judge before, or at, the first administrative hearing, shall be liable for a fine reduced by seventy-five percent (75%), provided said fine shall be paid at the initial administrative adjudication hearing." 
[A] 107.6 Transfer of ownership. Amend by adding the following language to the end of the section: 
"A grantee or lessee who has received actual or constructive notice of the existence of a notice of violation shall be bound by such notice as the date of the transfer without further service of notice upon him." 
[A] 109.2 Temporary safeguards . Amend by adding the following new subsections: 
" [A] 109.2.1 Time frame for catastrophic. In no case shall the temporary safeguard used as temporary repair for catastrophic damage remain more than 180 days, except that one extension of up to 90 days may be granted at the discretion of the code official. Catastrophic damage is defined as impacting more than twenty-five (25) percent of a structure. A cash bond to cover 150% of the cost of restoration may be required to be paid by the owner or contractor. 
[A] 109.2.2 Time frame for non-catastrophic. In no case shall the temporary safeguard used as temporary repair for non-catastrophic damage remain more than 30 days, except that one extension of up to 30 days may be granted at the discretion of the code official. If for any reason a non-catastrophic repair or alteration is performed on any structure that includes the permanent closing of any existing opening, the alteration or repair shall be made weather tight, properly surface coated if needed, shall match the existing surrounding materials, be architecturally compatible to the structure and be executed in a workmanlike manner, all as determined by the code official." 
[A] 111.1 Application for appeal. Amend this section by adding the following wording at the end of this section: 
"The Board of Appeals shall have the discretion to allow a variance from the provisions of the code if, after having received a written report, certified by a licensed Architect or Engineer, the Board of Appeals determines that strict compliance with the code is impractical from an engineering, architectural or structural standpoint, and not simply unaffordable, that the spirit and intent of the code has been met and life safety has not been materially compromised as a result of the variance." 
[A] 111.2 Membership of board. Delete this section in its entirety and substitute the following new section 111.2: 
" [A] 111.2 Membership of board. Each member shall be a licensed professional engineer or architect, or a builder or superintendent of building construction, with at least ten (10) years experience, for five (5) years of which that board member shall have been in responsible charge of work. There shall not be more than two (2) members of the board selected from the same profession or business. At least one (1) of the professional engineers shall be a licensed structural or civil engineer of architectural engineering experience. The Mayor shall appoint for a term of one (1) year an alternate member of such board in addition to the five (5) members above provided for, who shall act with full power only when a member of the board refuses to vote because of interest or when a member is absent the Mayor shall appoint one (1) member of the department who shall act as secretary to the board." 
[A] 112.4 Failure to comply. Delete this section in its entirety and substitute the following new section 112.4: 
"[A] 112.4 Failure to comply. Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be subject to penalties as provided in Chapter 1, Section 1-8 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of West Chicago". 
CHAPTER 1 ADMINISTRATION. Amend by adding the following new SECTION 113: 
"SECTION 113 
CHANGE OF OCCUPANCY 
113.1 Occupancy permit required. No person, firm or corporation shall herein occupy, or permit the occupancy of or change of occupancy of any premises, addition thereto or part thereof for any purpose until an occupancy permit has been issued by the building official. "Change of Occupancy" as used in this section shall have same meaning as in Section 4-1 (l) of the City Code. The occupancy permit shall be issued only when the premises comply with all of the provisions of the housing code and all sewer service fees, levies and/or fines with respect to the premises are paid in full. The building official may deny issuance of any occupancy permit for any premises which fails to comply with any provision of the Housing Code, Building Code or any other code incorporated in these codes by reference, or any county, state, or federal ordinance or regulation incorporated into the City of West Chicago Code of Ordinances; or for failure to pay any outstanding fees, fines or costs. The application for occupancy permit shall include the following information: 
(1) The name, address, and telephone number of the applicant. 
(2) The name, address, and telephone number of the owner of the premises, or owner's agent. 
(3) The number of persons who will occupy the premises and, for each such person, the date when his or her occupancy will commence. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly make any false statements in an application for an occupancy permit including the number of people who will occupy the premises. 
The provisions in subsection 4-1(l) of Article I, Building Code, of Chapter 4, Buildings and Building Regulations, of the City Code, governing the issuance of occupancy permits and temporary occupancy permits for change of occupancy shall apply and govern the issuance of such permits under this Section 113." 
302.1 Sanitation. Amend this section by adding the following new section 302.1.1: 
" 302.1.1 Padded furniture. Interior padded furniture not specifically designed for exposure to weather and other such elements shall not be allowed to remain on outside property areas unless properly tagged and left for disposal on the normally scheduled trash/garbage pick-up day." 
302.2 Grading and drainage. Amend this section by adding the following new section 302.2.1 and 302.2.2: 
" 302.2.1 Planting of grass. Any property, including vacant land, shall be seeded or sodded to prevent soil erosion and sedimentation of public drainage systems, creeks, streams, rivers and wetlands. Once seeded or sodded, the grass shall be maintained." 
302.3 Sidewalks and driveways. Amend this section by adding the following new section 302.3.1: 
"302.3.1 Gravel driveways. Existing gravel driveways shall be maintained so as to prevent growth of vegetation, rutting and ponding of water." 
302.4 Weeds. Delete this section in its entirety and substitute the following new section 302.4: 
" 302.4 Weeds. All premises and exterior property shall be maintained free of weeds and plant growth in excess of that specified in Chapter 10, Article I of the code of ordinance of the City of West Chicago." 
302.4 Weeds. Amend by adding the following new section 302.4.1: 
" 302.4.1 Landscaped and paved areas. Any vegetation, other than decorative plantings and decorative trees and bushes shall not be permitted to grow in defined landscape areas. Vegetation shall not be permitted to grow in parking lots, sidewalks, or patios except as part of a defined landscape area." 
SECTION 302 EXTERIOR PROPERTY AREAS. Amend by adding the following new sections 302.10 and 302.11: 
" 302.10 Dead vegetation. Any vegetation that is dead and in the opinion of the code official is capable of causing property or utility damage shall be removed. Any vegetation that is dead and within any yard shall be removed. Any vegetation removed that is part of a required landscaping area shall be replaced with live plants as approved by the Director of Community Development or his/her designee. 
302.11 Vacant automobile service stations. If an automobile service station ceases operation and is vacated for a period of six (6) continuous months, the City Council may, without need of further hearing, upon notification to the owner of the subject property by certified mail, return receipt requested, enter upon the premises, raze said station building, and restore said property at the cost of the owner, which may be recoverable as a lien against said property. The City does not assume any responsibility for the removal of underground storage tanks or the mitigation of contaminated soil conditions on the subject property." 
[F] 304.3 Premises identification. Amend by adding the following new section 304.3.1: 
" 304.3.1 Garage identification. Each garage off of an alley or street on which the principal structure is not fronting shall have the street number of the principal structure displayed in a position easily observed and readable from the public way." 
304.7 Roofs and drainage. Amend by adding thereto the following new section 304.7.1: 
" 304.7.1 Sump pumps. Sump pumps shall discharge at grade level so as to be absorbed or drain into a storm water drain system. Water shall not discharge over a sidewalk, to a street, or, onto other lots or property unless conveyed by a naturally occurring or approved drainage swale." 
304.13 Window, skylight and door frames. Amend this section by adding the following new section 303.13.3: 
" 303.13.3 Temporary repairs. No temporary repair of broken or damaged windows, skylights and doors shall remain in place for more than thirty (30) days. When requested in advance, one extension of up to thirty (30) days may be granted at the discretion of the code official." 
304.14 Insect screens. Insert "April 1" and "November 1," respectfully, where indicated. 
308.2.1 Rubbish storage facilities . Amend by adding the following language to the end of this section: 
"No storage areas for rubbish and garbage, whether or not a container is utilized, shall be located in a front or exterior side yard. No rubbish and garbage containers shall be visible from the public right-of-way except during regularly scheduled pick-up days." 
308.3.1 Garbage facilities. Delete the following wording in its entirety: 
"an approved incinerator unit in the structure available to the occupants in each dwelling unit;" 
602.3 Heat supply. Insert the dates "October 1" and "May 1," respectively, where indicated. 
602.4 Occupiable work spaces. Insert the dates "October 1" and "May 1," respectively, where indicated. 
605.2 Receptacles. Amend by deleting the last three (3) sentences and in place thereof insert the following: 
"Every new and existing bathroom shall contain at least one receptacle outlet installed and providing ground fault circuit interrupter protection. Existing electrified garages, kitchen outlets, outside outlets and outlets in crawl spaces shall also be provided with ground fault circuit interrupter protection. All receptacle outlets shall have the appropriate faceplate cover for the location." 
[F] 702.4. Emergency escape openings. Amend this section by adding the following new sub-section 702.4.1: 
"[F] 702.4.1 Basement emergency escape openings. Every bedroom located partially or fully below grade in residential or group home occupancies shall have at least one openable window or exterior door approved for emergency egress or rescue. Escape windows shall comply with those provisions specified in Chapter 7, Article III of the code of ordinance of the City of West Chicago." 
(Ord. No. 04-O-0100, § 1(Exh. B), 12-6-2004; Ord. No. 06-O-0004, §§ 3, 5, 3-6-2006; Ord. No. 06-O-0076, § 3, 9-5-2006; Ord. No. 08-O-0068, § 1, 10-20-2008; Ord. No. 08-O-0082, § 1, 11-3-2008; Ord. No. 2011-O-0047, § 2, 10-3-2011; Ord. No. 15-O-0017, § 6(Exh. C), 7-6-2015) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 15-O-0017, § 6(Exh. C), adopted July 6, 2015, shall be in full force and effect on Aug. 1, 2015.  
Sec. 7-17. - Regulation of occupancy for dwellings. 
(a)  Basement bedrooms, as well as other habitable basement space, shall be free of excess moisture, dampness in ground water seepage. All unnecessary moisture shall be removed by mechanical or gravitational means. 
(b)  All walls and ceilings in bedrooms on any floor level shall have, as a minimum, a layer of one-half (½) inch gypsum board taped and finished, or equivalent, so as to provide a continuous surface with no breaks or gaps. 
(c)  Bedroom doors shall be a minimum of one and one-quarter (1¼) inches thick and thirty (30) inches wide and six (6) feet eight (8) inches high for all bedrooms. The doors shall be provided with latching hardware, and be side hinged. No locks or locking mechanisms requiring the use of a key to operate are permitted. 
(Ord. No. 04-O-0100, § 1(Exh. B), 12-6-2004; Ord. No. 2011-O-0047, § 2, 10-3-2011; Ord. No. 15-O-0017, § 6(Exh. C), 7-6-2015) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 15-O-0017, § 6(Exh. C), adopted July 6, 2015, shall be in full force and effect on Aug. 1, 2015.  
Secs. 7-18—7-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - OVER OCCUPANCY 
 
Sec. 7-26. - Definitions. 
Bedroom. A bedroom is defined as a segregated and separate room or space used or intended to be used for sleeping purposes and delineated by four (4) fixed walls and a door containing a minimum of at least seventy (70) square feet of floor area for a single occupant and at least fifty (50) square feet of floor area for two (2) or more occupants thereof, for the health, safety and welfare of the residents of West Chicago, excepting studios. It shall be prohibited to occupy any residence that fails to satisfy the minimal floor area set forth herein for any residential occupancy. 
Bedroom requirements. Minimum height of the ceiling shall be seven (7) feet. In addition to that described elsewhere in this Code, basement bedrooms must have an escape window well as described herein. An escape window well with a sill height over forty-four (44) inches, but less than fifty-four (54) inches below the adjacent ground level shall have a step permanently attached to the floor or wall directly in front of the escape window well with a minimum size of two (2) feet by two (2) feet not to exceed ten (10) inches in height. Furthermore, the escape window well shall have horizontal dimensions that allow the window to be fully opened. The escape window shall have an accessible and clear opening of not less than nine (9) square feet and a minimum height of thirty-six (36) inches and a minimum width of thirty-three (33) inches. 
Over occupancy. Over occupancy is defined in a residential dwelling unit as any qualified bedroom occupied by one (1) person which does not consist of at least seventy (70) square feet of floor area and any qualified bedroom occupied by more than one (1) person which does not consist of at least fifty (50) square feet of floor area for each occupant thereof. 
Prohibited sleeping areas. Prohibited sleeping areas are defined as kitchens, and other non-habitable areas, as well as living rooms, dining rooms and other rooms which are not designated or qualified as bedrooms, as defined and qualified herein, which shall not be used for sleeping purposes. 
(Ord. No. 04-O-0100, § 1(Exh. B), 12-6-2004; Ord. No. 11-O-0047, § 2, 10-3-2011; Ord. No. 15-O-0017, § 6(Exh. C), 7-6-2015) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 15-O-0017, § 6(Exh. C), adopted July 6, 2015, shall be in full force and effect on Aug. 1, 2015.  
Sec. 7-27. - Enforcement. 
The city shall conduct regular inspections to ensure compliance with this article. In addition, the city may inspect other residential units for housing code compliance upon the receipt of probable cause of a code violation, which shall authorize the city to apply with the Circuit Court of DuPage County for issuance of a search warrant for said inspection. Nothing herein shall limit the right of a property owner or occupant of any residence hereunder from consenting to an unannounced administrative search. 
(Ord. No. 04-O-0100, § 1(Exh. B), 12-6-2004)  
Sec. 7-28. - Violations. 
It shall be a violation of the City Code for any person or persons to occupy a dwelling unit in a number in excess of that provided for herein. Infants under the age of eighteen (18) months shall not be counted in determining over occupancy. However, if over occupancy results solely from the presence of such an infant, and another occupant should leave the dwelling unit on a permanent basis, such occupant cannot be replaced by another even if the infant has not reached the age of eighteen (18) months. 
(Ord. No. 04-O-0100, § 1(Exh. B), 12-6-2004)  
Sec. 7-29. - Penalty. 
Any person violating any provision of this article shall be subject to a fine in an amount not less than those established in the schedule set forth below and not more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00): 
Minimum
Description of Violation       Fine Amount 
First violation in any 365 day period ..... $200.00 
Second violation in any 365 day period ..... 300.00 
Third violation in any 365 day period ..... 400.00 
Fourth and subsequent violations in any 365 day period ..... 750.00 
For purposes of this article, and determining the appropriate amount due hereunder: 
(a)  A separate violation shall be deemed committed in each instance in which a citation is issued. 
(b)  All violations of any provision of this article at the same location shall be counted, regardless of whether or not the violation involves the same individual(s). 
(c)  Any finding or plea of guilty or no contest upon a citation issued shall be deemed a violation. 
(Ord. No. 04-O-0100, § 1(Exh. B), 12-6-2004)  
Secs. 7-30—7-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - HUMAN RIGHTS/FAIR HOUSING[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 04-O-0100, § 3, adopted Dec. 6, 2004 renumbered Art. III as Art. IV. Formerly, Ord. No. 3058, § 2, adopted Nov. 18, 1996, provided for the deletion of Art. III, §§ 7-41—7-50, which pertained to fair housing as derived from Ord. No. 1014, §§ 1—6, adopted Sept. 15, 1969. Ord. No. 3058, § 2 further enacted new provisions which pertained to similar subject matter, set forth herein as Art. III, §§ 7-41—7-44. 
 
Sec. 7-41. - Declaration of policy. 
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city and the purpose of this article, in the exercise by the city of its police and regulatory powers for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare and for the maintenance and promotion of commerce, industry and good government in the city, to secure to all persons living or desiring to live in the city, a fair opportunity to purchase, lease, rent or occupy housing or other real estate, to provide all persons desiring employment in the city fair and equal employment opportunities and to provide all persons full and equal access to all public places of accommodation, regardless of race, sex, religion, color, age, marital status, handicap or national origin. 
(Ord. No. 3058, § 2, 11-18-96)  
Sec. 7-42. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article the following words shall have the following meanings unless their context requires otherwise: 
Age. The chronological age of a person who is at least forty (40) years old. 
Commission. The human relations commission established pursuant to section 2-311. 
Discriminate. To extend differential treatment on the basis of race, sex, religion, color, age, marital status, handicap or national origin. 
Handicap. A determinable physical or dental characteristic of a person, including but not limited to, a determinable physical characteristic which necessitates the person's use of a guide, hearing or support dog, the history of such characteristic, or the perception of such characteristic by the person complained against, which may result from disease, injury, congenital condition of birth or function disorder and which characteristic: 
(1)  For purposes of section 7-43(a) is unrelated to the person's ability to acquire, rent or maintain real estate; 
(2)  For purposes of section 7-43(b) is unrelated to a person's ability to utilize and benefit from a place of public accommodation. 
Investigator. An employee of the city designated by the city administrator to investigate a complaint filed under this article. 
Lending institution. Any bank, insurance company, savings and loan association or any other person in the business of lending money or guaranteeing loans, any person in the business of obtaining, arranging or negotiating loans or guarantees as agent or broker, and any person in the business of buying or selling loans or instruments for the payment of money which are secured by title to or a security interest in real estate. 
Marital status. The legal status of being married, single, separated, divorced or widowed. 
National origin. The place in which a person or one of his or her ancestors was born. 
Operator. Any owner, lessee, proprietor, manager, superintendent, agent, or occupant of a place of public accommodation or an employee of any such person or persons. 
Person. Includes one (1) or more individuals, partnerships, associations or organizations, corporations, the State of Illinois and its instrumentalities, political subdivisions, units of local government, legal representatives, trustees in bankruptcy or receivers. 
Public official. Any officer or employee of the state or any agency thereof, including political subdivisions, municipal corporations, park districts, forest preserve districts, educational institutions and schools. 
Public place of accommodation. A business, accommodation, refreshment, entertainment, recreation or transportation facility of any kind, whether licensed or not, whose goods, services, facilities, privileges, advantages or accommodations are extended, offered, sold or otherwise made available to the public. Such term includes, but is not limited to, restaurants, hotels, stores, taverns, soft drink or ice cream parlors, barber shops, beauty shops, theaters, places of amusement, taxicabs, funeral homes, public swimming pools, public golf courses, public driving ranges and other places of public accommodation and amusement. 
Real estate. The term "real estate" shall be construed to include the following real property within the corporate limits of the City of West Chicago: 
(1)  Multiple-family dwellings of three (3) or more units. 
(2)  Multiple-family dwellings containing two (2) or fewer units, if the owner does not reside in one of the units. 
(3)  Single-family houses not owned by private individuals. 
(4)  Single-family houses owned by a private individual who owns more than three (3) such houses or who, in any two-year period, sells more than one (1) in which he was not the last resident. 
(5)  Single-family houses owned by private individuals if they are sold or rented through a broker or other person in the business of selling or renting dwellings, or if a discriminatory written notice or advertisement is used in offering to sell or rent. 
Real estate broker. The term "real estate broker" means any natural person, partnership, association or corporation, or agent thereof, who for a fee or other valuable consideration sells, purchases, exchanges or rents real property of another, or offers or negotiates to do any of the foregoing, or manages and collects rental from the real property of another. 
Sex. The status of being male or female. 
(Ord. No. 3058, § 2, 11-18-96)  
Sec. 7-43. - Prohibited acts. 
(a)  Real estate. No contractor, developer, lessee, sublessee, real estate broker or salesman, lending institution, advertiser, or agent of any of the foregoing, shall discriminate against any person because of his race, sex, religion, color, age, marital status, handicap or national origin, or because of the race, sex, religion, color, age, marital status, handicap or national origin of his friends or associates in regard to the sale, leasing, rental, or other dealings concerning real estate. Any such discrimination shall be considered an unfair real estate practice. Without limiting the foregoing, it shall be an unfair real estate practice: 
(1)  To publish, circulate, issue or display, or cause to be published, circulated, issued or displayed, any communication, notice, advertisement, sign or other writing of any kind relating to the sale, leasing or renting of any real estate which will indicate or express any such discrimination. 
(2)  To exploit or overcharge any person for real estate services because of that person's race, sex, religion, color, age, marital status, handicap or national origin. 
(3)  To solicit for sale, lease, or listing for sale or lease, any real estate on the ground of loss of value due to the present or prospective entry into any neighborhood of any person or person of any particular race, sex, religion, color, age, marital status, handicap or national origin. 
(4)  To make or distribute, or cause to be made or distributed, any written material or statements intended to induce any owner of real estate to sell or lease his property because of any present or prospective change in the race, sex, religion, color, age, marital status, handicap or national origin of persons in the neighborhood. 
(5)  To refuse examination of copies of any listing of real estate to any person because of race, sex, religion, color, age, marital status, handicap or national origin. 
(6)  To refuse to show, sell, lease, or rent, any real estate because of the race, sex, religion, color, age, marital status, handicap or national origin of the proposed buyer or tenant. 
(7)  To enter into an agreement which prohibits the sale, leasing or rental of real estate to any person because of race, sex, color, religion, age, marital status, handicap or national origin. 
(8)  To act or undertake to act with respect to any real estate, the disposition of which is prohibited to any person because of race, sex, color, religion age, marital status, handicap or national origin. 
(9)  For a lending institution to refuse to negotiate, enter into or perform any agreement to lend or guarantee the loan of funds because of race, sex, color, religion, age, marital status, handicap or national origin; or to discriminate because of race, sex, color, religion or national origin in making, agreeing to make, arranging or negotiating any loan or guarantee of funds, for the purpose of financing the purchase or sale, construction, lease, rehabilitation, improvement, renovation or repair of any real estate; or to offer or agree to terms, conditions or privileges that discriminate against any party to such agreement because of race, sex, religion, color, age, marital status, handicap or national origin. 
Nothing in this section shall require an owner to offer property to the public at large before selling or renting it, nor shall this section be deemed to prohibit owners from giving preference to prospective tenants or buyers for any other reason than race, sex, religion, color, age, marital status, handicap or national origin. 
(b)  Public accommodations. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to, on the basis of race, sex, religion, color, age, marital status, handicap or national origin: 
a.  Deny or refuse to another the full and equal employment of the facilities and services of any public place of accommodation. 
b.  Directly or indirectly, as the operator of a place of public accommodation, publish, circulate, display or mail any written communication, except a private communication sent in response to a specific inquiry, which the operator knows is to the effect that any of the facilities of the place of public accommodation will be denied to any person or that any person is unwelcome, objectionable or unacceptable. 
c.  Deny or refuse to another, as a public official, the full and equal enjoyment of the accommodations, advantage, facilities or privileges of the official's office or services or of any property under the official's care. 
(2)  Nothing in this subsection shall apply to: 
a.  A private club, or other establishment not in fact open to the public, except to the extent that the goods, services, facilities, privileges, advantages, or accommodations of the establishment are made available to the customers or patrons of another establishment that is a place of public accommodation. 
b.  Any facility, as to discrimination based on sex, which is distinctly private in nature such as restrooms, shower rooms, bath houses, health clubs and other similar facilities. 
c.  Any facility, as to discrimination based on sex, which restricts the rental of rooms to individuals of one sex. 
(Ord. No. 3058, § 2, 11-18-96)  
Sec. 7-44. - Complaints; procedures. 
(a)  Complaints. 
(1)  Any person aggrieved in any manner by a violation of any provision of this article may file a written complaint with the city administrator. The complaint shall be under oath, addressed to the commission, and shall state: 
a.  The name and address of the complainant; 
b.  The name and address of the person or persons against whom the complaint is brought, if known to the complainant; and 
c.  The facts surrounding the alleged violation of this article. 
Such complaint shall also include the name and address of all persons believed to have knowledge concerning the alleged violation. The commission shall provide a printed form of complaint for the use of aggrieved persons. 
If the complaint is against the City of West Chicago; the complainant shall be referred to the Illinois Department of Human Rights and such complaint shall not be investigated, nor shall a hearing be held by the commission, under the provisions of this article. 
(2)  No fee shall be charged for the filing of the complaint. 
(3)  After the filing of the complaint, the city administrator shall, within three (3) days, serve a copy of the complaint personally or by certified mail on the person or persons charged. 
(4)  If the complaint alleges a violation of section 7-43(b) and the respondent has rules or policies in effect setting forth internal procedures to address the subject of the complaint, such complaint shall not be investigated by the investigator unless the complainant has followed such procedures through to their conclusion. 
(5)  Any complaint shall be barred from consideration unless it is filed with the commission within six (6) months after the alleged discriminatory practice occurred. The commission may extend the time for filing the complaint for an additional sixty (60) days when conciliation efforts are pending or when procedures referred to in paragraph (4) above are pending. 
(b)  Investigation. The investigator designated by the city administrator shall investigate the complaint. Upon completion of the investigation, the investigator shall prepare and submit a report to the commission summarizing the information gathered during the investigation, along with a recommendation as to whether probable cause exists in support of the allegations. No member of the commission shall participate in the investigation of a complaint. 
(c)  Hearing. Upon receipt of the investigator's report, the commission shall determine whether or not to hold a hearing on the complaint. If the commission determines that a hearing shall not be held, all parties shall be so notified in writing. If the commission determines that a hearing shall be held, it shall set a hearing date, which shall be no later than sixty (60) days from receipt of such report. The investigator shall, if requested by any party, testify at such hearing. The chairperson of the commission shall preside at the hearing, and the commission shall hear testimony and accept relevant evidence. The strict rules of evidence applicable to judicial proceedings shall not apply to the hearings; rather, all evidence shall be admitted if it is the type commonly relied upon by reasonably prudent persons in the conduct of their affairs, so long as it is relevant and material to the subject matter of the complaint. The hearing shall be conducted upon notice by certified mail to all parties, at least forty-eight (48) hours prior to the hearing. 
Hearings shall be held in front of the full commission; provided, however, that no commission member shall participate in a hearing in which his or her impartiality might reasonably be questioned, including, but not limited to, instances where such member has a personal bias or prejudice concerning a party to the complaint or in which such member or member's spouse or relatives are a party to the complaint. 
The commission shall provide a court reporter to take a transcript of the hearing. All evidence shall be under oath, administered by an officer authorized to administer oaths. All parties may be represented by counsel at their election and shall have the right to call witnesses and to cross examine witnesses. The complainant or the person charged, or the commission on its own motion, may have subpoenas issued in the name of the commission for persons to appear at commission hearings and for the examination of documents. Subpoenas shall only be issued to persons or for documents which have a substantial evidentiary connection with a complaint. Service of such subpoenas shall be made in the same manner as in civil actions and shall be enforceable through the circuit court of DuPage County. 
Hearings may be continued by the commission. At the conclusion of the hearing, the commission may hold a closed meeting to consider the evidence and testimony presented to the extent permitted by the Open Meetings Act. The commission shall also prepare: 
(1)  A summary of the evidence taken; 
(2)  Its findings of fact. 
(d)  Action. The commission shall take any one (1) or more of the following actions: 
(1)  Resolve the complaint by conciliation. The commission is authorized to hold closed meetings for conciliation of complaints alleging a violation of section 7-43(a). The complainant and respondent and their advisors are entitled to attend such closed meetings. A written record shall be made of the result of such conciliation. 
(2)  Dismiss the complaint. 
(3)  Make findings and recommendations to the city council. Such recommendations may include: 
a.  Filing a complaint for revocation of any applicable state license; 
b.  Transferring or referring the matter to an appropriate state agency; 
c.  Instructing the city prosecutor to file a complaint to enjoin the violation or a complaint for any other appropriate relief. If the commission feels that immediate court action is necessary, it may request that the mayor, and the mayor, in his discretion may instruct, the city prosecutor to file the complaint even though a hearing may be pending. 
Such written findings and recommendations shall be served by mail upon the complainant and the party or parties charged within thirty (30) days of the conclusion of the hearing. 
(e)  Relief. At any time after final action by the commission, or in the event of the refusal of the commission to act on a complaint within the time limits herein set forth, the complainant may file a complaint in the circuit court for appropriate relief for the alleged violation. 
(Ord. No. 3058, § 2, 11-18-96)  
Secs. 7-45—7-47. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - TURNER JUNCTION HISTORIC DISTRICT[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 04-O-0100, § 4, adopted Dec. 6, 2004 renumbered Art. IV as Art. V. Formerly, Ord. No. 03-O-0012, § 1, adopted Mar. 17, 2003, deleted the former Art. IV, §§ 7-51, 7-52, and enacted a new Art. IV as set out herein. The former Art. IV pertained to historic district and derived from Ord. No. 2475, § 1, adopted Aug. 19, 1991. 
Cross reference— Landmark and historic district regulations, § 4-90 et seq. 
 
Sec. 7-48. - Purpose. 
The historic district is created for the purpose of the educational, cultural, economic and general welfare of the community by: 
(1)  Protecting, enhancing and perpetuating the distinctive visual characteristics of the Turner Junction Historic District, which represent and reflect elements of the city's cultural, social, economic, political and architectural history; 
(2)  Retaining and enhancing those properties which contribute to the character of the historic district and encouraging their adoption for current use; 
(3)  Assuring that alterations of existing structures are compatible with the character of the historic district; 
(4)  Assuring that new construction and subdivision of lots in the historic district are compatible with the character of the historic district; 
(5)  Safeguarding the city's historic, aesthetic, architectural, cultural and community heritage as embodied in the historic district; 
(6)  Improving property values in the historic district; 
(7)  Fostering civic pride in the beauty and noble accomplishments of the past as represented in the historic district; 
(8)  Protecting and enhancing the city's attractiveness to tourists and visitors and supporting the business and industry thereby provided; 
(9)  Strengthening the economy of the city; 
(10)  Promoting the use of the Turner Junction Historic District for a the education, pleasure and welfare of the residents of the city. 
(Ord. No. 03-O-0012, § 1, 3-17-2003)  
Sec. 7-49. - Establish boundaries. 
(a)  The boundaries of the Turner Junction Historic District are as illustrated on the original map of the West Chicago Historic District and which are described as follows: 
Beginning at the point where the Chicago and Northwestern Railroad property adjoins the Elgin, Joliet and Eastern Railroad property and Aurora Street; thence northerly along the eastern boundary of the Elgin, Joliet and Eastern Railroad property; thence northeasterly along the southeastern boundary of the Chicago and Northwestern Railroad property; thence southeasterly along the northeastern boundary of Jacobson's Assessment Plat; thence easterly along the couth [south] line of McConnell Avenue; thence southerly along the west line of Arbor Avenue extending to a point on the south line of Washington Street; thence southeasterly along the southwest line of High Street; thence southwesterly along the northwest lone [line] of Center Street extending to a point on the southwest lone [line] of Main Street; thence northwesterly along the north boundary of the Chicago and Northwestern Railroads property to the point of beginning. 
(b)  The Turner Junction Historic District is hereby established and designated as a local historic district pursuant to the terms and provisions adopted by the city council outlined in the Ordinance No. 2365, November 5, 1990. 
(Ord. No. 03-O-0012, § 1, 3-17-2003) 
Cross reference— Historical preservation commission, § 2-278 et seq.; landmark and historic district regulations, § 4-90 et seq.  
ARTICLE VI. - EAST WASHINGTON STREET HISTORIC DISTRICT[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 04-O-100, § 5, adopted Dec. 6, 2004 renumbered Art. V as Art. VI. 
 
Sec. 7-50. - Purpose. 
The historic district is created for the purpose of the educational, cultural, economic and general welfare of the community by: 
(1)  Protecting, enhancing and perpetuating the distinctive visual characteristics of the East Washington Street Historic District, which represent and reflect elements of the city's cultural, social, economic, political and architectural history; 
(2)  Retaining and enhancing those properties which contribute to the character of the historic district and encouraging their adoption for current use; 
(3)  Assuring that alterations of existing structures are compatible with the character of the historic district; 
(4)  Assuring that new construction and subdivision of lots in the historic district are compatible with the character of the historic district; 
(5)  Safeguarding the city's historic, aesthetic, architectural, cultural and community heritage as embodied in the historic district; 
(6)  Improving property values in the historic district; 
(7)  Fostering civic pride in the beauty and noble accomplishments of the past as represented in the historic district; 
(8)  Protecting and enhancing the city's attractiveness to tourists and visitors and supporting the business and industry thereby provided; 
(9)  Strengthening the economy of the city; 
(10)  Promoting the use of the East Washington Street Historic District for a the education, pleasure and welfare of the residents of the city. 
(Ord. No. 03-O-0012, § 3, 3-17-2003)  
Sec. 7-51. - Establish boundaries. 
(a)  The boundaries of the East Washington Street Historic District are as illustrated on the original map of the East Washington Street Historic District and which are described as follows: 
That part of the southwest quarter of Section 3, the east half of the northeast quarter of Section 9, and the northwest quarter of Section 10, all in Township 39 north, Range 9 east of the Third Principal Meridian, described as follows: 
Beginning at the intersection of the south line of Washington Street and the northwest line of Galena Street; thence west along said south line of Washington Street a distance of 438.5 feet (more or less) to the southerly extension of the west line of Lot 2 of Madden's Re-Subdivision; thence northerly along the west line, and said southerly extension thereof of said Lot 2, a distance of 203 feet (more or less) to the northwest corner of said Lot 2; thence easterly along the north line of said Lot 2, and along the north line of Lots 10, 11, and 12 in Block 15, in McConnell's Town of Turner, a distance of 264 feet (more or less) to the northeast corner of said Lot 12; thence easterly a distance of 66 feet (more or less) to the northwest corner of Lot 10 in Block 14 in McConnell's Town of Turner; thence easterly along the north line of Lots 10 and 11 in Block 14 in McConnell's Town of Turner a distance of 138.3 feet (record) to the northeast corner of said Lot 11; thence north along the west line of Lot 6 in Block 14 in McConnell's Town of Turner a distance of 198 feet (record) to the northwest corner of said Lot 6; thence east along the north line of said Lot 6 and the north line of Lots 4 and 5 in Block 14 in McConnell's Town of Turner a distance of 264 feet (record) to the northeast corner of said Lot 4; thence south along the east line of said Lot 4 a distance of 198 feet (record) to the northwest corner of Lot 14 in Block 14 in McConnell's Town of Turner; thence east along the north line of said Lot 14 and the north line of Lots 15 and 16 in Block 14 of McConnell's Town of Turner a distance of 198 feet (record) to the northeast corner of said Lot 16; thence east a distance of 66 feet (more or less) to the northwest corner of Lot 4 in Block 13 in the McConnell's Town of Turner; thence east along the north line of Lot 4 in Block 13 in McConnell's Town of Turner, being also the south line of Lots 1 and 2 in Weiss-Dennis Assessment Plat, a distance of 198 feet (record) to the northeast corner of said Lot 4; thence east along the easterly extension of said north line of Lot 4 a distance of 66 feet (more or less) to the east line of Oakwood Avenue; thence south along said east line of Oakwood Avenue a distance of 65.2 feet (more or less) to the northwest corner of Lot 3 in Commissioner's Plat; thence east along the north line of said Lot 3 a distance of 91.14 feet (more or less) to the west line of Lot 1 in said Commissioner's Plat; thence north along said west line of Lot 1 a distance of 51 feet (more or less) to the northwest corner of said Lot 1; thence east along the north line of said Lot 1, a distance 60 feet (more or less) to the northeast corner of said Lot 1; thence north along the west line of the property described in Document Number R88-093305 a distance of 71 feet (more or less) to the north line of the northwest quarter of said Section 10; thence east along said north line of the northwest quarter of Section 10 a distance of 76.68 feet (more or less) to the west line of the property described in Document Number R86-011350; thence north along said west line of the property described in Document Number R86-011350 a distance of 51 feet (more or less) to the northwest corner of said property described in Document Number R86-011350; thence east along the north line of said property described in Document Number R86-011350 a distance of 60 feet (record) to the northeast corner of said property described in Document Number R86-011350; thence south along the east line of said property described in Document Number R86-11350 a distance of 72.5 feet (record) to the northwest corner of the property described in Document Number R98-200096; thence east along the north line of the property described in Document Number R98-200096 and along the north line of the property described in Document Number R96-127307, a distance of 191.34 feet (record) to the northeast corner of said property described in Document Number R96-127307; thence east along the easterly extension of the north line of said property described in Document Number R96-127307, a distance of 66 feet (more or less), to the east line of Ingalton Avenue; thence south along the east line of Ingalton Avenue a distance of 125 feet (more or less) to the northwest corner of the south 5 feet of Lot 43 in Block 2 in Rolling Mills Addition to McConnell's Town of Turner; thence east along the north line of said south 5 feet of Lot 43, and the easterly extension thereof, a distance of 182.5 feet (more or less) to the east line of the 20 foot wide north/south alley in said Block 2; thence south along the east line of said alley a distance of 5 feet (record) to the northwest corner of Lot 1 in Block 2 in said Rolling Mills Addition to McConnell's Town of Turner; thence east along the north line of said Lot 1, a distance of 162.5 feet (more or less) to the northeast corner of said Lot 1; thence east along the easterly extension of the north line of said Lot 1, a distance of 66 feet (more or less) to the east line of Oak Avenue; thence south along the east line of Oak Avenue, and the southerly extension thereof a distance of 116 feet (more or less) to the south line of Washington Street; thence west along said south line of Washington Street a distance of 33 feet (more or less) to the northwest corner of Lot 2 in Prudential Realty Companies Re-Subdivision of the Anthony Property; thence south along the west line of said Lot 2 and Lot 4 in Prudential Realty Companies Re-Subdivision of the Anthony Property a distance of 568.12 feet (record) to the southeast corner of Lot 1 in the Fox Subdivision; thence west along the south line of said Lot 1 a distance of 215.95 feet (record) to the southwest corner of said Lot 1; thence north along the west line of the Fox Subdivision a distance of 409.50 feet (record) to the southeast corner of Earl R. Nuemann's Survey; thence west along the south line of Earl R. Nuemann's Survey, the south line of Lots 1, 2 and 3 in Washington Summit, and the south line of Lots 4, 5, 6, 7, and 8 in Robertson's Addition to McConnell's Town of Turner, a distance of 599.5 feet (more or less) to the southwest corner of said Lot 4; thence north along the west line of said Lot 4, being also the west line of the property described in Document Number R99-235439, a distance of 31.14 feet (more or less) to a point 120 feet south of the south line of Washington Street; thence west along a line 120 feet south of the south line of Washington Street a distance of 149.5 feet (more or less) to the west line of Oakwood Avenue; thence north along said west line of Oakwood Avenue a distance of 102 feet (more or less) to the southeasterly line of Center Street; thence southwesterly along said southeasterly line of Center Street a distance of 239 feet (more or less) to a line that is perpendicular to the southeasterly line of Center Street which passes through the southerly most corner of Lot 4 in Block 5 in the Town of Junction; thence northwesterly along said perpendicular line a distance of 66 feet (record) to said southerly most corner of Lot 4; thence southwesterly along the northwesterly line of center street a distance of 20 feet (record) to the easterly most corner of Lot 3 in Block 5 in the Town of Junction; thence northwesterly, along the northeasterly line of Lots 3 and 2 in the Town of Junction a distance of 122 feet (more or less) to the northwesterly line of the southeasterly 56 feet of said Lot 2; thence southwesterly along said northwesterly line of the southeasterly 56 feet of Lot 2 a distance of 155 feet (record) to a point on the northeasterly line of Fulton Street; thence southwesterly along the southwesterly extension of said northwesterly line a distance of 66 feet (more or less) to a point on the southwesterly line of Fulton Street; thence northwesterly along said southwesterly line of Fulton Street a distance of 142 feet (more or less) to the easterly most corner of Lot 10 in Block 4 in said Town of Junction; thence southwesterly along the southeasterly line of said lot 10, a distance of 155 feet (record) to a point on the northeast line of a 20 feet wide northwest/southeast alley in Block 4 in said Town of Junction; thence northwesterly along the northeasterly line of said alley, a distance of 66 feet (more or less) to the southeasterly line of Galena Street; thence northwesterly along the northwesterly extension of said northeasterly line of the alley a distance of 66 feet (record) to the northwesterly line of Galena Street; thence northeasterly along said northwesterly line of Galena Street, a distance of 48 feet (more or less) to said point of beginning; 
All in DuPage County Illinois. 
The above description is intended to include the properties identified as parcel identification numbers (PIN); 
04-03-316-033, 04-03-316-037, 04-10-100-005, 04-10-100-006, 04-10-100-007, 04-10-100-010, 04-10-101-002, 04-10-101-003, 04-10-101-004, 04-10-101-005, 04-10-101-006, 04-10-102-003, 04-10-102-004, 04-10-102-005, 04-10-103-003, 04-10-103-004, 04-10-103-005, 04-10-103-006, 04-10-103-007, 04-10-103-008, 04-10-104-004, 04-10-104-008, 04-10-110-007, 04-10-111-001, 04-10-111-002, 04-10-111-005, 04-10-116-002, 04-10-116-003, 04-10-116-004, 04-10-116-005, 04-10-116-006, 04-10-116-007, 04-10-116-008, 04-10-116-009, 04-10-116-010, 04-10-116-011, 04-10-116-012, 04-10-116-013, 04-10-117-002, 04-10-117-012, 04-10-117-013, 
The above parcel identification numbers where obtained from Dupage County 2001 tax assessment map sheet numbers 4-10A-E and 4-10A-W. 
(b)  The East Washington Street Historic District is hereby established and designated as a local historic district pursuant to the terms and provisions adopted by the city council outlined in the Ordinance No. 2365, November 5, 1990. 
(Ord. No. 03-O-0012, § 3, 3-17-2003)  
Sec. 7-52. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - RESERVED[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 04-O-0100, § 6, adopted Dec. 6, 2004 renumbered Art. VI as Art. VII, at the city's request Art. VI, §§ 7-53—7-60 was deleted in its entirety. Art. VII pertained to rental inspection program. Ord. No. 03-O-0012, § 2, adopted Mar. 17, 2003 renumbered Art. V as Art. VI. Formerly Art. V. pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 4401, § 1, adopted May 14, 2001; Ord. No. 01-O-0124, § 1, adopted Dec. 3, 2001. 
 
Secs. 7-53—7-64. - Reserved.  
Chapter 8 - ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION SYSTEM  
ARTICLE I. - ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION SYSTEM[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 18-O-0047, § 1, adopted Aug. 4, 2018, amended Art. I in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. I, §§ 8-1—8-14, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 18-O-0017, 5-7-2018. 
 
Sec. 8-1. - Creation of administrative adjudication system. 
(a)  Pursuant to Division 2.1 of the Illinois Municipal Code, 65 ILCS 5/1-2.1-1 et seq., which authorizes municipalities to implement a system of administrative adjudication, there is created a system of administrative adjudication of charges of Code violations for the city of West Chicago. The system will authorize an administrative law judge to conduct adjudicatory hearings of cases instituted by city departments. 
(b)  The city adopts Division 2.1 of the Illinois Municipal Code, 65 ILCS 5/1-2.1-1 et seq., as it may be amended from time to time. In the event of a conflict between said statutes and this article, this article shall prevail. 
(c)  The adoption of this article does not preclude the city from using other lawful methods to enforce the provisions of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 18-O-0047, § 1, 9-4-2018)  
Sec. 8-2. - Purpose. 
The purpose of the administrative adjudication system for Code violations is to provide a procedure by which charges of Code violations can be equitably and efficiently adjudicated administratively by an administrative law judge. 
(Ord. No. 18-O-0047, § 1, 9-4-2018)  
Sec. 8-3. - Jurisdiction. 
Those matters subject to the administrative adjudication system provided for by this article are charges of violation of any regulation of the City of West Chicago, excluding traffic violations that regulate the movement of vehicles, so long as the relief sought is not a penalty of incarceration or a total fine in excess of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00), excluding allowable costs. The fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) limitation shall not apply to those cases brought to enforce the collection of any tax imposed and collected by the city. 
(Ord. No. 18-O-0047, § 1, 9-4-2018)  
Sec. 8-4. - Administrative hearings supervisor. 
(a)  There is hereby established the office of administrative hearings. That office shall be directed by an administrative hearings supervisor, who shall be the city administrator, or his/her designee. The administrative hearings supervisor's function is to expedite the prosecution and/or correction of Code violations subject to the jurisdiction of the administrative adjudication system. The administrative hearings supervisor is authorized to manage the administrative adjudication process in the manner provided for in this article, which shall include determining the qualifications of administrative law judges, appointing administrative law judges, upon the appointment by the mayor and with the advice and consent of the city council; and establishing such rules and regulations, as may be necessary for the effective operation of the administrative adjudication system. The city administrator may also appoint other persons to assist with the administrative adjudication system provided for in this article. 
(b)  Any violation prosecuted under administrative adjudication which is not listed in the below table is subject to the general penalty provisions of section 1-8 of this Code. 
(c)  Any offense listed in the below table of this chapter may be settled, comprised and paid in the respective amounts and within the respective time frames set forth in the below table of offenses and fines. 
Chapter/Section 	Title/Offenses 	Minimum Fine/Fine Paid Before Hearing 	Maximum Fine 
Chapter 17 
Article I, § 17-1 	West Chicago Vehicle and Traffic Code. Adoption by reference of the Illinois Vehicle Code (IVC) 		
5/3-401 	No valid registration 	$50.00 	$100.00 
5/3-413(a) 	No front/rear registration plate 	$50.00 	$100.00 
5/3-413(b) 	Improper display of license plate 	$50.00 	$100.00 
5/3-413(f) 	Operation of vehicle with expired registration 	$50.00 	$100.00 
5/3-413(g) 	Use of license plate cover 	$50.00 	$100.00 
5/3-701 	Inoperable odometer under mileage plates 	$50.00 	$100.00 
5/1-100 et seq. 	Miscellaneous traffic code violations 	$50.00 	$100.00 
5/6-112 	Driver's license not on person 	$50.00 	$100.00 
5/6-116 	Failure to notify Secretary of State—Change of address 	$50.00 	$100.00 
5/12-713 	Improperly marked vehicles—Contractor 	$50.00 	$100.00 
5/12-101 	Unsafe equipment 	$50.00 	$100.00 
5/12-201(a) 	Driving motorcycle without lighted headlight 	$50.00 	$100.00 
5/12-201(b) 	Driving without lights when required 	$50.00 	$100.00 
5/12-201(b) 	Only one tail light 	$50.00 	$100.00 
5/12-201(c) 	No rear license plate light 	$50.00 	$100.00 
5/12-202 	Clearance, identification and side marker lamps 	$50.00 	$100.00 
5/12-204 	Improper lamp or flag on projected load 	$50.00 	$100.00 
5/12-205 	Lamps on other vehicles and equipment 	$50.00 	$100.00 
5/12-205.1 	Implements of husbandry or slow moving vehicles—Display of amber signal lamp 	$50.00 	$100.00 
5/12-207 	Improper use of spot lamp/aux driving lamps 	$50.00 	$100.00 
5/12-208(a) 	No stop lights 	$50.00 	$100.00 
5/12-208(b) 	No turn signal (vehicle) 	$50.00 	$100.00 
5/12-208(c) 	No turn signal (trailer or semitrailer) 	$50.00 	$100.00 
5/12-209(a) 	Other lighting violation 	$50.00 	$100.00 
5/12-209(b) 	Other lighting violation 	$50.00 	$100.00 
5/12-209(c) 	Defective back-up lights 	$50.00 	$100.00 
5/12-210 	Failure to dim headlights 	$50.00 	$100.00 
5/12-211 	Only one headlight 	$50.00 	$100.00 
5/12-212(a) 	Restrictions on lamps 	$50.00 	$100.00 
5/12-212(b) 	Flashing lights 	$50.00 	$100.00 
5/12-215 	Oscillating, rotating of flashing lights 	$50.00 	$100.00 
5/12-218 	Illegal auxiliary accent lighting on motorcycle 	$50.00 	$100.00 
5/12-301 	Defective brakes 	$50.00 	$100.00 
5/12-405(c) 	Use of unsafe tire 	$50.00 	$100.00 
5/12-501(a) 	No windshield 	$50.00 	$100.00 
5/12-502 	No rear view mirror 	$50.00 	$100.00 
5/12-503(a) 	Illegally tinted windows 	$50.00 	$100.00 
5/12-503(c) 	Obstructed windshield 	$50.00 	$100.00 
5/12-503(d) 	Obstructed windows—Snow, ice, moisture 	$50.00 	$100.00 
5/12-503(d) 	No windshield clearing device (wipers) 	$50.00 	$100.00 
5/12-503(e) 	Defective windshield, side or rear windows 	$50.00 	$100.00 
5/12-601(a) 	Defective or no horn 	$50.00 	$100.00 
5/12-601(b) 	Horns and warning devices violation 	$50.00 	$100.00 
5/12-602 	Loud muffler—Excessive noise 	$50.00 	$100.00 
5/12-604(a) 	Video devices violations 	$50.00 	$100.00 
5/12-606 	Miscellaneous tow truck violations 	$50.00 	$100.00 
5/12-607 	Illegal suspension (first division vehicle) 	$50.00 	$100.00 
5/12-607.1(a) and (b) 	Illegal suspension (second division vehicle) 	$50.00 	$100.00 
5/12-608 	No bumper or unlawful bumper height 	$50.00 	$100.00 
5/12-610(a) 	Illegal use of headset 	$50.00 	$100.00 
5/12-611 	Illegal operation of sound amplification—75' 	$50.00 	$100.00 
5/12-702 	No flags, flares, warning devices carried 	$50.00 	$100.00 
5/12-709(a) 	No slow moving vehicle emblem 	$50.00 	$100.00 
5/12-710 	Inadequate or no splash guards (mud flaps) 	$50.00 	$100.00 
5/13-111 	Operation without valid certificate of safety 	$50.00 	$100.00 
5/15-316(c) 	Violation of local weight restrictions 	$50.00 	$100.00 
 
(Ord. No. 18-O-0047, § 1, 9-4-2018; Ord. No. 19-O-0004, § 1, 4-1-2019)  
Sec. 8-5. - Qualifications of administrative law judge. 
Prior to conducting administrative adjudication proceedings under this article, the administrative law judges shall have successfully completed a formal training program that includes the following: 
(1)  Instruction on the rules of procedure of the administrative hearings over which the administrative law judges shall preside; 
(2)  Orientation to each subject area of the Code violations they will adjudicate; 
(3)  Observation of administrative hearings; and 
(4)  Participation in hypothetical cases, including ruling on evidence and issuing final orders. 
In addition, an administrative law judge must be an attorney licensed to practice law in the State of Illinois for at least three (3) years, and be in good standing with the Attorney Registration and Disciplinary Commission of the Supreme Court of Illinois. An administrative law judge may not be a resident of the City of West Chicago. 
(Ord. No. 18-O-0047, § 1, 9-4-2018)  
Sec. 8-6. - Scope of authority of administrative law judges. 
Administrative law judges shall preside over adjudicatory hearings. The authority of an administrative law judge shall encompass all acts necessary to conduct fair and impartial adjudicatory hearings, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Hearing testimony and accepting evidence that is relevant to the existence of the Code violation. 
(2)  Administering oaths and affirmations to witnesses. 
(3)  At the request of any party or on the administrative law judge's own motion, issuing subpoenas for the attendance of relevant witnesses and/or the production of relevant books, records, or other information. Subpoena issuance shall be at the discretion of the administrative law judge, where it is determined that the requested witness or document is material to the defense of the allegations and does not constitute a needless presentation and that the elements of the defense sought to be proved could not otherwise be established without the production of the requested evidence. 
(4)  Preserving the record of the hearing, including all exhibits and evidence admitted into the record at the hearing. 
(5)  Issuing a determination based upon a review of the notice of violation, citation, other charging document (hereinafter, "charging document") and on the evidence admitted, which determination shall be final for purposes of judicial review under the Illinois Administrative Review Act. The determination shall be in writing, shall be signed by the administrative law judge, shall be designated as finding(s), decision, and order, and shall include the fine, penalty or action with which the respondent must comply. 
(6)  Upon finding a respondent liable for violating one (1) or more charged Code provisions: 
a.  Imposing penalties as provided by the governing penalty provision, except, however, that in no event shall an administrative law judge have authority to (i) impose a penalty of incarceration, or (ii) impose a fine in excess of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00), excluding allowable costs. When applicable, each day a Code provision is found to have been violated by the respondent shall constitute a separate offense, and each separate offense subjects the respondent to the penalty provided by the governing penalty provision. 
b.  Imposing, in addition to fines, administrative and/or enforcement costs and, when applicable, imposing costs incurred by the city for effecting compliance with Code provision(s) for which a respondent has been found liable. 
c.  Ordering, notwithstanding fines imposed or costs assessed, the respondent to comply with Code provision(s) found to have been violated, and, if appropriate, ordering the respondent to post a compliance bond as provided by subsection 8-11(b). 
d.  Ordering, regardless of fines imposed or costs assessed, the respondent to perform a term of community service. 
(7)  Adhering to the policies, procedures, and legislation set forth in the city Code, except where discretion is specifically vested in the administrative law judge. However, an administrative law judge is authorized to waive the fine and/or costs that otherwise would be imposed upon finding a respondent liable for one (1) or more Code violations when the administrative law judge specifically finds as a matter of fact that the violation(s) occurred under such circumstances that, as a reasonable person, would constitute an excuse for the violation(s). 
(8)  Asking questions of the parties and witnesses, if necessary, to ensure the clarity and completeness of the testimony and the record. 
(9)  Regulating the course of the hearing in accordance with this article, the rules adopted by the administrative hearings supervisor for the conduct of administrative hearings, and other applicable law. 
(10)  Hearings on appeals from the orders of the administrative hearings supervisor, or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 18-O-0047, § 1, 9-4-2018)  
Sec. 8-7. - Administrative hearings. 
(a)  All administrative hearings conducted by an administrative law judge are open to the public and shall be presided over by a duly appointed administrative law judge who is charged with providing the parties a full and fair opportunity to be heard. 
(b)  The city shall not be represented by an employee or other representative of the office of administrative hearings. However, documentary evidence, prepared by another department of the city and submitted to the administrative law judge, may be presented at the hearing by the administrative hearing supervisor. 
(c)  All administrative hearings shall be conducted on the date set for hearing. In rare instances and for good cause shown, a continuance may be granted at the discretion of the administrative law judge. The purpose of administrative hearings is to provide a prompt resolution of alleged Code violations. Accordingly, the request for, and the grant of, continuances shall be curtailed to the extent fairness permits. Lack of preparation shall not be grounds for a continuance. Continuances shall not be granted for more than two (2) months or twice per case, unless good cause is shown. 
(d)  The administrative law judge may issue subpoenas. 
(e)  The formal and technical rules of evidence may be waived in the conduct of the hearing. Evidence, including hearsay, may be admitted only if it is of a type commonly relied upon by reasonably prudent persons in the conduct of their affairs. 
(f)  The administrative law judge shall permit persons to contest the merits of an alleged violation subject to the administrative adjudication procedures of this article without attending a hearing. Any person, who wishes to contest a vehicular violation, must file a notarized statement of facts specifying grounds for contesting the violation notice, which must be filed with the office of administrative hearings, postmarked within ten (10) days of the issuance of the notice of violation. The request shall be deemed filed, if postmarked by such due date. The submission of a notarized statement of facts is a waiver of the person's right to a personal appearance and the administrative law judge will make his/her decision based upon the notarized statement of facts submitted by the person and the facts contained in the notice of violation(s). 
(g)  No violation may be established except upon proof by a preponderance of the evidence. However, the original or a legible copy of the charging document, issued in accordance with the applicable provisions of this Code, shall be prima facie evidence of the correctness of the facts specified in the document. 
(h)  The administrative hearings supervisor shall determine the manner in which the record shall be preserved. Such preservation may be made by tape recording or other appropriate means, in accordance with the Illinois Open Meetings Act. Recording by any means by any member of the public is prohibited unless expressly authorized by the administrative hearings supervisor. The record of all hearings before an administrative law judge shall include a copy of the findings, decision, and order of the administrative law judge's final determination. 
(i)  At the conclusion of a hearing, the administrative law judge shall issue his/her final determination. If the administrative law judge issues a final determination of liability, he or she may impose fines, assess costs, and make orders, all as provided by subsection 8-6(6), and as are consistent with the specific Code provision(s) found to have been violated. 
(j)  At the conclusion of the hearing, the administrative law judge shall inform the parties orally and in writing of his determination. Such determination shall constitute a final determination for purposes of judicial review and is subject to review under the Illinois Administrative Review Act. Based on the charging document and the evidence admitted, the administrative law judge may issue the following determinations: liable, not liable, or liable upon a plea of no contest. The administrative law judge also may dismiss the case with or without prejudice or grant a properly made motion by the city voluntarily dismissing the case. 
(Ord. No. 18-O-0047, § 1, 9-4-2018)  
Sec. 8-8. - Procedure. 
All matters to be adjudicated by the administrative law judge shall be commenced against the party alleged to have violated one (1) or more Code provisions by issuing and serving upon that party a charging document and shall be conducted in accordance with the following procedures: 
(1)  The charging document shall be issued by a city officer or employee so authorized and served as provided for in subsection 8-8(3). 
(2)  a.  Any charging document issued pursuant to this section 8-8 shall contain the following information: 
1.  The name; city department; position; and identification number, if applicable, of the person issuing the charging document; 
2.  The name and address of the person or entity being charged with one (1) or more Code violations ("respondent"); 
3.  The name and address of the person to whom the charging document is given if that person is not the respondent; 
4.  The section(s) of the Code alleged to have been violated; 
5.  The date, time, and place of the alleged violation(s); 
6.  A legally sufficient description of the activity or conduct alleged to constitute a violation of each Code section set forth in the charging document or a legally sufficient description of the facts giving rise to the allegations set forth in the charging document; 
7.  The complainant's name if the complainant is not the issuing city officer or employee. 
The city officer or employee shall certify the correctness of the information required by this subsection (2)1. by signing his/her name to the charging document to be issued. Compliance with this subsection (2)1. shall establish a prima facie case. 
b.  A charging document issued pursuant to subsection (2)1. also shall set forth: 
1.  The date, time and place of the adjudicatory hearing to be held with respect to the violation(s) alleged in the charging document; and 
2.  The legal authority and jurisdiction under which the hearing will be held. 
(3)  a.  The hearing shall be scheduled with reasonable promptness, provided that for hearings scheduled in all nonemergency situations, the respondent shall have at least fifteen (15) days after service of process to prepare for a hearing, if requested by the respondent. For purposes of this subsection, "non-emergency situation" means any situation that does not reasonably constitute a threat to the public interest, safety or welfare. 
b.  The respondent named in a charging document shall be given notice of the date of the adjudicatory hearing which may appear on the face of the notice of violation, citation, or other charging document. Notice of the hearing date may be given in any of the following ways: 
1.  By first class mail or by overnight or two-day commercial delivery service at the respondent's last known address or if the respondent is a business entity, at any address identified for its registered agent or at its principal place of business; 
2.  By personal service; 
3.  By posting upon the property that is the site of the alleged violation(s) when the respondent is the owner or person in control of the property; or 
4.  By any other means permitted by law for service of civil summons. 
c.  If service is provided by first class mail or by overnight or two-day commercial delivery service, the fifteen-day period shall begin to run on the day that the notice is deposited in the mail or given to the commercial delivery service, as applicable. 
(4)  The original or a legible copy of the notice of violation, citation, or other charging document shall be filed with the office of administrative hearings as soon as practicable at the place and in the manner as the administrative hearings supervisor directs. Upon receiving the original or legible copy of the charging document, the administrative hearings supervisor shall select a hearing date and give respondent notice of the date, time, and place of the hearing in the manner set forth in subsection (3)c., unless the charging document sets forth the date, time, and location of the hearing and was served on the respondent as provided in subsection (3)b. 
(5)  Parties to an adjudicatory hearing may be represented by an attorney, present witnesses, and cross-examine opposing witnesses. Parties may request the administrative law judge to issue subpoenas according to the authority granted in subsection 8-6(3). 
(Ord. No. 18-O-0047, § 1, 9-4-2018)  
Sec. 8-9. - Representation at hearings. 
(a)  City representation. The case for the city may be presented by a city employee, or by an attorney designated by the city attorney, but not by an employee or other representative of the office of administrative hearings except as allowed by subsection 8-7(b). 
(b)  Respondent representation. The case for the respondent may be presented by the respondent or by an attorney or agent of the respondent. An attorney or agent appearing at an adjudicatory hearing on behalf of a respondent shall present the administrative law judge with a signed appearance form stating, on oath or affirmation, that he or she has been authorized by the respondent to represent the respondent at the hearing. 
(Ord. No. 18-O-0047, § 1, 9-4-2018)  
Sec. 8-10. - Default. 
(a)  If at the time set for hearing, the respondent, or his/her attorney or agent of record, fails to appear, the administrative law judge may enter a default judgment of liability against the respondent and impose fines and assess costs. A copy of the order of default shall be served in any manner permitted by this article and applicable to the violation. The order shall advise the respondent of the procedure for setting aside the default judgment and shall also apprise the respondent of the availability of an appeal of the default judgment to the Circuit Court of DuPage County. The default judgment shall be mailed promptly to the respondent as provided by subsection 8-8(3)a. The default judgment constitutes a final determination for purposes of judicial review and is subject to review under the Illinois Administrative Review Act. 
(b)  A respondent against whom a default judgment has been entered may file a motion with the office of administrative hearings to set aside the default judgment and request a new hearing. A motion to set aside a default judgment may be filed at any time if the respondent alleges lack of subject matter or personal jurisdiction. In all other cases, the motion must be filed within twenty-one (21) days of entry of the default judgment. A motion to set aside a default judgment shall set forth the reason(s) the respondent failed to appear on the original hearing date. The administrative law judge shall hear and rule on the motion. If the administrative law judge grants the motion, a hearing will be held immediately on the alleged Code violation(s) set forth in charging document unless the respondent requests another hearing date and presents good cause for continuing the hearing. 
(c)  If any default judgment is set aside pursuant to this section 8-10, the administrative law judge shall have authority to enter an order extinguishing any lien which has been recorded for any debt due and owing the city as a result of the vacated default judgment. 
(Ord. No. 18-O-0047, § 1, 9-4-2018)  
Sec. 8-11. - Fines; compliance bond. 
(a)  All fines and other payments must be made within ten (10) calendar days from the date of the final determination. 
(b)  If the administrative law judge issues an order of compliance, the administrative law judge may order the respondent to post either a cash bond or other security bond to ensure respondent's timely compliance. Any non-cash security bond shall name the city as beneficiary and shall be in the amount specified by the administrative law judge. Any bond issued as a result of an administrative law judge's order is subject to review and approval for sufficiency of the bond by the city administrator. If the respondent fails to timely remedy the Code violation(s) for which a bond has been issued and the city undertakes remediation or otherwise expends funds related to the Code violation(s), the administrative law judge, after giving the parties notice and opportunity to be heard, may issue an order permitting the city to draw against the bond in an appropriate amount. The administrative law judge shall order the bond amount, less the reasonable costs incurred by the city, returned to the respondent upon proof of compliance. Upon failure to achieve compliance, the administrative law judge shall, upon written petition of the city, increase the assessed fine by ten (10) percent for each day beyond the original compliance date that compliance has not been achieved. 
(c)  Nothing in this article shall prevent the administrative hearings supervisor from issuing citations which are payable to the city without a hearing. 
(Ord. No. 18-O-0047, § 1, 9-4-2018)  
Sec. 8-12. - Enforcement of administrative law judge's order. 
(a)  Any fine and any administrative, enforcement, or compliance costs imposed by an administrative law judge's order that remain unpaid after the exhaustion of, or the failure to exhaust, judicial review procedures, unless stayed by a court of competent jurisdiction, shall be a debt due and owing the city and may be collected in accordance with applicable law. 
(b)  After the expiration of the period for which judicial review may be sought, unless stayed by a court of competent jurisdiction, the determination of liability of an administrative law judge may be enforced in the same manner as a judgment entered by a court of competent jurisdiction. At such time, the administrative hearings supervisor shall send a notice of final determination of liability to respondent. 
(c)  Any fine, penalty, and/or cost remaining unpaid after the notice of final determination of liability is sent shall constitute a debt due and owing the city. Failure of the respondent to pay such fine or penalty within twelve (12) days of the notice may result in a lien against the respondent's property (and foreclosure of such a lien) or such other remedies as may be available by law, including the denial of the issuance or renewal of licenses or permits from the city. 
(d)  In any case in which a respondent fails to comply with an administrative law judge's order to correct a Code violation, any expenses incurred by the city to enforce the administrative law judge's order, including but not limited to attorney's fees, court costs and costs related to property demolition or foreclosure, shall be a debt due and owing the city. Prior to any expenses being fixed by an administrative law judge pursuant to this subsection (d), the respondent shall be provided with notice that directs the respondent to appear at a hearing before an administrative law judge to determine whether the respondent has failed to comply with the administrative law judge's order. The notice shall set the place and the time for the hearing, which shall not be less than seven (7) days from the date the notice is served. Notice may be served by first class mail or by an overnight or two-day commercial delivery service and the seven-day period shall begin to run on the date that the notice was personally served, deposited in the mail or placed with the overnight or commercial delivery service. 
(e)  Nothing in this section shall prevent the city from enforcing or seeking to enforce any order of an administrative law judge in any manner provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 18-O-0047, § 1, 9-4-2018)  
Sec. 8-13. - Driver's license suspension for unpaid parking violations. 
(a)  A notice of impending suspension of a person's driver's license shall be sent to any person determined to be liable for the payment of any fine or penalty that remains due and owing on ten (10) or more vehicular standing or parking regulation violation(s): 
(1)  The notice shall state that the failure to pay the fine or penalty owing within forty-five (45) days of the date of the notice will result in the municipality's notifying the Secretary of State that the person is eligible for initiation of suspension proceedings under Chapter 625 ILCS 5/6-306.5, which section is incorporated herein by reference. 
(2)  The notice of impending driver's license suspension shall be sent by first class mail, postage prepaid, to the address recorded with the Secretary of State. 
(3)  The notice shall also state that the person may obtain a photostatic copy of an original ticket imposing a fine or penalty by sending a self-addressed, stamped envelope to the municipality along with a request for the photostatic copy. 
(b)  Upon a failure to pay fines and penalties deemed due and owing the municipality after the exhaustion of administrative procedures set forth in chapter 8, article I, for ten (10) or more vehicular parking violations, the hearings supervisor, or his/her designee, shall make a certified report to the secretary of state stating that the owner of a registered vehicle has failed to pay any fine or penalty due and owing the municipality as a result of ten (10) or more violations of municipal vehicular standing or parking regulations and thereby cause the suspension of that person's driver's license. 
(c)  The hearings supervisor shall take no further action unless and until the fines and penalties due and owing the municipality are paid or upon determination that the inclusion of the person's name on the certified report was in error. At such time, the hearings supervisor shall submit to the secretary of state a notification which shall result in the halting of a driver's license suspension proceedings. The person named therein shall receive a certified copy of such notification upon request and at no charge. 
(d)  Persons may challenge the accuracy of the certified report by completing a form provided by the hearings supervisor or his/her designee. The form shall specify the grounds on which such challenge is based. Grounds for challenge shall be limited to the following: 
(1)  The person was neither the owner nor the lessee of the vehicle so receiving ten (10) or more violation notices on the date or dates such notices were issued; or 
(2)  The person has paid the fine and/or penalty for the ten (10) or more violations indicated on the certified report. 
(e)  The hearings supervisor shall render a determination within fourteen (14) business days of receipt of the objection form and shall notify the objector of the determination. 
(Ord. No. 18-O-0047, § 1, 9-4-2018)  
Sec. 8-14. - Election of remedies. 
In no case may an administrative law judge conduct an adjudicatory hearing for an alleged Code violation where the remedy is a punishment of imprisonment. 
Nothing in this article, however, shall preclude the city from petitioning a court of competent jurisdiction to adjudicate any ordinance violation or an ordinance violation, which provides the remedy of imprisonment, or from petitioning a court of competent jurisdiction to impose the remedy of imprisonment for failure to comply with an order of an administrative law judge. 
(Ord. No. 18-O-0047, § 1, 9-4-2018)  
Chapter 9 - LICENSES, PERMITS AND BUSINESS REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— License required, § 3-6 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 9-1. - License required. 
It shall be unlawful to engage in the businesses or activities regulated in this chapter 9 without having obtained a license therefore. No license shall be granted by the city when any applicant owes the city any money for any purpose whatsoever. 
(Ord. No. 833, § 1, 11-4-68; Ord. No. 1456, § 1, 12-17-79; Ord. No. 11-O-0007, § 4, 5-16-2011)  
Sec. 9-2. - Separate licenses required for individual businesses. 
Any person operating any business requiring more than one (1) license under this article shall be required to procure a license for each and every business so operated and required hereunder to be licensed. 
(Ord. No. 1147, § 3, 1-15-73)  
Sec. 9-3. - Application. 
Application for licenses shall be obtained from the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 833, § 2, 11-4-63)  
Sec. 9-4. - Term. 
Unless otherwise provided, all licenses shall be for one (1) year, beginning January 1 and shall expire December 31 following. 
(Ord. No. 1147, § 2, 1-15-73; Ord. No. 4393, § 1, 2-5-2001)  
Sec. 9-5. - Signatures. 
Each license or permit issued shall bear the signature of the mayor, in the absence of any provision to the contrary. 
(Code 1954, Ch. XIV, § 3)  
Sec. 9-6. - Investigations. 
Upon the receipt of an application for a license or permit, where any provision of this Code or other ordinance of the city necessitates an inspection or investigation before the issuance of such permit or license, the same shall be referred to the proper officer for making such investigation within forty-eight (48) hours of the time of such receipt. The officer charged with the duty of making the investigation or inspection shall make a report thereon, favorable or otherwise, within ten (10) days after receiving the application or a copy thereof, unless a longer period of time is otherwise provided by another provision of this Code. 
(Code 1954, Ch. XIV, § 4; Ord. No. 4393, § 2, 2-5-2001)  
Sec. 9-7. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 11-O-0007, § 9, adopted May 16, 2011, repealed § 9-7, which pertained to fees and derived from Ord. No. 833, adopted November 4, 1963.  
Sec. 9-8. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 11-O-0007, § 9, adopted May 16, 2011, repealed § 9-8, which pertained to fees—enumeration and derived from Ord. No. 1147, adopted January 1, 1973; Ord. No. 1730, adopted May 7, 1984; Ord. No. 1879, adopted April 4, 1988; Ord. No. 2448, adopted August 5, 1991; Ord. No. 2969, adopted May 6, 1996; Ord. No. 4393, adopted February 5, 2001; Ord. No. 01-O-0083, adopted October 15, 2001; Ord. No. 02-O-0120, adopted November 4, 2002; Ord. No. 03-O-0110, adopted December 15, 2003 and Ord. No. 03-O-0119, adopted January 5, 2004.  
Sec. 9-9. - Building and premises. 
No license shall be issued for the conduct of any business, if the premises and building to be used for the purpose do not fully comply with the requirements of the ordinances of the city. No license or permit shall be issued for the conduct of any business or performance of any act which would involve a violation of the zoning ordinance. 
(Code 1954, Ch. XIV, § 7)  
Sec. 9-10. - Fraud. 
Any licensed firm, business, corporation, or person who shall be guilty of any fraud, cheating or misrepresentation, whether through himself or an employee, while conducting business in the municipality shall be fined not less than five dollars ($5.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense, and the mayor may revoke his license for such an offense. 
(Ord. No. 833, § 4, 11-4-63)  
Sec. 9-11. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 11-O-0007, § 35, adopted May 16, 2011, repealed § 9-11, which pertained to annual increase in licenses and derived from Ord. No. 07-O-0195, adopted December 7, 2007. Similar provisions can found in Appendix G, §§ 1.1. and 1.3.  
Secs. 9-12—9-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - BUILDING CONTRACTORS 
 
Sec. 9-26. - Definitions. 
The following terms used in this section have the following meanings unless the context otherwise requires: 
Contractor: Any person engaged in the business of constructing, altering or repairing buildings or other structures or sidewalks or pavements, including but not limited to: carpentry contractors; concrete contractors; dry wall contractors; fencing contractors; fire-sprinkler contractors; garage contractors; general contractors; heating, air conditioning and refrigeration contractors; lawn-sprinkler contractors; masonry contractors; paving contractors (including brick pavers); plastering contractors; porch and deck contractors; sewer and water contractors; sheet metal contractors; siding contractors; swimming pool contractors; window contractors; and wrecking/demolition contractors. 
Homeowner: As used in this section, shall be understood to mean anyone who occupies, or intends to occupy, the residence in which said individual possesses an ownership or other interest in the property, other than occupancy through a lease agreement. 
(Ord. No. 04-O-0017, § 1(Exh. A), 8-2-2004; Ord. No. 11-O-0007, § 12, 5-16-2011)  
Sec. 9-27. - Registration required. 
(a)  It is unlawful to engage in business as a contractor within the city without first having registered as hereinafter provided. 
(b)  For every required construction permit issued, the primary contractor as shown on the permit application, shall be registered with the city. 
(c)  Exceptions: 
(1)  Any plumbing contractor, roofing contractor or other contractor licensed and/or otherwise regulated by the State of Illinois. However, a current copy of the respective license must be on file with the community development department, prior to the issuance of a permit. This exception will remain so long as the work being performed is performed under said license and is covered by the bond and licensing requirements of the State of Illinois. 
(2)  Homeowner, as defined herein, is not required to obtain a contractor's registration for doing work on his/her own residence. 
(Ord. No. 04-O-0017, § 1(Exh. A), 8-2-2004; Ord. No. 11-O-0007, § 12, 5-16-2011)  
Sec. 9-28. - Term. 
The city shall issue a registration, upon proper application and compliance with this article. All contractors' registrations shall expire on December 31 of each year. Any registration application not acted upon by the city within sixty (60) days from the date of application, shall be deemed denied. 
(Ord. No. 04-O-0017, § 1(Exh. A), 8-2-2004; Ord. No. 11-O-0007, § 12, 5-16-2011)  
Sec. 9-29. - Fees. 
The fees for such license shall be as prescribed in Appendix G; such fees shall not be prorated or refunded. 
(Ord. No. 04-O-0017, § 1(Exh. A), 8-2-2004; Ord. No. 07-O-0019, § 3, 3-19-2007; Ord. No. 11-O-0007, § 12, 5-16-2011)  
Sec. 9-30. - Bond. 
Prior to the issuance of a contractor's registration, the applicant shall submit a license and permit bond to the city in the sum of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), in a form acceptable to the city, as security for the applicant's full and complete performance in accordance with the contractor's building permit and applicable codes and ordinances of the city. Such bond expires December 31 of each year or until canceled by the provider. 
(Ord. No. 04-O-0017, § 1(Exh. A), 8-2-2004; Ord. No. 11-O-0007, § 12, 5-16-2011)  
Sec. 9-31. - Contractor insurance. 
(a)  Contractors shall maintain sufficient insurance to protect the interests of the property owner and the community during the performance of any work undertaken in the city. All insurance must be placed with financially responsible companies that are authorized under the insurance laws of Illinois, to do business in the State of Illinois. Minimum coverage shall include the following types of insurance in the following amounts: 
(1)  Worker's compensation and employee's liability: not less than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) per person; 
(2)  Comprehensive public liability: not less than two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00) for injuries, including accidental death to any person, and subject to the same limits for each person, in an amount of any one (1) accident; 
(3)  Property damage: not less than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for damage to property in any one (1) accident with an aggregate limit of not less than three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00). 
(b)  Prior to the issuance of a contractor's registration, insurance coverage shall be verified by submittal of a valid annual certificate from the contractor's insurance agent listing the city as certificate holder. 
(Ord. No. 04-O-0017, § 1(Exh. A), 8-2-2004; Ord. No. 11-O-0007, § 12, 5-16-2011)  
Sec. 9-32. - Administration. 
Upon the building official's preliminary determination that cause may exist to suspend or revoke a registration issued pursuant to the provisions of this article, the building official shall serve written notice of that intent to the contractor. 
(1)  Any written notice of intent to suspend, revoke or not renew a registration shall be served by certified mail, return receipt requested, at the address shown on the registration application. 
(2)  Such written notice shall include: 
a.  A general statement of the facts which the building official believes constitutes cause to suspend or revoke the registration; 
b.  A statement describing the manner in which the contractor may request a cause hearing to suspend or revoke the registration; 
c.  The time within which the hearing request must be served on the building official in order to obtain a hearing; and 
d.  The intended disposition of the registration in the event a timely request for a public hearing is not served as provided in this section. 
(3)  The building official must receive a contractor's written request for a hearing on a preliminary determination to suspend or revoke his registration not less than fourteen (14) calendar days after the date on which the contractor received the notice. 
(4)  Upon the timely receipt of the contractor's written request for a hearing, the building official shall schedule a hearing to consider whether cause exists to suspend or revoke the registration. 
(5)  Written notice of the time, date and place of said hearing shall be served upon the contractor by certified mail at the address listed in the application, return receipt requested, not less than seven (7) calendar days prior to said hearing. 
(6)  The building official shall render a decision, in writing together with an order to either suspend the registration for a definite period of time or to revoke the registration for a period not to exceed two (2) years. 
(7)  Any suspension or revocation of a registration shall also apply to any subsequent company that has a twenty (20) percent or more common identity/ownership interest with the affected contractor. 
(Ord. No. 04-O-0017, § 1(Exh. A), 8-2-2004; Ord. No. 11-O-0007, § 12, 5-16-2011)  
Sec. 9-33. - Appeals. 
(a)  The decision of the building official on any suspension or revocation of a registration issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter may be appealed directly to the city administrator. 
(b)  Any request for an appeal must be in writing and filed with the city administrator within fourteen (14) days of the building official's decision. 
(c)  Any such appeal shall be based upon the record of the proceedings before the building official. A hearing de novo shall not be allowed, and no new or additional evidence in support of, or in opposition to, the building official's findings shall be considered. 
(Ord. No. 04-O-0017, § 1(Exh. A), 8-2-2004; Ord. No. 11-O-0007, § 12, 5-16-2011)  
Sec. 9-34. - Compliance with building regulations. 
It shall be the duty of all contractors to comply with all ordinances relating to the construction of buildings or other structures, and all laws or ordinances pertaining to or regulating the activities undertaken. 
(Ord. No. 04-O-0017, § 1(Exh. A), 8-2-2004; Ord. No. 11-O-0007, § 12, 5-16-2011)  
Sec. 9-35. - Penalty. 
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this article by failing to obtain a contractor registration shall be subject to a fine per section 1-8 of this Code. A separate offense shall be determined to have been committed each day during which or on which the violation occurs or continues. 
(Ord. No. 04-O-0017, § 1(Exh. A), 8-2-2004; Ord. No. 11-O-0007, § 12, 5-16-2011)  
Secs. 9-36—9-45. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - ANNUAL BUSINESS REGISTRATION 
 
Sec. 9-46. - Annual business registration required. 
Every business, as defined in this article, whether or not subject to any licensing requirements of the city or of any other governmental agency, shall annually register with the city in the manner, and at the times, prescribed in this article. 
(Ord. No. 04-O-0122, § 1, 11-15-2004)  
Sec. 9-46.1. - Definition of business. 
For purposes of this article, the term "businesses" shall mean any for-profit or not-for-profit entity, including, without limitation, any sole proprietorship, partnership, corporation, joint venture, association, franchisee, or cooperative that leases or owns spaces within a building, located in the city for the primary purpose of carrying on such business. Businesses that operate from distinct spaces or buildings with separate addresses shall be deemed to be separate businesses regardless if such businesses are owned or operated by the same sole proprietorship, partnership, corporation, joint venture, association, franchisee, or cooperative. 
(Ord. No. 04-O-0122, § 1, 11-15-2004)  
Sec. 9-47. - Registration deadline. 
Every business subject to the regulations in this article shall register with the city on or before December 31 of each calendar year, for the subsequent calendar year. Any business that commences initial operations within the city after January 1 of a given year shall, within thirty (30) days after commencement, register for its annual permit for the year within which commencement occurs. 
(Ord. No. 04-O-0122, § 1, 11-15-2004)  
Sec. 9-48. - Annual business registration application form. 
Annual business registration applications shall be on forms prepared and supplied by the city. 
(Ord. No. 04-O-0122, § 1, 11-15-2004)  
Sec. 9-48.1. - Annual business registration fee. 
Upon the submittal of the annual business registration application, every business shall pay an annual registration fee as prescribed in Appendix G. Not-for-profit and charitable organizations shall not be required to pay a fee. Said fee is in addition to any other fees required of businesses subject to separate licensing regulations. Such fees shall not be refunded or prorated. 
(Ord. No. 04-O-0122, § 1, 11-15-2004; Ord. No. 05-O-0070, § 1, 9-6-2005; Ord. No. 07-O-0019, § 1, 3-19-2007; Ord. No. 07-O-0105, § 2, 12-7-2007, eff. 1-1-2008; Ord. No. 11-O-0007, § 13, 5-16-2011)  
Sec. 9-48.2. - Changes to business registration application. 
Every business shall submit written notice of any change to a previously submitted annual business registration application to the city within thirty (30) days after the occurrence of such change. 
(Ord. No. 04-O-0122, § 1, 11-15-2004)  
Sec. 9-48.3. - Exempted activities and organizations. 
The registration requirements of this article shall not apply to: 
(1)  Activities sponsored or conducted exclusively by educational, civic or political organizations or institutions. 
(2)  Governmental institutions or agencies. 
(3)  Home occupations, as defined in Section 4.1 of the Zoning Code. 
(Ord. No. 04-O-0122, § 1, 11-15-2004)  
Sec. 9-49. - Additional businesses. 
Except as otherwise provided in this article, a business that is registered pursuant to this article may engage in an additional business without submitting an additional annual business registration application if: 
(1)  The additional business is owned or operated by the same sole proprietorship, partnership, corporation, joint venture, association, franchisee, or cooperative; 
(2)  The additional business is conducted solely within a space or building with the same address as the previously registered business; 
(3)  The additional business is subordinate to the registered business in terms of income and use of the space or building; and 
(4)  The additional business is customarily conducted in conjunction with the registered business. 
(Ord. No. 04-O-0122, § 1, 11-15-2004)  
Sec. 9-50. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 15-O-0021, § 1, adopted June 15, 2015, repealed § 9-50, which pertained to penalty and derived from Ord. No. 04-O-0122, § 1, 11-15-2004; Ord. No. 11-O-0007, § 14, 5-16-2011.  
ARTICLE IV. - PAWNBROKERS AND PRECIOUS METALS DEALERS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 12-O-0007, § 4, states that all pawnbrokers and precious metals dealers operating within the city at the time these licensing regulations are adopted by the city council shall be granted a license so long as they comply with all of the requirements of the article. It should also be noted that § 7 of said ordinance shall be in full force and effect on November 1, 2012 for the 2013 business license years. 
 
Sec. 9-51. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following words or phrases shall have the following meaning: 
Pawnbroker: Every owner, operator or employee engaged in the business of receiving property in pledge or as security for money or other things advanced to the pawner or pledger shall be deemed to be a pawnbroker. 
Precious metals dealer: Every owner, operator or employee engaged in the business of the purchase, sale, trade or barter of jewelry and valuable or precious metals, as defined in this article, shall be deemed a precious metals dealer, whether such dealer operates from a fixed storefront business, or is conducting business on a temporary, short-term basis from a non-fixed location. 
LeadsOnline: A computerized records management system designed to record transactions between pawnshops and precious metals dealers and their customers and transmit said transactions electronically to law enforcement agencies. 
Licensee: The owner, operator, and all employees of a business licensed under this article. 
Precious metals: Articles consisting primarily of the elements gold (chemical symbol Au), silver (chemical symbol Ag), platinum (chemical symbol Pt) or palladium (chemical symbol Pd), but not including articles merely plated with these metals or articles similar in color to these metals but not actually consisting of them. 
Individually identifiable articles: Articles that are individually identifiable by a serial number, or other applied numbers, letters, characters or markings, or other unique features that serve to distinguish it from any other similar article and can be used to establish ownership of the article. 
(Ord. No. 12-O-0007, § 2, 10-1-2012)  
Sec. 9-52. - Exemptions. 
This article shall not apply to businesses or charitable organizations that accept donated goods for resale and to precious metal dealers that are purchasing precious metals solely at home sales. 
(Ord. No. 12-O-0007, § 2, 10-1-2012)  
Sec. 9-53. - Electronic reporting of transactions. 
The city shall enter into a contract for service and maintain its contract for service with LeadsOnline, or a similar entity as designated by the chief of police, to enhance its investigative services to protect pawnbrokers and precious metals dealers and members of the general public. In the event of a change to its electronic reporting system, the city will notify all impacted licensees of the change within a reasonable time prior to such change. 
Every pawnbroker or precious metals dealer shall operate and maintain a computer system with Internet access and photographic or video capability sufficient for the electronic reporting requirements described in this article. Any failure or malfunction of such equipment on the part of the licensee shall not exempt the licensee from the recording/reporting requirements. The licensee shall immediately notify the designated individual in the police department of any such failure or malfunction, and shall have such resolved as soon as practicable. Failure by the licensee to resolve any failure or malfunction of equipment in a reasonable amount of time will lead to license suspension or revocation proceedings defined in this article. 
(Ord. No. 12-O-0007, § 2, 10-1-2012)  
Sec. 9-54. - Record of transactions. 
Every pawnbroker or precious metals dealer doing business in the city, shall report/upload to LeadsOnline, the below listed information for each and every transaction conducted on a daily basis, by the end of each business day. All information shall be recorded in the English language. 
A transaction shall consist of all articles brought into a pawnbroker or precious metals dealer for sale, barter, trade, pledge or pawn by a customer and includes the sale of articles by a pawnbroker or precious metals dealer to another customer. Articles brought in to a pawnbroker or precious metals dealer for sale, barter, trade, pledge or pawn at different times on the same date by the same customer shall be considered as separate transactions. Each transaction is to be recorded individually. 
During each transaction, the pawnbroker or precious metals dealer shall require identification to be shown to him by each customer. The identification must be a driver's license or identification card issued by a governmental entity and must include a photograph of the customer. If, however, a customer does not have a driver's license or a state identification card issued by a governmental entity with a photograph, then a pawnbroker or precious metals dealer must require that two forms of identification be shown; at least one (1) of these two (2) forms of identification must include the customer's home address. These alternate forms of identification may include, but are not limited to, any of the following: social security card, utility bill, employee or student identification card or credit card statement. In addition, if the customer does not have an identification issued by a governmental entity containing a photograph of the person being identified, the pawnbroker or precious metals dealer shall photograph the customer in color and record the customer's name, home address, date of birth, and social security number. The Pawnbroker Act requires that a customer's social security number be documented. 
Records of each transaction shall contain the name and address of the customer, a description of each item taken in or sold by the pawnbroker or precious metals dealer, the date and time of the purchase and/or sale, as well as any individual identifiable numbers such as model, serial number, or applied numbers or letters. Digital photographs or video shall be taken by the licensee of each item purchased, taken in barter, trade or pawned. 
Licensees shall maintain records of all transactions for three (3) years following the transaction. 
(Ord. No. 12-O-0007, § 2, 10-1-2012)  
Sec. 9-55. - Issuance of signed receipt. 
Every pawnbroker shall, at the time of making any advancement or loan, deliver to the customer a receipt signed by him containing an accurate account and description, in the English language, of all the goods, articles or other things pawned or pledged, the amount of money, value or thing thereon, the time of pledging the same, the rate of interest to be paid on such loan and the name and residence of the customer making the pawn or pledge. 
Every precious metals dealer shall at the time of purchasing precious metals from any customer, issue said customer a receipt containing the description and weight of the items purchased and the amount of money paid for said items. 
(Ord. No. 12-O-0007, § 2, 10-1-2012)  
Sec. 9-56. - Employment of persons under sixteen. 
Pawnbrokers or precious metals dealers shall not permit any person under the age of sixteen (16) years to make purchases or take pledges in pawn for him. 
(Ord. No. 12-O-0007, § 2, 10-1-2012)  
Sec. 9-57. - Precious metal dealer not to act as a pawnbroker. 
Unless they have a pawnbroker license, precious metals dealers shall neither receive any article or thing by way of pledge or pawn nor loan or advance any sum of money on the security of any article or thing. 
(Ord. No. 12-O-0007, § 2, 10-1-2012)  
Sec. 9-58. - Waiting periods. 
(a)  No articles received on deposit or pledge by any pawnbroker shall be permitted to be redeemed or removed from the place of business for a time period of forty-eight (48) hours after it was inventoried. 
(b)  No articles pawned or pledged shall be sold or disposed of by any pawnbroker within one (1) year from the time the customer defaulted on the payment of interest on the money so advanced by the pawnbroker, unless by the written consent of the customer. 
(c)  No pawnbroker shall expose for sale, or sell, trade or barter, or melt, crush/compact, destroy, or otherwise dispose of, any article that is individually identifiable within seven (7) days of the time of purchasing or receiving the same, or until the same has been in or upon the premises where the same are offered, exposed, traded, bartered or sold, for at least seven (7) days, unless the article consists primarily of precious metal(s). 
(d)  Due to fluctuations in the prices of precious metals and security concerns emanating from the accumulation of large quantities of precious metals, there shall be no waiting period for such articles, even if they are individually identifiable. 
(e)  There shall be no waiting period for coins, paper money or other non-individually identifiable articles. 
(Ord. No. 12-O-0007, § 2, 10-1-2012)  
Sec. 9-59. - Prohibited transactions. 
No pawnbroker or precious metals dealer, in the course of conducting his business, shall receive any articles for pawn, pledge, advancement of money, loan, resale, or personal use from customers who meet any of the following criteria: 
(1)  Are under eighteen (18) years of age. 
(2)  Appear to be intoxicated or under the influence of drugs or alcohol. 
(3)  Are known to the pawnbroker or precious metals dealer to have been convicted of theft, residential burglary, burglary, home invasion, vehicular invasion, armed robbery, robbery or electronic fencing under the laws of the State of Illinois, or the equivalent laws of any other state. A peace officer may provide such criminal conviction information to a pawnbroker or precious metals dealer, and a pawnbroker or precious metals dealer shall also access the LeadsOnline "No Buy" list prior to making a transaction to ensure that the prospective pawner/seller has not been convicted of any such crime. 
(4)  Brings such articles to the premises in a shopping cart. 
(5)  Presents a serial numbered article from which the serial number has been removed or obliterated. 
In the event that any of the above enumerated customers shall attempt to conduct a prohibited transaction, a representative of that business shall notify the police department of the incident while the customer is still present in the business if safe to do so, or otherwise as soon as the customer has left the business. 
(Ord. No. 12-O-0007, § 2, 10-1-2012)  
Sec. 9-60. - Report of false/fictitious/forged/altered ID card. 
In the event that a person seeking to sell or pawn items to a licensed pawnbroker or precious metals dealer, presents the licensee with what appears to be a false form of identification, the licensee shall contact the police department as soon as it is safe to do so and report the incident. 
(Ord. No. 12-O-0007, § 2, 10-1-2012)  
Sec. 9-61. - Report of lost or stolen articles to police. 
Every pawnbroker or precious metals dealer who shall receive or be in possession of any goods, articles or things under circumstances which would lead a reasonable person to conclude that they have been lost or stolen, or which have been alleged or supposed to have been lost or stolen shall immediately notify the police department of such receipt and, forthwith on demand, exhibit the same to any member of the police department. 
(Ord. No. 12-O-0007, § 2, 10-1-2012)  
Sec. 9-62. - Return of stolen property. 
When any person is found to be the owner of stolen property which has been pawned or purchased by a pawnshop or precious metals dealer, such property shall be returned to the owner thereof without the payment of the money advanced by the pawnbroker or the precious metals dealer, which was paid by the pawnshop or the precious metals dealer thereon or any costs or charges of any kind which the pawnbroker or precious metals dealer may have placed upon the same. 
(Ord. No. 12-O-0007, § 2, 10-1-2012)  
Sec. 9-63. - Inspection of premises by police. 
The chief of police or any officer designated by him shall have general supervision over all pawnbrokers and precious metals dealers, and shall also have power to inspect their respective places of business and all articles or things kept therein, whenever he shall deem it necessary to do so. 
(Ord. No. 12-O-0007, § 2, 10-1-2012)  
Sec. 9-64. - Hours of operation. 
No business licensed under this article shall purchase or accept any goods, articles or things whatsoever, from any person outside of posted business hours. 
(Ord. No. 12-O-0007, § 2, 10-1-2012)  
Sec. 9-65. - Solicitation of articles. 
No person licensed under this article shall be permitted to solicit business of any nature upon any street or public highway in the city. 
(Ord. No. 12-O-0007, § 2, 10-1-2012)  
Sec. 9-66. - City license requirements. 
In addition to any license which may be required by the State of Illinois: 
(1)  No person shall engage in, carry on or conduct the business of a pawnbroker or precious metals dealer unless the business is licensed by the city. 
(2)  A pawnbroker license and precious metals dealer license are separate from each other, and the license shall state for which it is. 
(3)  A pawnbroker license shall entitle the licensee to engage in the purchase, sale, trade or barter of secondhand articles in addition to the business of receiving property in pledge or as security for money or other things. 
(4)  A precious metals dealer license will entitle the licensee to purchase precious metals and gems from individuals. A precious metals dealer cannot act as a pawnbroker without first having obtained a pawnbroker license from the State of Illinois and a pawnbroker license from the city. 
(5)  Neither a pawnbroker license nor a precious metals dealer license are transferable. 
(6)  A license shall only be issued to the actual owner, operator or manager of the business for which the license is sought. 
(7)  Should a pawnbroker or precious metals dealer own multiple businesses or have multiple locations in the city where activities regulated by this chapter take place, he must secure a separate license for each business and/or location. 
(Ord. No. 12-O-0007, § 2, 10-1-2012)  
Sec. 9-67. - Number of licenses; fees. 
(a)  The number of licenses may be increased or reduced at any time by the city council. No license in violation of that number shall be issued or renewed. 
(b)  There shall be no more than the following number of licenses: 
(1)  Pawnbroker ..... 1 
(2)  Precious metals dealer ..... 2 
(c)  The applicable license fees are as prescribed in Appendix G. 
(Ord. No. 12-O-0007, § 2, 10-1-2012; Ord. No. 13-O-0001, § 1, 2-4-2013; Ord. No. 13-O-0023, § 1, 7-1-2013; Ord. No. 13-O-0031, § 1, 10-7-2013; Ord. No. 15-O-0001, § 1, 2-2-2015; Ord. No. 15-O-0008, § 1, 3-2-2015; Ord. No. 16-O-0006, § 1, 2-1-2016)  
Sec. 9-68. - Application. 
Any person desiring a license as a pawnbroker or precious metals dealer shall make application in writing to the city administrator or his designee, setting out in the application the full name and residence of the applicant, if an individual, and if a corporation, the name and residence of each of its officers. Such application shall also set out the location at which it is intended or desired to conduct such business, and such other information as the city administrator or his designee shall from time to time deem appropriate. Such application shall also require each applicant to certify that he has read and understands the contents of this article. 
Any false information provided on the application shall result in the denial or automatic revocation of the license. 
(Ord. No. 12-O-0007, § 2, 10-1-2012)  
Sec. 9-69. - License to state location of business. 
Every license granted to any pawnbroker or precious metals dealer under the provisions of this division shall designate the place in which the person receiving the license shall be authorized to carry on such business. Such business shall not be carried on or conducted in any place other than at the location listed on the license. 
(Ord. No. 12-O-0007, § 2, 10-1-2012)  
Sec. 9-70. - Change of location of business. 
In case any person licensed as a pawnbroker or precious metals dealer shall remove his place of business from the place designated on such license, no business shall be carried on or engaged in at the new location under such license until written notice of such change has been given by the licensee to the city administrator or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 12-O-0007, § 2, 10-1-2012)  
Sec. 9-71. - License to be publicly posted. 
Every license granted under this article shall be conspicuously posted for public viewing so as to be seen by anyone entering the place of business of such pawnbroker or precious metals dealer. 
(Ord. No. 12-O-0007, § 2, 10-1-2012)  
Sec. 9-72. - Background checks. 
The city administrator or his designee shall grant licenses (to the extent available) to such pawnbroker or precious metals dealer applicants as shall who have passed a background check conducted by the police department, and paid the associated fees. Any person who is a corporate officer, employed by or providing volunteer work for the licensee shall also be required to pass a background check conducted by the police department. The results of all background checks will be reviewed to determine if the applicant has a history of past criminal conduct or criminal associations that would make it not in the best interests of the city to issue a license to the applicant to engage in such business. 
(Ord. No. 12-O-0007, § 2, 10-1-2012)  
Sec. 9-73. - Suspension; revocation. 
It shall be the duty of the chief of police to report to the city administrator any failure to comply with any provision of this article on the part of any such licensee. Depending on the nature and/or frequency of the violations, the city administrator may commence administrative hearing procedures to suspend or revoke the license of such person, firm or corporation. 
(Ord. No. 12-O-0007, § 2, 10-1-2012)  
Sec. 9-74. - Penalties. 
Any person, firm, or corporation who shall violate any provision of this article shall be subject to, at minimum, a fine of not less than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) per occurrence. 
(Ord. No. 12-O-0007, § 2, 10-1-2012)  
Sec. 9-75. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - PEDDLERS 
 
Sec. 9-76. - Defined. 
When used herein the term "peddler" shall mean any person selling or offering for sale merchandise or services from a vehicle, or otherwise, on a house-to-house basis or upon the public ways of the city. The term peddler shall not include any person selling daily or weekly newspapers or to anyone making deliveries to homes pursuant to: 
(1)  Regularly established route, or 
(2)  Prior individualized invitation from the homeowner. 
(Code 1954, Ch. XXI, § 1; Ord. No. 2969, § 2, 5-6-96; Ord. No. 16-O-0023, § 1, 6-6-2016)  
Sec. 9-77. - License required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in business as a peddler in the city without having first obtained a license to do so. Licenses will only be issued on an annual basis. Such license shall not be prorated. 
(Code 1954, Ch. XXI, Art. IV, § 2; Ord. No. 2969, § 3, 5-6-96; Ord. No. 11-O-0007, § 7, 5-16-2011; Ord. No. 16-O-0023, § 1, 6-6-2016)  
Sec. 9-78. - Application. 
An application to engage in business as a peddler shall be made to the chief of police. The applicant shall truthfully state the following information: 
(1)  The applicant's name and address; 
(2)  The applicant's date of birth, phone number and e-mail address; 
(3)  Business name, address, and phone number; 
(4)  Insurance company name and policy number; 
(5)  Vehicle information (type, make, model, registration); 
(6)  Statement indicating that the applicant is a corporation, partnership or individual; 
(7)  The commodity or service to be peddled. If the application is for a license pursuant to section 9-82 hereof, applicant shall include each type of food and/or beverage to be sold and list the vehicle to be used. 
(8)  A statement whether applicant has ever had a peddler's license denied, suspended or revoked by any city or village in Illinois. 
(9)  Whether the applicant, or their employees, is a registered sex offender. 
(10)  The application shall be accompanied by written evidence of liability insurance in amounts not less than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for property damage and five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) for personal injury and shall include the city, its agents, employees, boards and commissions as additional insured. 
(11)  Any application for a license involving the sale of food and/or beverages shall be accompanied by a current certificate of inspection from the county health department, if such inspection is required by the county. No such license shall be issued unless such certificate is supplied. 
(12)  A statement that the applicant agrees to properly train all employees to handle the items that they are peddling and to deal with customers in a responsible manner. 
(13)  A statement that the applicant agrees to conduct a thorough background check on all of its potential employees, to include a review of past work experience. 
(Code 1954, Ch. XXI, Art. IV, § 3; Ord. No. 2969, §§ 4—6, 5-6-96; Ord. No. 4309, §§ 1, 2, 5-1-2000; Ord. No. 16-O-0023, § 1, 6-6-2016)  
Sec. 9-79. - Investigation. 
(a)  Upon receipt of the application required by this article, there will be an investigation of the applicant's business and moral character and criminal history. 
(b)  If the investigation reveals the character and business responsibility of the applicant to be satisfactory and the chief of police so notes on the application, the chief of police shall, upon payment of the prescribed license fee, deliver to the applicant the license for which he applied. 
(c)  Upon review of the application, the chief of police may refuse to issue a permit to the applicant under this article for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  An investigation reveals that the applicant falsified information on the application; 
(2)  The applicant has a prior revocation or suspension of a peddler's license, or a conviction of a violation of any city/village, state or federal law regarding peddling or a related field; 
(3)  The applicant has been convicted of a felony or class A misdemeanor, the nature of which is related to the applicant's fitness to engage in door-to-door activities under this article. The applicant shall be of good character and reputation without a conviction related to fraud, dishonesty, deceit, misrepresentation, sexual misconduct, trafficking in controlled substances, violent acts against persons or property, or an offense involving moral turpitude. 
(4)  In reviewing fitness under subsection (c)(3) of this section, the following shall be considered: 
a.  The extent and nature of the applicant's past criminal history; 
b.  The age of the applicant at the time of the commission of the crime; 
c.  The amount of time that has elapsed since the applicant's last criminal activity; 
d.  The conduct and work activity of the applicant prior to and following the criminal activity; 
e.  Evidence of the applicant's rehabilitation or rehabilitative effort while incarcerated or following release; and 
f.  Other evidence of the applicant's present fitness. 
(d)  The chief of police shall endorse on the application his disapproval and his reasons for such; the applicant shall then be notified by the chief of police or designee that the application is disapproved and that no license shall be issued. Any person aggrieved by said disapproval shall have the right to appeal and have a hearing before the city council. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the city administrator a written statement under oath setting forth specifically the grounds for appeal. The city council shall thereupon set the time and place for the hearing on such appeal within thirty (30) days from the date of such request, and notice of such hearing shall be given to the applicant by certified mail (return receipt requested) to the applicant at least ten (10) days prior to the date set for the hearing. The decision of the city council shall be made within thirty (30) days of said hearing on such appeal and shall be by a vote of a majority of all members then holding office and shall be final. 
(Code 1954, Ch. XXI, Art. IV, § 4; Ord. No. 2969, § 7, 5-6-96; Ord. No. 4309, § 3, 5-1-2000; Ord. No. 16-O-0023, § 1, 6-6-2016)  
Sec. 9-80. - Term; suspension and revocation. 
(a)  The term of a peddler's license shall be one (1) year, commencing January 1 and expiring the following December 31, except in the case of weekly licenses, which shall be valid for the days set forth thereon. 
(b)  The mayor may suspend for a period of up to thirty (30) days or revoke any license issued under the provisions of this article for the following reasons: 
(1)  Violation of any of the provisions of this article. 
(2)  Fraud, misrepresentation or knowingly false statement contained in the license application. 
(3)  Fraud, misrepresentation or knowingly false statement in the course of carrying on the business of peddling. 
(4)  Conducting the business of peddling in such a manner as to create a public nuisance, cause a breach of the peace or constitute a danger to the public health, safety, welfare or morals. 
(5)  Conviction of licensee or any employee of the licensee of any felony or of a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude. 
(6)  Failure of the licensee to pay any fine or penalty owing to the city. 
(c)  No such license shall be revoked or suspended except after a public hearing by the mayor with a seven-day written notice sent either personally or by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, to the licensee affording the licensee an opportunity to appear and defend against the charges contained in such notice. The seven-day notice provisions shall begin the day following delivery by certified mail or by personal service. Upon receipt of said notice of hearing, all peddling activity shall cease. Notwithstanding the foregoing, if the mayor has reason to believe that any continued peddling will immediately threaten the welfare of the community, the mayor may, upon the issuance of a written order stating the reason for such conclusion and without notice or hearing, suspend a license for not more than seven (7) days, giving the licensee an opportunity to be heard during that period. 
(d)  The mayor shall, within seven (7) days after such hearing, if he determines after such hearing that the license should be revoked or suspended, state the reason for such determination in a written order and serve a copy of such order within the seven (7) days upon the licensee. 
(e)  Any licensee whose license is revoked or suspended shall pay to the city the costs of the hearing before the mayor on such violation. The mayor shall determine the costs incurred by the city for the hearing, including, but not limited to: court reporter's fees, the costs of transcripts or records, attorney's fees, the cost of preparing and mailing notices and orders and all other miscellaneous expenses incurred by the city or such lesser sum as the mayor may allow. 
(f)  The licensee shall pay said costs to the city within thirty (30) days of notification of the costs by the mayor. Failure to pay the costs within thirty (30) days of notification is a violation of this article and may be cause for not issuing future licenses to the licensee. 
(g)  Any person aggrieved by said revocation or suspension shall have the right to appeal and have a hearing before the city council. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the city administrator a written statement under oath setting forth specifically the grounds for appeal. The city council shall thereupon set the time and place for the hearing on such appeal within thirty (30) days from the date of such request, and notice of such hearing shall be given to the licensee by certified mail (return receipt requested) to the licensee at least ten (10) days prior to the date set for the hearing. The decision of the city council shall be made within thirty (30) days of said hearing on such appeal and shall be by a vote of a majority of all members then holding office and shall be final. 
(Code 1954, Ch. XXI, Art. IV, § 5; Ord. No. 2969, § 8, 5-6-96; Ord. No. 4309, § 4, 5-1-2000; Ord. No. 16-O-0023, § 1, 6-6-2016)  
Sec. 9-81. - Fees. 
The fees to be paid by the applicant at the time of issuance of the license shall be as prescribed in Appendix G. 
(Ord. No. 11-O-0007, § 15, 5-16-2011; Ord. No. 16-O-0023, § 1, 6-6-2016)  
Sec. 9-82. - Additional restrictions on sale of food and/or beverages. 
The issuance of a peddler's license for the sale of food and/or beverages from a cart, nonmotorized trailer or motor vehicle on the public ways of the city shall be subject to the following additional restrictions: 
(1)  The licensee must obtain a separate license for each cart, nonmotorized trailer or motor vehicle to be operated in the city. Such license shall be prominently displayed and permanently affixed to the lower lefthand corner of the windshield, or if there is no windshield, to the upper lefthand side of such cart, trailer or vehicle. Such license shall be transferable to another vehicle only upon notification to the chief of police and payment of a transfer fee as prescribed in Appendix G. 
(2)  No more than fifteen (15) annual licenses for such peddling shall be issued each year. If more than fifteen (15) applications are received, priority shall be granted to an applicant possessing a valid license from the preceding year, provided that said applicant had no violations of any of the provisions of this article in the preceding year. The city council may alter the number of licenses to be issued each year, and no license in violation of that number shall be issued or renewed. 
(3)  Each person operating a cart, trailer or vehicle must wear a photo identification card issued by the city, identifying him/herself as the licensee or an employee of the licensee. 
(4)  Peddling under this subsection shall occur only between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and sunset of each day provided, however, that carts, trailers or vehicles peddling food and/or beverages at construction sites and areas not zoned for residential use shall be permitted to begin peddling at such sites between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. 
(5)  Each cart, trailer or vehicle shall be equipped with sufficient garbage receptacles, and each licensee shall be responsible for collecting refuse related to his or her products located within a fifty-foot radius of the cart, trailer or vehicle. 
(6)  No cart, trailer or vehicle stopped upon the public way or on public/government owned land to sell food and/or beverages shall broadcast any music or other sounds while in the stopped position. Further, any music or other sounds emanating from the cart, trailer or vehicle while in motion shall not be able to be heard more than seventy-five (75) feet from said cart, trailer or vehicle. 
(7)  The following distance restrictions shall apply to the sale of food and/or beverages from a cart, non-motorized trailer or motor vehicle: 
a.  No cart, trailer or vehicle shall sell any food or beverage within two hundred (200) feet of any other cart, trailer or vehicle, or of any park with a designated concession stand. 
b.  No cart, trailer or vehicle shall sell any food or beverage within two hundred (200) feet of any licensed food or beverage establishment in a structure. 
c.  No cart, trailer or vehicle shall sell any food or beverage within five hundred (500) feet of any school on any days when school is in session (students attending). 
d.  No cart, trailer or vehicle shall sell any food or beverage within five hundred (500) feet of any fair, festival, special event, civic event, or carnival that is licensed or sanctioned by the city, except when an event specific permit has been approved by the city council. 
(8)  No cart, trailer or vehicle shall park on the public way in a given location or on public/government owned land for longer than two (2) hours. Upon expiration of this time, such cart, trailer or vehicle must move at least one (1) city block away from said location. 
(9)  No cart, trailer or vehicle shall park within fifteen (15) feet of any fire hydrant, emergency facility or intersecting driveway, street or alley. 
(10)  Only the food and/or beverages listed in the application for license shall be sold. No licensee shall offer for sale, or keep for the purpose of selling or offering for sale, any food or beverage of any kind intended for human consumption which is unwholesome or unfit for human consumption for any reason. 
(11)  No such cart, trailer or vehicle shall impede visibility or flow of vehicular, pedestrian and bicycle traffic in any location. 
(12)  The chief of police or his designee shall grant licenses (to the extent available) to such peddlers engaging in the sale of food and/or beverages from a cart, trailer or vehicle who have passed a background check conducted by the city, and paid the license fee. Any person who is a corporate officer, employed by or providing volunteer work for the licensee shall also be required to pass a background check conducted by the police department. The results of all background checks will be reviewed to determine if the applicant has a history of past criminal conduct or criminal associations that would make it not in the best interests of the city to issue a license to the applicant to engage in such business. 
(13)  It shall be the duty of the chief of police to report to the city administrator any failure to comply with any provision of this article on the part of any such licensee. Depending on the nature and/or frequency of the violations, the city administrator may commence administrative hearing procedures to suspend or revoke the license of such person, firm or corporation. 
(14)  Any person, firm, or corporation who shall violate any provision of this article shall be subject to, at minimum, a fine of not less than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) per occurrence. 
(Ord. No. 2969, § 9, 5-6-96; Ord. No. 4111, § 1, 6-15-98; Ord. No. 4309, § 5, 5-1-2000; Ord. No. 13-O-0011, § 1, 6-3-2013; Ord. No. 16-O-0023, § 1, 6-6-2016) 
Editor's note— Section 9 of Ord. No. 2969, adopted May 6, 1996, amended this section to read as herein set out. Formerly, § 9-82 pertained to exceptions and derived from § 7 of Art. IV of Ch. XXI, Code 1954.  
Sec. 9-83. - Act of agent or employee. 
Every act or omission of whatever nature constituting the violation of any of the provisions of this article, by any officer, director, manager or other agent or employee of any licensee, shall be deemed and held to be the act of such licensee, and such licensee shall be punishable in the same manner as if the act or omission had been done or omitted by the licensee. 
(Ord. No. 4309, § 6, 5-1-2000; Ord. No. 16-O-0023, § 1, 6-6-2016)  
Sec. 9-84. - Penalty. 
In addition to any other penalty set forth in this article, any person or entity violating any provision of this article shall be subject to a penalty under section 1-8 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 4309, § 7, 5-1-2000; Ord. No. 16-O-0023, § 1, 6-6-2016)  
Secs. 9-85—9-95. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - SOLICITORS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 06-O-0020, § 1, adopted Apr. 3, 2006, amended the former Art. VI, §§ 9-96—9-107, and enacted a new Art. VI as set out herein. The former Art. VI pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 1201, §§ 1—9, adopted Feb. 4, 1974; Ord. No. 1493, § 1, adopted Oct. 6, 1980; Ord. No. 03-O-0085, § 4, adopted Oct. 6, 2003; Ord. No. 05-O-0022, § 1, adopted Mar. 21, 2005. 
 
Sec. 9-96. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the following words as used herein shall be construed to have the meanings indicated unless their context clearly requires otherwise: 
Advertising materials shall mean and include all leaflets, flyers, cards, door tags, advertisers, advertising newspapers or other advertising or promotional materials offering or promoting the sale or purchase of goods, wares, merchandise, foodstuffs, insurance and/or services of any kind, character or description; or soliciting gifts or contributions of money, clothing or other valuable things for the support or benefit of any charitable or nonprofit association, organization, corporation or project; or selling or soliciting subscriptions to books, magazines, periodicals, newspapers or other type or kind of publication. Advertising materials shall not include books, magazines, periodicals, newspapers consisting of noncommercial speech, even though they may incidentally contain advertising or other commercial speech; religious or political tracts and pamphlets or election campaign literature; or telephone directories of classified listings of products and services, commonly known as "yellow pages." 
Exempt solicitor shall mean: 
(1)  A person age seventeen (17) and under, who is participating in fundraising programs for, or sponsored by a public or private elementary or high school or bona fide children's or youth organization including, without limitation, Boy Scouts, Girl Scouts or youth sports. 
(2)  A person engaged in soliciting or activities whose purpose is religious, political, civic, charitable, scientific, or educational and which neither directly nor indirectly relate to or involve in any fashion the seeking of funds or the sale and promotion of any goods or services, as more fully set forth in the definition of soliciting in this section. 
Person shall mean and include any individual, organization, group, association, firm, corporation, trust, or any combination thereof. 
Residence and residential shall mean and refer to and include every separate living unit occupied for residential purposes by one (1) or more persons, contained within any type of building or structure. 
Soliciting shall mean and include any one (1) or more of the following activities conducted on any part of residential property regardless of the method used, including the leaving or placing of advertising materials anywhere thereon, including the parkway between the sidewalk and road or street thereof: 
(1)  Seeking to obtain order for the purchase of goods, wares, merchandise, foodstuffs, services of any kind, character or description whatever, for any kind of consideration; 
(2)  Seeking to obtain prospective customers for application or purchase of insurance of any type, kind or character; 
(3)  Seeking to obtain gifts or contributions of money, clothing or any other valuable thing for the support or benefit of any charitable or nonprofit association, organization, corporation or project; 
(4)  Seeking to obtain subscriptions to books, magazines, periodicals, newspapers and every other type or kind of publication; or 
(5)  Going upon any premises and ringing the door bell, knocking, upon or near any door, or creating any sound in any manner that is calculated to attract the attention of an occupant or owner for the purpose of engaging in any of the activities described above in this definition of solicitation. 
Solicitor shall mean and include any person who engages in soliciting as defined herein except an exempt solicitor. 
(Ord. No. 06-O-0020, § 1, 4-3-2006; Ord. No. 10-O-0071, §§ 2, 3, 9-7-2010; Ord. No. 11-O-0021, § 2, 5-2-2011; Ord. No. 16-O-0024, § 1, 6-6-2016)  
Sec. 9-97. - Certification of registration required. 
As a condition of engaging in any act of soliciting within the corporate limits of the City of West Chicago, every solicitor as defined herein, except an exempt solicitor, shall apply for and possess a valid certificate of registration which shall be carried and prominently displayed on the front of his or her person, uncovered by any article of clothing, so as to be fully visible at all times to any onlooker; said solicitor shall also pay an annual fee as prescribed in Appendix G. An exempt solicitor is not required to apply for, possess, carry, or display a certificate of registration. 
(Ord. No. 06-O-0020, § 1, 4-3-2006; Ord. No. 10-O-0071, § 4, 9-7-2010; Ord. No. 11-O-0021, § 3, 5-2-2011; Ord. No. 16-O-0024, § 1, 6-6-2016)  
Sec. 9-98. - Application. 
Application for a certificate of registration shall be made upon a form provided by the chief of police or his/her designee, of this municipality and filed with such chief of police or his/her designee. The applicant shall truthfully state the following information: 
(1)  The applicant's name and address 
(2)  The applicant's date of birth, phone number and email address; 
(3)  The name, address and phone number of the person or association by whom the applicant is employed or represents; 
(4)  Description of the subject matter of the soliciting; 
(5)  Period of time for which the certificate is applied for; 
(6)  The date, or approximate date, of the latest previous application for a certificate under this article; 
(7)  Prior revocation of any certificate of registration issued to the applicant under this article; 
(8)  Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this article, or any provision of any ordinance of any other city or village in Illinois regulating soliciting, and if the applicant has been convicted of any violation, the applicant shall state the details of the violation in full; 
(9)  Whether the applicant has been convicted of a felony or class A misdemeanor within the last five (5) years, and if the applicant has been convicted, the applicant shall state the details of the conviction in full; 
(10)  Whether the applicant is a registered sex offender. 
All statements made by the applicant upon the application or in connection therewith shall be under oath. 
The chief of police or his/her designee shall require every applicant to submit to a thorough background investigation by the police department in connection with the application for certificate. The owner(s) or applicant(s) shall submit his/her fingerprints to be used in completing the investigation. Owner(s)/applicant(s) are required to present themselves for fingerprints to be taken by the police department. 
The chief of police or his/her designee shall cause to be kept in his office an accurate record of every application received and acted upon together with all other information and data pertaining thereto and all certificates of registration issued under the provisions of this article, and of the denial of any application. Applications for certificates shall be numbered in consecutive order as filed and every certificate issued and any renewal thereof shall be identified with the number of the application upon which it was issued. 
(Ord. No. 06-O-0020, § 1, 4-3-2006; Ord. No. 16-O-0024, § 1, 6-6-2016)  
Sec. 9-99. - Issuance and revocation of certificates. 
Upon receipt of the application required by this article, there will be an investigation of the applicant's business and moral character and criminal history. 
If the investigation reveals the character and business responsibility of the applicant to be satisfactory and the chief of police so notes on the application, the chief of police shall, upon payment of the prescribed license fee, deliver to the applicant the certificate of registration for which he applied. 
Upon review of the application, the chief of police may refuse to issue a certificate of registration to the applicant under this article for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  An investigation reveals that the applicant falsified information on the application; 
(2)  The applicant has a prior revocation or suspension of a solicitor's license, or a conviction of a violation of any city/village, state or federal law regarding soliciting or a related field; 
(3)  The applicant has been convicted of a felony or class A misdemeanor, the nature of which is related to the applicant's fitness to engage in door-to-door activities under this article. The applicant shall be of good character and reputation without a conviction related to fraud, dishonesty, deceit, misrepresentation, sexual misconduct, trafficking in controlled substances, violent acts against persons or property, or an offense involving moral turpitude. 
(4)  In reviewing fitness under subsection (3) of this section, the following shall be considered: 
a.  The extent and nature of the applicant's past criminal history; 
b.  The age of the applicant at the time of the commission of the crime; 
c.  The amount of time that has elapsed since the applicant's last criminal activity; 
d.  The conduct and work activity of the applicant prior to and following the criminal activity; 
e.  Evidence of the applicant's rehabilitation or rehabilitative effort while incarcerated or following release; and 
f.  Other evidence of the applicant's present fitness. 
Each certificate of registration shall be valid only for the period of time set forth thereon, but in no event shall any such certificate be valid for a period in excess of forty-five (45) calendar days from date of issuance. 
Any certificate of registration issued hereunder shall be revoked by the chief of police or his/her designee if the holder of the certificate is convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this article, or has made a false statement in the application, or otherwise has been disqualified for the issuance of a certificate of registration under the terms of this article. Immediately upon such revocation written notice thereof shall be given by the chief of police or his/her designee to the holder of the certificate in person or by certified United States mail addressed to the residence address set forth in the application. 
Immediately upon the mailing or serving of such notice the certificate of registration shall become null and void. 
The certificate of registration shall state the expiration date thereof. 
(Ord. No. 06-O-0020, § 1, 4-3-2006; Ord. No. 16-O-0024, § 1, 6-6-2016)  
Sec. 9-99.1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 11-O-0021, § 4, adopted May 2, 2011, repealed § 9-99.1, which pertained to display of certificates of registration and derived from Ord. No. 06-O-0020, adopted April 3, 2006 and Ord. No. 10-O-0071, adopted September 7, 2010. The provisions of this section have been incorporated into section 9-97 as amended above.  
Sec. 9-100. - City policy on soliciting. 
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the City of West Chicago that the occupant or occupants of residential property within this municipality shall exclusively make the determination whether solicitors and exempt solicitors shall be, or shall not be, invited on their property through display of a notice as provided for in section 9-101 of this article or by personal direction as provided for section 9-102. Solicitations on property owned or leased by the city (e.g., land, buildings, commuter station and lots, sidewalks, streets, alleys, etc.) is expressly prohibited in the city, including the soliciting at intersections from occupants of any vehicle or from any pedestrian, except as detailed in section 9-100.1. 
(Ord. No. 06-O-0020, § 1, 4-3-2006; Ord. No. 11-O-0021, § 5, 5-2-2011; Ord. No. 16-O-0024, § 1, 6-6-2016)  
Sec. 9-100.1. - Solicitations from persons in motor vehicles. 
City law enforcement personnel, firefighters of the West Chicago Fire Protection District and employees, members or volunteers of a charitable organization may solicit donations on city streets from passing motorists on behalf of a charitable organization, provided the charitable organization first complies with all requirements of Public Act 97-692 (65 ILCS 5/11-80-9). The city may impose reasonable conditions on such solicitation in writing consistent with the intent of Public Act 97-692 and based upon articulated public safety concerns. No soliciting from motor vehicles will be permitted at state or county highway intersections. 
If the city determines that an applicant's desired location cannot be permitted due to safety concerns, such as high traffic volumes, poor geometrics, construction, maintenance operations, or past accident history, then the city will deny the application. 
Vehicle solicitors shall be at least seventeen (17) years of age. Any solicitor between the ages of seventeen (17) and eighteen (18) may engage in vehicle soliciting only in the presence of a supervising adult, who must be present at all times. 
All vehicle solicitors for charity are required to wear highly visible equipment or clothing and an easily recognizable badge or other symbol identifying the organization for which they are soliciting so that it can be easily recognized by a driver or passenger in a motor vehicle. 
Charitable solicitations from motor vehicles shall occur only between 6:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m., and shall only occur at intersections protected by traffic lights, stop signs, or median islands at all corners. 
Applications for charitable solicitation pursuant to this paragraph shall be made in writing on an application form provided by the chief of police and shall be submitted to the office of the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 11-O-0007, § 48, 5-16-2011; Ord. No. 16-O-0024, § 1, 6-6-2016)  
Sec. 9-101. - Notice regulating soliciting. 
Every person wanting to secure the protection provided by the regulations regarding soliciting contained in this article shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  A person who desires to invite no solicitors or exempt solicitors on his or her residential premises shall post a notice substantially in conformity with that in Exhibit "A" attached to this chapter 9. 
(2)  The notice shall be weather-proof. For a single-family residence or apartment, condominium or other residential unit within a multi-family residential building which has an outside entry on the front side of the structure that provides direct access to the unit, the notice shall be permanently posted on the door of such entry or immediately adjacent to, not less than two and one-half (2½) feet nor more seven and one-half (7½) feet above the threshold. Where the residence is an apartment or other type of residential unit that has no outside entry on the front side of the structure which provides direct access to the unit, a notice substantially identical to that in Exhibit "A" but not less than one-quarter (¼) of the dimensions stated there shall be posted adjacent to the U.S. mail box or slot for said apartment or unit so that it is immediately visible at said mail box or slot. A notice placed in conformance with this paragraph shall constitute sufficient notice to any solicitor or exempt solicitor of the determination of the occupant or occupants of the residence regarding receipt of solicitations. 
(3)  Notice as authorized by this section may be provided by the chief of police or his/her designee to persons requesting them, at the cost thereof. However, no notice that otherwise conforms to this section shall be deemed defective or invalid because it was not provided by the chief of police or his/her designee. 
(4)  Only persons actually occupying the premises as their personal residence are authorized to give the notice provided for herein. No person having an interest in any premises, including any landlord or absentee owner who does not occupy the premises as his or her residence, shall be authorized to give such notice. Where a residence is part of a multiple unit structure, such as an apartment building or townhouse, the notice shall only apply to the unit for which it is given. 
(Ord. No. 06-O-0020, § 1, 4-3-2006; Ord. No. 10-O-0071, § 6, 9-7-2010; Ord. No. 11-O-0021, § 6, 5-2-2011; Ord. No. 16-O-0024, § 1, 6-6-2016) 
Editor's note— It should be noted that Exhibit "A" referenced above is not set out at length herein, but is on file and available for inspection in the office of the city clerk.  
Sec. 9-102. - Duty of solicitors and exempt solicitors. 
It shall be the duty of every solicitor and exempt solicitor, upon going onto any premises in the City of West Chicago upon which a residence as herein defined is located, to ascertain whether any "NO SOLICITORS" notice as provided for in section 9-101 is present on the premises and, if so, then immediately and peacefully depart from the premises without engaging in an act of soliciting of any kind, including the leaving of advertising materials. Further, every solicitor and exempt solicitor, who goes upon the premises of or has gained entrance to any residence shall immediately and peacefully depart therefrom when requested or directed to do so by any occupant or the agent of the occupant of the residence, regardless of the absence of a "NO SOLICITORS" notice or whether initially invited onto the premises by an occupant. 
No solicitor or exempt solicitor shall engage in soliciting by means of projecting, throwing, tossing, dropping, or otherwise placing upon any premises any advertising material which is affixed to a stone, piece of metal, wood, or other material intended to facilitate its placement on the premises or to keep it in the position where placed. 
(Ord. No. 06-O-0020, § 1, 4-3-2006; Ord. No. 10-O-0071, § 7, 9-7-2010; Ord. No. 11-O-0021, § 7, 5-2-2011; Ord. No. 16-O-0024, § 1, 6-6-2016)  
Sec. 9-103. - Uninvited soliciting prohibited. 
It is hereby declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any solicitor, exempt solicitor or person to go upon any premises and leave thereon any advertising materials in a manner prohibited by this article, or to go upon any premises ring the doorbell upon or near any door, or create any sound in any manner calculated to attract the attention of the occupant of such residence, for the purpose of securing an audience with the occupant thereof and engage in soliciting as herein defined, in defiance of a "NO SOLICITORS" notice exhibited at the residence in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 06-O-0020, § 1, 4-3-2006; Ord. No. 10-O-0071, § 8, 9-7-2010; Ord. No. 11-O-0021, § 8, 5-2-2011; Ord. No. 16-O-0024, § 1, 6-6-2016)  
Sec. 9-104. - Time limit on soliciting. 
It is hereby declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any solicitor, exempt solicitor, or person, whether registered under this article or not, to go upon any premises and ring the doorbell upon or near any door of a residence located thereon, or rap or knock upon any door, or create any sound in any other manner calculated to attract the attention of the occupant of such residence, for the purpose of securing an audience with the occupant thereof and engage in soliciting as herein defined, prior to 9:00 a.m. or at sunset of any day of the week. 
(Ord. No. 06-O-0020, § 1, 4-3-2006; Ord. No. 11-O-0021, § 9, 5-2-2011; Ord. No. 13-O-0007, § 2, 2-4-2013; Ord. No. 16-O-0024, § 1, 6-6-2016)  
Sec. 9-105. - Penalty. 
In addition to the provisions contained herein regarding license revocation, the violation of any provision of this article shall result in a fine of not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) and not more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). Each act of soliciting in violation of this article, including each act of leaving advertising materials in a manner prohibited by this article, or entering upon any premises and ringing the door bell, knocking upon or near any door, or creating any sound in any manner to attract the attention of an occupant or owner in violation of this article, shall constitute a separate offense. All persons who enter upon any premises for the purpose of soliciting in violation of this article, or who publish or distribute in any advertising materials left on any premises in violation of this article or offer goods, products, merchandise, services, insurance or subscriptions or solicit gifts, contributions, or donations in such advertising materials shall be jointly and severally liable for such offense, whether they knew of or intended such offense. 
(Ord. No. 06-O-0020, § 1, 4-3-2006; Ord. No. 10-O-0071, § 9, 9-7-2010; Ord. No. 16-O-0024, § 1, 6-6-2016)  
Secs. 9-106—9-120. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - ITINERANT OR TRANSIENT PHOTOGRAPHERS 
 
Sec. 9-121. - Defined. 
The term "itinerant or transient photographer" when referred to herein shall mean any person who solicits the taking, finishing or sale of photographs or who solicits photographic service of any kind, in the city for profit and who does not maintain a studio, laboratory or other permanent place of business in the city. 
(Code 1954, Ch. XXI, Art. V, § 1)  
Sec. 9-122. - License required. 
It shall be unlawful for any transient or itinerant photographer to solicit or conduct or carry on the business of photography in any manner in the city without first having obtained a license so to do. 
Such license shall be effective from January 1 to December 31. 
(Code 1954, Ch. XXI, Art. V, § 2; Ord. No. 580, 7-5-55)  
Sec. 9-123. - Application. 
Application for such license shall be made to the city administrator and shall set forth among other things: 
(1)  Name and address of the main office or studio. 
(2)  Name and residence address of the solicitor. 
(3)  Description of solicitor including height, weight, color of hair and distinguishing marks, if any. 
(4)  Date or dates on which solicitation will be made. 
(5)  Scope of solicitation. 
A separate application shall be made for each solicitor. 
(Code 1954, Ch. XXI, Art. V, § 3)  
Sec. 9-124. - Investigation, refusal. 
Upon receipt of said application the city administrator shall refer it to the police department. In case any police record of any solicitor is found, that application shall be denied. In case no police record is found, the license shall be issued upon payment of the fees as provided herein. 
(Code 1954, Ch. XXI, Art. V, § 4)  
Sec. 9-125. - Fees. 
The fee to be paid by the applicant at the time of issuance of the license shall be as prescribed in Appendix G. 
(Code 1954, Ch. XXI, Art. V, § 5; Ord. No. 11-O-0007, § 16, 5-16-2011)  
Secs. 9-126—9-140. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - SCAVENGERS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 06-O-0013, § 1, adopted Feb. 20, 2006, deleted the former Art. VIII, §§ 9-141—9-144, and enacted a new Art. VIII as set out herein. The former Art. VIII pertained to similar subject matter. For complete derivation see the Code Comparative Table at the end of this volume. Formerly, Art. VIII was amended in its entirety to read as herein set out by § 1 of Ord. No. 2053, adopted June 6, 1988. Formerly, Art. VIII contained §§ 9-141—9-148, which pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the following ordinances: 
Ord. No. 	Section 	Date 	Ord. No. 	Section 	Date 
1114 	1—5 	11-1-71 	1707 	1, 2 	1-3-84 
1120 	1 	1-17-72 	1837 	1 	12-2-85 
1358 	1 	12-5-77 	1851 	1 	12-2-85 
1462 	2 	2-19-80 	1883 	1 	7-7-86 
1511 	1 	1-5-81 	1928 	1 	3-16-87 
1514 	1 	2-2-81 	1996 	1 	12-21-87 
 
 
Sec. 9-141. - Definitions. 
(a)  Commercial and industrial units. For the purpose of this article, these are defined as those units within the city that are not residential units as defined in this section. 
(b)  Residential units. For the purpose of this article, these are defined as single- and two-family residences within the city. 
(c)  Scavenger. Any person who collects refuse, garbage, landscape waste, recyclable material, construction and demolition debris, or rubbish of any kind, including industrial wastes. 
(Ord. No. 06-O-0013, § 1, 2-20-2006; Ord. No. 11-O-0007, § 17, 5-16-2011)  
Sec. 9-142. - Residential scavenger requirements. 
(a)  Exclusive service area. The scavenger(s) with whom the city has contracted for exclusive service in any area of the city shall serve the residential units in that area under the terms provided in the contract with the city. 
(b)  Use by residential units. Every resident shall use the scavenger servicing the areas in which the residence is located and shall adhere to the terms of the contract between the chosen scavenger and the city for such use, except when there is a valid building permit for work which requires disposal of significant debris, then the property owner or contractor may use a different disposal service for the duration of the project. No residence shall use the disposal service of any scavenger not under such contract with the city. Payment for the disposal services of the scavengers shall be required for the provision of city water services, as water service is an indicator of residential occupancy. If the fee for the disposal service of the scavenger is not paid within one hundred twenty (120) days from the date that such fees are due, the failure to pay shall be deemed a failure for the resident to comply with the Code of Ordinances. The city is authorized to terminate sewer and water service in the manner provided by this Code, Chapter 18, Article I, section 18-12. 
(c)  Disposal on own premises. It shall be unlawful for any resident to deposit his garbage or garbage containers on the property of another for the purpose of having such garbage picked up by a scavenger. 
(d)  Brush collection program. The brush collection program is a contracted service and begins the first Monday of each month from May through November. The program is not designed for pickup of whole tree removal. Any limbs over six (6) inches in diameter will be rejected, as will root balls, foreign materials such as lumber, fence posts, or any material placed in containers. Length of branches is unimportant. Small twigs from yard clean ups should be disposed through the yard waste sticker collection. The monthly brush collection program charge shall be one dollar and twenty-five cents ($1.25) for all residential units, except for any attached residential units that are included in a homeowners' association that separately contracts for this service. For an owner of an attached residential unit to be exempt from the brush collection program, the city must have received a letter from that owner's association board requesting said exemption on behalf of its members, along with a copy of the contract providing evidence that such brush collection service is being provided via the association and a list of addresses covered by the association's contract. 
(e)  Placing material for collection. All material shall not be placed at the curb or alley for collection prior to 6:00 p.m. on the day before the collection. The collection day shall be determined according to the agreement reached between the contractor and the city. 
(f)  Transfer of property; unlawful removal. Once recyclable materials have been placed in and along recycling containers, and set curbside or at the designated collection point, recycling materials become the property of the city until lifted onto the contractor's truck or recycling vehicle, at which time such materials shall become the property and responsibility of the contractor. It shall be unlawful for any other persons, firms or corporations to remove any recyclable material set out or aside for recycling collection by the city's approved refuse scavenger company. 
(g)  Retail establishments must be authorized to sell stickers by the contactor that has exclusive service of the residential scavenger program and may add no more than five cents ($0.05) to the cost of each sticker to recover their administrative costs associated with selling them. 
(Ord. No. 06-O-0013, § 1, 2-20-2006; Ord. No. 11-O-0007, § 18, 5-16-2011; Ord. No. 15-O-0027, § 1, 7-6-2015)  
Sec. 9-143. - Commercial and industrial scavenger requirements. 
(a)  License required. No person shall engage in the business of scavenger for commercial or industrial units within the city without first securing a license to conduct such business. 
(b)  Application for license. Application for such license shall be made in writing to the city administrator annually for renewal by December 31 of each year, and shall state therein the name of the applicant and the number and type of scavenger trucks operated by such applicant. All applicants shall conform to the rules and regulations governing this article at the time of application for the license. If the applicant is a corporation, the application shall give the names and addresses of the president, secretary and all persons owning, beneficially or otherwise, ten (10) percent or more of the common stock of such corporation. In addition, the application shall contain any one or more of the following items, at the discretion of the city administrator or his designee: 
(1)  A list of equipment inventory showing the equipment owned at the time of the application. 
(2)  The number of employees and a description of their duties and experience. 
(3)  The company safety record for the prior three (3) continuous years of operation. 
(4)  Schedule of pickups. 
(5)  Performance guarantees. 
(6)  A statement of the applicant's dependability to perform scavenger service. 
(7)  A statement that all employees have a working knowledge of all streets and alleys within the corporate limits of the city. 
(8)  A statement of the length of business experience. 
(9)  Proof of insurance. 
(10)  A statement that all pickups shall be made between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 8:30 p.m. unless otherwise authorized by the city council. 
(c)  License fee. The fee for commercial and industrial scavenger licenses shall be as prescribed in Appendix G, and shall be due by December 31 of the subsequent calendar year. Failure to pay said license fee by December 31 shall result in a ten (10) percent penalty being added to the fee for each month that payment is past due. The license fee shall not be prorated if the city has issued a notice of violation or correction because a scavenger was found working in the city without a license. No refunds shall be provided. 
(d)  Use by commercial and industrial units . Each commercial and industrial unit shall be served by a scavenger licensed by the city. 
(e)  Service rates. The service rates for commercial and industrial units are to be agreed upon between the licensed scavenger and the user. 
(f)  Visible identification. Each scavenger must have its name and telephone number for the main office visible on each vehicle, waste receptacle and dumpster. 
(Ord. No. 06-O-0013, § 1, 2-20-2006; Ord. No. 11-O-0007, §§ 19—21, 5-16-2011)  
Sec. 9-144. - Disposal outside city or in an approved waste transfer station. 
All scavengers shall dispose all refuse either outside the city limits or in an approved transfer station. 
(Ord. No. 06-O-0013, § 1, 2-20-2006)  
Secs. 9-145—9-165. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - CARNIVALS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 2726, adopted May 16, 1994, repealed Ch. 9, Art. IX, §§ 9-166—9-169, in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 9, Art. IX pertained to miscellaneous merchants and amusement operators and derived from Code 1954, Ch. XXI, Art. I, §§ 1—3. 
 
Sec. 9-166. - Definitions. 
The following terms as used in sections 9-167 through 9-169 of this chapter shall have the meanings stated below: 
Carnival means any circus, carnival, rodeo or other aggregation of attractions, consisting of shows, menageries, acts, games, rides, coin-activated devices, or other amusement conducted either under one or more managements or independently, which are temporarily set up or conducted in a public place or upon any private premises and intended, with or without payment of admission or other fees, to attract the attendance of the general public for the purpose of amusement, recreation, or merrymaking. Excluded from this phrase and from application of sections 9-167 through 9-177 is any circus, carnival, rodeo, or other aggregation of attractions mounted by a non-profit charitable, civic, trade, or educational organization, governmental organization, church, or fraternal or veterans organization where such event is actually and directly conducted by such organization, provided that the organization shall use only its members or regular full-time or part-time employees for conducting such event, and not any employees or independent contractors hired or retained for the purpose of conducting such or assisting with the conduct of such. 
Employee shall include an individual who is the owner of a carnival; an agent or employee of a circus or carnival; an independent contractor with a circus or carnival; and an agent or employee of such independent contractor. It shall not include a member of a non-profit charitable, civic, trade, or educational organization, governmental organization, church, or fraternal or veterans organization operating a booth, stand, or stall at a circus or carnival nor a full-time or part-time employee of such organization not hired specifically for the purpose of operating or assisting with the operation of such booth, stand, or stall. 
(Ord. No. 06-O-0023, § 2, 8-7-2006; Ord. No. 10-O-0101, § 2, 12-6-2010)  
Sec. 9-167. - Permit required; fees. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to conduct or operate any amusement attraction, amusement ride, or carnival, which is open to the public without having first secured a permit from the city administrator of the City of West Chicago, therefor in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  There shall be an investigation fee for each employee who shall at anytime be on the premises of the carnival, fair or other exhibition, as prescribed in Appendix G. All fees shall be non-refundable. 
(c)  Applications for any permit required by this article shall be made in writing to the city administrator or his designee at least ninety (90) days prior to the opening of the carnival on a form provided by the city. All such employees who will be on the premises shall submit to the taking of their fingerprints by the city for the purpose of a criminal history check no less than twenty-one (21) days prior to the event. Such application shall be signed by the operator of the carnival in his or her own proper person or in his or her name by his or her duly authorized agent, verified by oath or affidavit. Each such application for a carnival shall include a detailed site plan, security plan and parking and traffic management plan. All applications for permits shall be accompanied by a policy or certificate of insurance issued by a solvent insurance company authorized to do business in the state, insuring the permitee or owner of such amusement ride or such carnival against liability for any injury to any person or persons resulting from the permitted operation. Such policy or certificate shall cover the entire time for which the permit is issued, and shall at a minimum include: 
(1)  Commercial general liability: $5,000,000.00 combined single limit per occurrence for bodily injury, and property damage with the city named as additional insured. The general aggregate shall be twice the required occurrence limit or no less than $10,000,000.00 per occurrence. 
(2)  Business automobile liability: $1,000,000 combined single limit per accident for bodily injury and property damage. 
Each application for a carnival, and all information required to be furnished in connection therewith, or a copy thereof, shall be referred to the chief of police and any other appropriate city official. Each city official shall certify to the city administrator whether or not the applicant is qualified to receive the permit applied for and whether or not the place complies in every respect with the applicable provisions of this article relating to his or her department. 
(d)  Each permit issued with respect to any carnival shall be issued subject to, and shall set forth, the following terms and conditions: 
(1)  There shall not, in connection with said carnival, be set up or operated any gambling device, lottery, number or paddle wheel, number board, punch board, or other game of chance, or any lewd, lascivious or indecent show or attraction making an indecent exposure of the person or suggesting lewdness or immorality. 
(2)  Sheriffs, police officers and building inspectors shall have free access to the grounds and all booths, shows and concessions on such grounds at all times. 
(3)  Each amusement ride and amusement attraction shall be surrounded by a restraining barrier so as to limit the amusement ride or amusement attraction to a single, or limited number of, supervised point(s) of access. No amusement ride or amusement attraction shall be operated within the corporate limits of the city without evidence of a permit having been issued by the director, or designee, of the State of Illinois Department of Labor to the operator of such equipment. Such permit to operate shall be posted in full public view on or near the amusement ride or amusement attraction. If an amusement ride or amusement attraction undergoes a substantial alteration or is repaired after a breakdown, it shall be reinspected or approved for use by the director of the Illinois Department of Labor. All such amusement rides or amusement attractions governed by this article must be assembled, operated, and disassembled in accordance with the provisions of the State of Illinois Carnival and Amusement Rides Safety Act. 
(4)  No amusement ride or amusement attraction shall be operated until such time as it has been inspected by the building official, or his designee, and found to be in safe operating condition so as to provide protection to the public. Such inspections shall include, but not be limited to, compliance with all applicable electrical and fire safety codes, rules and regulations. In the event that an amusement ride or amusement attraction involves unique or specialized equipment which, in the discretion of the building official, requires specialized technical knowledge in order to inspect, the building official shall order, in writing, that the applicant retain, at the applicant's cost, a qualified independent expert, acceptable to the building official, to inspect said amusement ride or amusement attraction and report to the city on the safe operating condition of the same prior to operation of the same. 
If, after inspection, additions or alterations are contemplated which change a structure, mechanism, classification or capacity of any amusement ride or amusement attraction, the operator shall immediately notify the building official of his intentions in writing, and provide any plans or diagrams requested by the building official. 
At the determination of the building official, additional inspections and operational tests may then be required. 
The building official, or his designee, shall order, in writing, an immediate halt of operations of any amusement ride or amusement attraction if it has been determined after inspection to be hazardous or unsafe. Operation of the amusement ride or amusement attraction shall not resume until the unsafe or hazardous condition is corrected to the satisfaction of the building official or his designee. No amusement ride or amusement attraction shall be operated until such time as it has been inspected and approved by a duly appointed State of Illinois Department of Labor Amusement Ride Inspector. 
(5)  All food service operations conducted in connection with any carnival shall be conducted in full compliance with all rules and regulations of the DuPage County Health Department, and all necessary inspections, approvals and permits shall be obtained prior to commencement of such operations. Any and all permits issued by the DuPage County Health Department shall be posted in full public view at the food service operation. 
(6)  The operation and conduct of the carnival shall be in accordance with the hours of operation designated by the city, as well as the site plan, security plan and parking and traffic management plan approved by the city, and with all applicable statutes, ordinances, resolutions, codes, rules and regulations of each and every governmental body or agency having jurisdiction over the site of the carnival, including but not limited to, the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance of the City of West Chicago, Illinois, regulating temporary uses within the city. 
(Ord. No. 2726, § 1, 5-16-94; Ord. No. 06-O-0023, § 2, 8-7-2006; Ord. No. 10-O-0101, § 2, 12-6-2010; Ord. No. 11-O-0007, § 22, 5-16-2011; Ord. No. 11-O-0038, § 1, 8-1-2011)  
Sec. 9-168. - Employees of carnivals. 
All employees of a carnival must be qualified and must wear an event-worker photo identification issued by the city and conspicuously displayed on himself or herself whenever he or she shall be on the premises of the event. No employee of a carnival shall be on the premises of a circus or carnival at any time without a city event-worker permit. No employee of a carnival who: 
(1)  Is a registered child sex offender, or 
(2)  Has been convicted of a felony in the past five (5) years, or 
(3)  Been convicted of any other crime involving moral turpitude or violence, or 
shall be issued a city event-worker photo identification, nor shall such employee at anytime be on the premises of the event. A city event-worker permit shall be worn only by the employee for whom it is issued and is not transferable to another employee. The event-worker photo identification shall remain the property of the city and shall be surrendered to the city upon demand by the city or any representative thereof. As the chief of police shall provide by order, the event-work photo identification shall be returned to the city, or invalidated or otherwise destroyed so to prevent its reuse, at the conclusion of the carnival, fair or other exhibition for which it is issued. 
(Ord. No. 06-O-0023, § 2, 8-7-2006; Ord. No. 10-O-0101, § 2, 12-6-2010)  
Sec. 9-169. - Violations. 
(a)  Violations of sections 9-166 through 9-168 shall be a Class C misdemeanor, and the violator punished by a sentence of up to thirty (30) days incarceration and a fine of up to one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) for each such violation. 
(b)  Additionally, whenever the city administrator is presented with evidence that there has been a violation of sections 9-166 through 9-168, or of acts upon the premises of the carnival that constitute a clear endangerment to public morals and safety, the city administrator may, without notice or hearing, suspend the permit of a carnival and order said carnival closed for a period of up to three (3) days, provided that the suspension and closure is set for hearing within that three-day period as provided for in section 9-671 of this chapter, and further provided that a written notice of the suspension and closure, with the reasons therefor and the date, time, and place of the hearing thereon, is served upon any owner of the carnival or upon any employee on the premises of the carnival having charge of the operation of such. The hearing board provided for under section 9-671 may terminate or continue such suspension or revoke the permit. Decisions of the hearing board are final administrative decisions and shall be reviewable as the law provides. 
(Ord. No. 06-O-0023, § 2, 8-7-2006; Ord. No. 10-O-0101, § 2, 12-6-2010)  
Secs. 9-170—9-185. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - RESERVED[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 11-O-0007, § 8, adopted May 16, 2011, repealed Art. X, §§ 9-186—9-193, which pertained to currency exchanges and derived from Ord. No. 4146, adopted Dec. 21, 1998 and Ord. No. 03-O-0122, adopted January 1, 2004. 
 
Secs. 9-186—9-205. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XI. - AUCTIONS AND AUCTIONEERS 
 
Sec. 9-206. - Short title. 
This article shall be known as the "Auction and Auctioneering Licensing Code of the City of West Chicago." 
(Ord. No. 828, § 1, 10-7-63)  
Sec. 9-207. - Liberal construction of article required. 
All general provisions, terms and phrases used in this article shall be liberally construed, in order that the true interest and meaning of the council may be carried out. 
(Ord. No. 828, § 2, 10-7-63)  
Sec. 9-208. - Definitions. 
Whenever in this article the following terms are used they shall have the meaning indicated unless their context clearly requires otherwise: 
Auction crier means one who assists a public auctioneer. 
Fill in stock means merchandise added to the stock on hand with the intention of selling it at public auction. 
Public auctioneer means any person who shall arrange for the disposal of any goods, wares, merchandise, fruits, stocks, bonds and other securities, livestock or other personal property, or any real estate, in any building, public or private, or any other place, public or private, within the city, at public offering, either in person or by duly employed auction criers. 
Stock on hand means any merchandise that a merchant usually and ordinarily carries throughout the year and not acquired for sale at public auction. 
(Ord. No. 828, § 3, 10-7-63)  
Sec. 9-209. - Compliance required. 
Any public auctioneer shall obtain a license, as provided herein, and comply with this Code, whenever he shall auction any property whether the same shall be his own, or the property of others. 
(Ord. No. 828, § 4, 10-7-63)  
Sec. 9-210. - Application for license. 
Applicants for license as a public auctioneer must state in writing, among other things: 
(1)  The length of residency in the State of Illinois as a licensed auctioneer or crier, or retail or wholesale merchant; 
(2)  The auctions conducted in the city within two (2) years last past; 
(3)  A general description of the merchandise to be auctioned and whether there be any fill in stock to be auctioned, and if fill in stock is to be added, a detailed description of the same; 
(4)  A statement whether all merchandise is stock on hand or not, and if not, a detailed description of that which is not; 
(5)  The owner of all merchandise, together with the owner's complete address; 
(6)  The place, time and duration of the auction. 
(Ord. No. 828, § 5, 10-7-63)  
Sec. 9-211. - Issuance of license. 
The clerk shall issue the license, upon proper application and upon payment of the license fee and the giving of an approved bond. 
(Ord. No. 828, § 6, 10-7-63)  
Sec. 9-212. - License fee. 
The license fee shall be as prescribed in Appendix G. 
(Ord. No. 11-O-0007, § 23, 5-16-2011)  
Sec. 9-213. - Bond required. 
In addition to the license fee the applicant shall tender a three thousand dollar ($3,000.00) bond, with a surety company authorized to do business in Illinois as surety; said bond to be payable to the city and conditioned upon the principal paying all losses and damages occasioned by any material misrepresentation of fact or belief or any suppression of fact concerning any property sold at auction or any violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 828, § 8, 10-7-63)  
Sec. 9-214. - Fill in stock; notice requirements. 
No fill in stock shall be auctioned off at any auction unless the same is announced at the time of the auction as fill in stock, and unless in all printed material used to advertise the auction, whether newspaper advertisement or otherwise, the following words are used, "Merchandise specifically bought for the purpose of auctioning off will be offered and this merchandise is not stock on hand" in printing no smaller than the largest print appearing in the said printed notice or advertisement. In addition thereto each item shall be identified at the time of the auction by announcing, before the same is sold, that this item is a fill in item and purchased specifically for the purpose of being auctioned off today, in a clear voice, audible to all persons present. 
(Ord. No. 828, § 9, 10-7-63)  
Sec. 9-215. - Investigation. 
The city administrator, or his agent, may investigate any part or all of the property before or after issuing the auctioneer's license. 
(Ord. No. 828, § 10, 10-7-63)  
Sec. 9-216. - False statements prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person acting as an auction crier to make any statements which are false in any particular, or which have a tendency to mislead any person present, or to make any misrepresentation as to the quality, quantity, character, present condition, value, cost, general selling price, or whether new or secondhand, of the property offered for auction. 
(Ord. No. 828, § 11, 10-7-63)  
Sec. 9-217. - Bill of sale; warranty notice. 
The owner of auctioned property sold at auction for an amount not less than two dollars and fifty cents ($2.50) shall give to the purchaser a bill of sale, containing a full description of the property, its selling price and a statement giving each and every warranty under which the article was sold. In the event the property was sold without any warranties there shall appear upon the said bill of sale in letters no less than one-quarter inch high the following words: "This property was sold without any warranties." 
(Ord. No. 828, § 12, 10-7-63)  
Sec. 9-218. - Revocation. 
The license herein to be granted may be revoked by the city for cause at any time before or during the auction sale. Violation of any provision of this article shall be deemed sufficient cause to so revoke the same. 
(Ord. No. 828, § 13, 10-7-63)  
Secs. 9-219—9-230. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XII. - RELOCATORS AND REPOSSESSORS 
 
Sec. 9-231. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following words shall have the meanings indicated unless their context clearly requires otherwise: 
Collateral. Any motor vehicle, boat, recreational vehicle, motor home, motorcycle or other property that is subject to a security, lease or rental agreement. 
Commission. Illinois Commerce Commission. 
Dispatcher. Any person who, as an employee or agent of a relocator or repossession agency, dispatches vehicles for operators who perform removal activities. 
Operator. Any person who, as an employee of a relocator or repossesor, removes trespassing vehicles from private property by means of towing or otherwise recovers vehicles for collateral. This term includes the driver of any vehicle used in removing a trespassing vehicle from private property as well as any person other than the driver who assists in the removal of a trespassing vehicle from private property. 
Owner. A person to whom title to equipment has been issued or who, without title, has the right to exclusive use of equipment, for a period longer than thirty (30) days, or who has lawful possession of equipment, registered and licensed in any state in the name of that person. 
Relocator. Any person or entity engaged in the business of removing trespassing vehicles from private property by means of towing or otherwise, and thereafter relocating and storing such vehicles. 
Repossessor. Any person or entity conducting business, or an employee of the business, who, for any type of consideration, engages in the business of, accepts employment, or agrees to provide collateral vehicle recovery. 
(Ord. No. 18-O-0038, § 2, 7-16-2018)  
Sec. 9-232. - Declaration of city policy. 
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city to regulate the collateral recovery of vehicles and removal of trespassing vehicles from private property and the subsequent relocation and storage of such vehicles in such manner as to fairly distribute rights and responsibilities among vehicle owners, private property owners and relocators and repossessors. For this purpose, the city's regulations herein are for the purpose of complementing and supplementing the regulatory process of the commission pursuant to 225 ILCS 422 and 625 ILCS 5/18a-100 et seq., and any amendments thereto, and its enforcement efforts thereunder. The laws and regulations adopted hereunder are adopted pursuant to the home rule authority of the city as well as the express authority conferred by the state legislature on local units of government pursuant to 225 ILCS 422 and 625 ILCS 5/18a-100 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 18-O-0038, § 2, 7-16-2018)  
Sec. 9-233. - Towing performed pursuant to police order. 
Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to regulate or otherwise affect towing performed by any relocator pursuant to the order of a law enforcement official or agency in accordance with 625 ILCS 5/4-201—5/4-204 of the Illinois Vehicle Code. 
(Ord. No. 18-O-0038, § 2, 7-16-2018)  
Sec. 9-234. - General powers and duties of the city administrator. 
The administrator or his designee shall: 
(1)  Regulate relocators and repossessors and their employees or agents in accordance with this article and to that end, may establish reasonable requirements with respect to proper service and practices relating thereto; 
(2)  Require the maintenance of a uniform systems of accounts, and records and their preservation; 
(3)  Require all drivers and other personnel used in relocation and repossession to be employees of a relocator or repossessor; 
(4)  Issue permits to relocators and repossessors in accordance with the requirements of this article; and 
(5)  Upon receiving a verified complaint in writing by any person, organization or body politic, or upon its own initiative, may investigate whether any relocator, repossesor, operator, dispatcher or person otherwise required to comply with any provision of this article or any rule promulgated hereunder has failed to comply with any such provision or rule. 
(Ord. No. 18-O-0038, § 2, 7-16-2018)  
Sec. 9-235. - Relocators—Unlawful practices. 
It shall be unlawful for any relocator to: 
(1)  Relocate vehicles from authorized spaces. No vehicle shall be relocated if it is parked in a space on private property where it is authorized to be parked. 
(2)  Relocate vehicles from private property without authorization from a property owner. No vehicle shall be relocated from private property without express, written authorization from the property owner, lessee or agent. The authorization must either direct the relocator to remove the specific vehicle in question or authorize the relocator to remove all unauthorized vehicles from the property. 
(3)  Relocate vehicles not in accordance with proper posting. No vehicle shall be relocated from a lot which does not, at the time of the tow and for at least twenty-four (24) hours prior thereto, have signs posted in compliance with this article. Furthermore, no vehicle shall be relocated to a storage lot or facility that is not identified on signs posted in compliance with this article at the location from which the vehicle is relocated. No vehicle shall be relocated and/or stored even temporarily at any other location than the location advertised on the relocator's sign. Once a vehicle is picked up from private property it must be towed immediately to the storage lot or facility that is identified on the sign posted on the private property. No vehicle shall be subsequently transported to any other lot or facility. 
(4)  Relocate vehicles where the owner of the vehicle or the owner's agent is present or arrives on scene before the vehicle is completely removed from the private property, produces the ignition key to the vehicle, and the owner or agent is able and does immediately remove the vehicle from the private property. 
(5)  Engage in the removal of a commercial motor vehicle that requires a commercial driver's license to operate, as required under 625 ILCS 5/6-500 et seq., if the operator does not have the appropriate driver's license classification. 
(6)  Transact any part of its business at any location until after the relocator has obtained and remitted payment for a permit from the city, through its police department. The city is authorized to establish an electronic method for relocators to obtain a permit online using the internet. 
(7)  Post signs at locations where the relocator is not authorized to operate or tow beyond a maximum distance. No relocator shall remove any vehicle otherwise in accordance with this article more than ten (10) air miles from its location when towed nor shall it post a sign at a location more than ten (10) air miles from the storage lot to which the relocator can relocate vehicles. 
(8)  Relocate vehicles unless the relocation lot is open during certain prescribed hours. No vehicle shall be relocated to a lot which is not open to allow the vehicle owner to retrieve the vehicle within two (2) hours following the tow. 
(Ord. No. 18-O-0038, § 2, 7-16-2018)  
Sec. 9-236. - Relocators—Prerequisites to operating within the city. 
It shall be unlawful for any relocator to: 
(1)  Employ as an operator or otherwise use the services of any person who has not been duly licensed by the commission and the Illinois Secretary of State pursuant to the applicable laws, rules and regulations. 
(2)  Operate a business other than in conformance with the laws of the commission and the rules and regulations adopted thereunder. 
(3)  Operate any towing vehicle which does not carry a copy of 625 ILCS 5/18A of the Illinois Vehicle Code, a copy of this article of the city Code and sufficient copies of the commission complaint form. All documents shall be made available to any complainant at his request in the event of a dispute regarding vehicle relocation. 
(4)  Operate any vehicle which has not passed a safety test as required in 625 ILCS 5/13-101. 
(5)  Operate any vehicle which does not have the proper identification, equipment and insurance for that vehicle. 
(6)  Relocate any vehicle prior to obtaining and remitting payment for an online permit, using the internet. This permit must be displayed in either paper or electronic form to any police officer upon request. The city will establish the form and determine the content of the online permit. 
(7)  Relocate a vehicle unless the operator has a valid operator's permit issued from the commission. Each vehicle operator under authority of a relocator's license must carry a copy of the license in its cab. The copy shall be presented to any investigator or enforcement officer of the commission on request. 
(Ord. No. 18-O-0038, § 2, 7-16-2018)  
Sec. 9-237. - Relocators—Responsibilities. 
A relocator must: 
(1)  Notify the city prior to such removal by purchasing a permit as described in section 9-236(6). Notification shall include, but is not limited to, a complete description of the vehicle, including the year, make, model vehicle identification number (VIN) and state license plate number, the registration numbers, the locations from which and to which the vehicle is to be removed and taken and the time of removal and any other information required by state or local regulations, statute or ordinance. 
(2)  Make a telephone number available to the city at which the relocator or an employer of the relocator may be contacted at any time, twenty-four (24) hours each day. This phone number shall be advertised for the purpose of effectuating the release of a towed vehicle. The relocator must have an employee available at all times on the premises owned or controlled by the relocator for the purposes of arranging for the immediate release of the vehicle. 
(3)  Accept certain types of compensation: 
a.  Except as provided in subsection b. below, no relocator shall demand, collect or receive anything of value or compensation in relation to its relocation business; 
b.  From the property owner, lessee or their agents or from any person other than the owner or owner's agent of the relocated vehicle, except according to terms in the contract entered into between the property owner or lessee and the relocator; 
c.  From the vehicle owner, lessee or their agents: 
1.  Greater than the amount posted on the signs on the private property from which the vehicle was relocated; 
2.  Greater than or other than the rates prescribed by the commission; or 
3.  Where the relocation was not performed in compliance with the law and in this article. 
(4)  Release the vehicle provided payment is either in cash or through a valid major credit card, including, but not limited to, VISA, American Express, Discovery or MasterCard. 
(Ord. No. 18-O-0038, § 2, 7-16-2018)  
Sec. 9-238. - Relocators posting of signs; sign specifications. 
(a)  Generally. It shall be unlawful for an owner or other person in lawful possession or control of private property to remove, or employ a relocator to remove, an unauthorized vehicle from such property unless written notice is provided pursuant to the administrative rules of the commission. Such notice shall consist of a sign posted in a conspicuous place in the affected area of a size and content as required by the commission. Such sign shall state the amount of the towing charges to which the person parking may be subject. Such signs must be posted at least twenty-four (24) hours before any vehicle is relocated from the lot. 
(b)  Application to residential property. No express notice shall be required under this section upon residential property which, paying due regard to the circumstances in the surrounding area, is clearly reserved or intended exclusively for the use or occupation of residents or their vehicles. 
(c)  Sign specifications : 
(1)  Those portions of the sign warning that unauthorized vehicles will be relocated must be formatted in accordance with the administrative rules of the commission. 
(2)  Each sign must contain: 
a.  A warning that unauthorized vehicles will be relocated; 
b.  The full legal name of the relocator as it appears on the relocator's license, the address and telephone number of the relocator, and the address and telephone number of the location to which the vehicle will be relocated and at which it can be reclaimed, if different from the address of the relocator; 
c.  The maximum fee which the relocator will charge the vehicle's owner or owner's agent as a condition of reclaiming the vehicle, and any restrictions on the form of payment which will be accepted by the relocator, provided that no sign shall indicate a restriction on the form of acceptable payment that is contrary to section 9-237(4); 
d.  The hours during which the owner or owner's agent can reclaim the vehicle, and when the relocator is closed to the public due to observation of holidays or otherwise. To the extent that a sign does not show limitation on hours or days when the vehicle can be reclaimed, the sign shall constitute a representation that the vehicle can be reclaimed at any time or on any day. No sign shall include hours of doing business contrary to the restrictions contained in section 9-235(8). 
(3)  Such signs must be visible and readable from all entrances and exits, both during the day and at night, free of any natural or man-made interference. 
(4)  No more than one (1) location where the vehicle may be relocated shall be identified on any posted sign at any lot from where the vehicle was relocated. 
(Ord. No. 18-O-0038, § 2, 7-16-2018)  
Sec. 9-239. - Repossessors—Unlawful practice. 
It shall be unlawful for any repossessor: 
(1)  To repossess a vehicle prior to obtaining a valid permit issued by the city. 
(2)  To violate any other provision of this article, commission regulations or orders adopted under this article or pursuant to 225 ILCS 422 et seq. 
(3)  No repossessor may remove a vehicle from private property where such entry and/or removal constitutes a breach of the peace. 
(Ord. No. 18-O-0038, § 2, 7-16-2018; Ord. No. 19-O-0020, § 1, 7-1-2019)  
Sec. 9-240. - Permit fee. 
The fee to be paid by the applicant at the time of issuance of the permit shall be as prescribed in appendix G. 
(Ord. No. 18-O-0038, § 2, 7-16-2018)  
Sec. 9-241. - Penalties. 
In addition to any other relief granted by the courts or the administrative law judge, any relocator, repossessor, operator, dispatcher or employee of a relocator or repossesor who violates any of the provisions of this section shall be subject to a fine per section 1-8, general penalty, of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 18-O-0038, § 2, 7-16-2018)  
Secs. 9-242—9-250. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XIII. - TAXICABS AND LIVERY SERVICES[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 02-O-0090, § 1, adopted July 1, 2002 amended Art. XIII, §§ 9-251—9-262 and enacted a new Art. XIII as set out herein. The former Art. XIII pertained to taxicabs and derived from Ord. No. 1275, §§ 1—4, 6—12, adopted July 21, 1975; Ord. No. 1737, §§ 1, 2, adopted May 7, 1984; Ord. No. 1595, § 1, adopted Aug. 2, 1982; Ord. No. 1788, § 1, adopted Mar. 4, 1985. 
Cross reference— Traffic regulations, Ch. 17. 
 
Sec. 9-251. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by section. 
Cab company. A person or company engaged in the business as proprietor of one (1) or more taxicabs or livery services. 
Driver. A person who drives or is licensed to drive a taxicab on the streets and ways within the city. 
Person with a disability. A West Chicago resident who has a physical or mental impairment which is expected to be of long continued and indefinite duration and which is a substantial impediment to the resident's ability to move about as a pedestrian. Proof thereof shall consist of a regional transportation authority special user card or an affidavit from a medical doctor. 
Senior citizen. A West Chicago resident who is sixty-five (65) years of age or older. Proof thereof shall consist of a State of Illinois photograph identification card. 
Taxicab or livery. Any vehicle used to transport or carry passengers for hire but not operating on a fixed route. 
Taximeter. Any mechanical, electrical or electronic device installed in a public passenger vehicle, which calculates and indicates the fares, measures the distance traveled and time elapsed, and indicates other charges which may be due. 
(Ord. No. 02-O-0090, § 1, 7-1-2002)  
Sec. 9-252. - License required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of operating a taxicab or taxicabs in the city without first having secured a license therefor, and paying the fees hereinafter set forth. 
It shall be deemed operating a taxicab without a license, within this article, for any person, partnership or corporation to pick up a passenger within the city limits without first having obtained a license as herein provided. 
(Ord. No. 02-O-0090, § 1, 7-1-2002)  
Sec. 9-253. - Use of taxicabs. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to refuse any person transportation in a taxicab to any place of destination within the city in a taxicab that is unoccupied by a passenger for hire unless it is on its way to pick up a passenger or otherwise out of service or unless the person to be served appears intoxicated or uses profane or abusive language in attempting to contract for service. When the taxicab is out of service or carrying a passenger, there shall be displayed on the taxicab, and visible to those outside the taxicab, a sign or light indicating the taxicab is "not for hire" in letters at least two (2) inches in height. 
(b)  Group riding is permitted in taxicabs; provided, that the driver accepts no more than five (5) passengers for any trip, and provided that the fare charged to any passenger will be no greater than if he rode alone. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of the driver of any taxicab to accept as a passenger any person who seeks to use the taxicab, provided such person is not intoxicated and conducts himself in an orderly manner. 
(d)  No person shall be admitted to a taxicab occupied by a passenger without the consent of such passenger. 
(e)  The driver shall take his passenger to the destination by the most direct route from the place where the passenger enters the cab. 
(f)  Taxicabs shall not be used for the transport of alcoholic beverages. 
(g)  Taxicabs shall only be parked in an enclosed garage when not in use. 
(Ord. No. 02-O-0090, § 1, 7-1-2002)  
Sec. 9-254. - Identification on taxicab operated by a licensed cab company required. 
Every taxicab operated by a cab company licensed by the city hereunder shall have displayed thereon, in the appropriate place, the following identification materials: 
(1)  On the center of the exterior main panel of the front or rear doors of each such taxicab, there shall appear the cab number assigned by the cab company and the cab company's name and telephone number. 
(2)  On the back of the front seat, clearly visible to passengers in the rear of the vehicle, there shall be affixed a copy of the taxicab driver's license and the license number thereof in plainly legible print, the telephone number of the cab company, and the rates charged for trips inside and outside of the city. 
(Ord. No. 02-O-0090, § 1, 7-1-2002)  
Sec. 9-255. - Taximeters. 
Every taxicab operated by a cab company licensed by the city shall be equipped with a taximeter connected with and operating from the transmission of the taxicab, subject to the following regulations: 
(1)  No taximeter shall be attached to a taxicab unless it has been inspected by an inspector approved by the chief of police and found to be accurate. The cab company shall keep certificates of accuracy from the inspector for each taximeter and provide the same for inspection by a passenger upon request. 
(2)  Each taximeter shall be inspected annually not more than thirty (30) days prior to January 1, and a certificate of accuracy, as provided above, shall be submitted by the cab company to the police department prior to renewal of the cab company license. 
(3)  Taximeters shall have a lighted dial or dials to register the tariff in accordance with lawful rates as expressed herein and the dial shall at all times be maintained by the cab company so that it is in plain view and readable by the passenger. 
(4)  No driver or cab company shall operate a taxicab with a taximeter that is inaccurate, has not been inspected as provided herein or is otherwise not in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(5)  It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with a taximeter. 
(6)  Upon the request of the chief of police, the cab company shall submit any taximeter installed on a taxicab to an inspection to determine its accuracy, at the sole cost and expense of the cab company. 
(Ord. No. 02-O-0090, § 1, 7-1-2002)  
Sec. 9-256. - Taxicab fares. 
(a)  Rates and charges: The following schedule of rates and charges which is hereby declared to be just and reasonable, computed according to the number of passengers, the distance traveled, and the time computed as indicated by the taximeter installed in each taxicab, shall apply: 
$2.00 	for the first ½ mile or fraction thereof; 
$0.60 	for each additional ½ mile 
$1.00 	for the second and additional passengers, excepting 
	children age 8 and under which shall be carried free 
$0.35 	for each additional ½ minute of waiting time 
$2.00 	minimum fare 
 
(b)  Waiting time: Waiting time shall include the time beginning five (5) minutes after call time at the place to which the taxicab has been called, when it is not in motion, and the time consumed while standing at the direction of the passenger. 
(c)  Baggage: No extra charge shall be made for baggage or parcels the size of which permits them to be carried in the cab. 
(d)  The meter rates and charges set forth in this section shall apply to all trips within the city and all trips between the city and Bartlett, Carol Stream, Winfield, Wheaton, Warrenville, Batavia, Geneva, St. Charles and Wayne, and the unincorporated areas falling within the perimeters established by such municipal boundaries. For the transport of passengers between the city and destinations beyond the perimeter of the municipal boundaries listed above, a maximum charge not to exceed one hundred fifty (150) percent of the actual metered rate may be imposed. 
(Ord. No. 02-O-0090, § 1, 7-1-2002; Ord. No. 04-O-0092, § 1, 9-7-2004)  
Sec. 9-257. - Conduct of taxicab drivers generally. 
It shall be unlawful for any driver to conduct himself in a disrespectful or contemptuous manner towards any person, or to use abusive or profane language while so occupied or in charge of such vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 02-O-0090, § 1, 7-1-2002)  
Sec. 9-258. - Conditions of taxicabs generally. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any taxicab on the streets of the city unless it has proper state license plates properly displayed. 
Every taxicab operated in the city by a cab company licensed by the city shall be maintained in a safe, dependable and clean condition at all times. Each taxicab shall have two (2) doors on each side of the taxicab and provide a seat belt for every passenger. If any taxicab shall become unsafe for operation or if its body or seating facilities shall be so damaged as to render the taxicab unfit for public use, the chief of police may suspend the license issued to the cab company operating that vehicle, or suspend that taxicab's registration, until the vehicle is made safe for use by the public. 
(Ord. No. 02-O-0090, § 1, 7-1-2002)  
Sec. 9-259. - Books and records of account. 
Every licensed cab company shall keep accurate books and records of account and log books of service rendered in its dispatching office located in the city. The chief of police shall be permitted to examine those books and records of account and logs as they may relate to a specific charge that is the subject of a public hearing under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 02-O-0090, § 1, 7-1-2002)  
Sec. 9-260. - Complaints. 
(a)  Any person may file a written complaint with the chief of police regarding the conduct of a driver or cab company. 
(b)  The chief of police shall investigate all complaints against drivers or cab companies. He shall notify the driver and cab company of the complaint and shall hold a meeting on the matter, if he determines that such a meeting is necessary, at which meeting the driver and a representative of the cab company shall be present. If the chief of police determines that any provision of this chapter has been violated, he shall take any further action consistent with the provisions of this chapter and shall also refer the matter to the police department. 
(Ord. No. 02-O-0090, § 1, 7-1-2002)  
Sec. 9-261. - Application. 
(a)  The cab company shall apply to the police department for a cab company license before operating any taxicabs within the city. The application for a cab company license shall be approved by the chief of police and a cab company license issued pursuant to the following rules and regulations: 
(1)  Application shall be made by the cab company in writing to the police department on a form as reasonably required and approved by the chief of police. 
(2)  The cab company shall be required to include in the application a true statement of certain facts including, but not limited to, the state of incorporation of the cab company if the cab company is a corporation; whether the cab company is organized and qualified to do business under the laws of the state if the cab company is a corporation; the cab company's principal place of business; the names of the individuals who own the cab company; whether the cab company is a corporation, partnership or sole proprietorship; the registered agent of the corporate cab company, and the principal office, address and phone number of the cab company. 
(3)  The cab company shall, with its application for a cab company license, register or cause to be registered each taxicab operated by or operated for, such company within the city. The following information for each taxicab to be registered shall be provided: 
a.  The year, make, color and vehicle identification number of the taxicab. 
b.  Name, address, and telephone number of the owner of the taxicab. 
c.  Written certification that required safety inspections of the taxicab and inspection of the taximeter have been completed within thirty (30) days prior to application and that these inspections find the taxicab to be safe and the taximeter to be in proper working order and accurate. 
(4)  The city shall investigate the owner(s) of the applicant cab company. If this investigation or the application materials uncover information showing any of the following, the application shall not be approved and no license shall be issued to the cab company: 
a.  An owner(s) has been convicted of a felony based upon his conduct or involvement in such business or activity or related or similar business or activity within the past ten (10) years; 
b.  An owner(s) has been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor unrelated to his conduct or involvement in such business or activity or related or similar business or activity, but which felony or misdemeanor involved the use of a deadly weapon, traffic in narcotic drugs, or violence against another person, including criminal sexual assault and sexual abuse, within the past ten (10) years; 
c.  An owner(s) has been convicted of a misdemeanor or licensing ordinance violation based upon his conduct or involvement in such business or activity or related or similar business or activity within the past two (2) years; or 
d.  The owner(s) or applicant(s) has misrepresented facts in the application for a license. 
(5)  The owner(s) or applicant(s) shall submit his/her fingerprints to be used in completing the investigation. Owner(s)/applicant(s) are required to present themselves for fingerprints to be taken by the police department. Applicant shall pay a fingerprint fee as prescribed in Appendix G. Provided, in the case of a renewal application, fingerprints and the fingerprinting fees shall not be required from a renewal applicant whose fingerprints are on file, unless the city determines that there may be reason to believe that the renewal applicant may have unreported convictions. 
(6)  The cab company shall be required to file with the police department, along with its application for a cab company license, a certificate of insurance showing that the cab company, its drivers and employees, are adequately insured against public liability, property damage and workman's compensation claims on account of its operation of taxicabs in the city, and shall provide proof of automobile liability insurance for each taxicab registered pursuant to this section. Taxicab companies with independent contractors as taxicab drivers must cause each driver to provide proof of automobile liability insurance for each taxicab registered pursuant to this section. The policy of insurance may cover one or more motor vehicles and for each vehicle shall insure such owner against liability upon the owner to a minimum amount of two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00) for bodily injury to, or death of, any person, and fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) for damage to property provided that the maximum payment required of such company on all judgments recovered against an owner hereunder shall not exceed the sum of three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) for each motor vehicle operated under the provisions of this section. If the insurance expires or is otherwise terminated during the term of the license, the cab company shall submit to the city, within fifteen (15) days of receipt thereof, a new certificate of insurance showing that the policy has been renewed or a new policy obtained, which meets the requirements of this section. If the insurance expires or is otherwise terminated during the term of the license, the cab company shall submit to the city, within fifteen (15) days of receipt thereof, a new certificate of insurance showing that the policy has been renewed or a new policy obtained, which meets the requirements of this section. 
(7)  Failure to fully comply with the application and disclosure requirements of this section shall constitute grounds for the chief of police to deny issuance of a cab company license to any cab company. 
(8)  The chief of police shall, within forty-five (45) days after submittal of a properly completed application, or within such other period of time as the city and the applicant shall otherwise agree, either issue or deny issuance of a taxicab company license pursuant to this article. Provided, if after forty-five (45) days a criminal history background investigation has not been completed, the chief of police may issue a temporary taxicab company license during the investigation period. The temporary taxicab company license shall only be valid for ninety (90) days from the date of issuance and shall automatically terminate at the end of the ninety-day term. The chief of police has the right to revoke the temporary taxicab company license immediately upon an unsatisfactory completion of a criminal history background investigation. 
(Ord. No. 02-O-0090, § 1, 7-1-2002; Ord. No. 03-O-0016, §§ 1, 2, 3-3-2003; Ord. No. 11-O-0007, § 25, 5-16-2011)  
Sec. 9-262. - Fees. 
Fees for the annual business license (including the additional fee per driver and fee per vehicle) shall be as prescribed in Appendix G. The full license fee shall be paid no matter when the license is applied for or issued. If the application is for renewal of a cab company license, the application shall be submitted to the police department by December 31 of the year in which the license will expire. Application filed after this deadline shall be considered a late filing, but shall be accepted by the city, provided a late filing fee, as prescribed in Appendix G, is submitted with the application and the license fee. 
(Ord. No. 02-O-0090, § 1, 7-1-2002; Ord. No. 03-O-0110, § 6, 12-15-2003; Ord. No. 11-O-0007, § 24, 5-16-2011)  
Sec. 9-263. - Transfer of cab company license. 
If a licensee holding a cab company license under this chapter shall change the principal place of business of the company, he shall apply to the police department for a transfer of the license, such application to state the address of the new principal place of business. 
The chief of police shall make the necessary alterations and endorse the transfer on the license. No fee shall be required for the transfer of a license for a change in the principal place of business of the company. 
If ownership of a cab company licensed under this chapter shall be conveyed to a new owner, said new owner shall apply for a new license in his name in accordance with the procedures and standards set forth in this section herein. There shall be no transfer of a license from one (1) owner of a business to another. 
(Ord. No. 02-O-0090, § 1, 7-1-2002)  
Sec. 9-264. - Changes in taxicabs during license term. 
During the term of any license issued to a cab company, if the cab company substitutes another taxicab for any taxicab registered with the city pursuant to section 9-261 of this chapter, or adds any additional taxicab to the list of registered taxicabs, the company shall register such substitute or additional taxicab with the city pursuant to section 9-261. 
(Ord. No. 02-O-0090, § 1, 7-1-2002)  
Sec. 9-265. - Taxicab driver's license required. 
It shall be unlawful for any driver to operate a taxicab for a cab company licensed by the city unless that driver is licensed by the city. It shall be unlawful for any driver to operate a taxicab that is not properly registered pursuant to sections 9-261. 
(Ord. No. 02-O-0090, § 1, 7-1-2002)  
Sec. 9-266. - Application for and issuance of taxicab driver's license. 
The driver of any taxicab to be operated within the city for a cab company licensed to operate taxicabs in the city, shall apply for a taxicab driver's license before driving a taxicab in the city. The application for a taxicab driver's license shall be approved by the chief of police and a taxicab driver's license issued pursuant to the following rules and regulations: 
(1)  Application shall be made by the driver in writing to the police department on a form as reasonably required and approved by the chief of police. Prior to issuance of the license, the business license fee shall have been paid. 
(2)  The driver shall be required to include in the application a true statement of certain facts including but not limited to, the age of the driver, the driving convictions of the driver, the type of state driver's license of the driver, any felony convictions of the driver, the address and home telephone number of the driver. 
(3)  At the time of application, the driver shall submit his or her driving abstract obtained from the Illinois Secretary of State's Office within thirty (30) days prior to the submittal of the application for a license. 
(4)  The city shall investigate the applicant for a taxicab driver's license. If this investigation or the application materials uncover information showing any of the following, the application shall not be approved and no taxicab driver's license shall be issued to that applicant: 
a.  The applicant has been convicted of a felony based upon his conduct or involvement in such business or activity or related or similar business or activity within the past ten (10) years; 
b.  The applicant has been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor unrelated to his conduct or involvement in such business or activity or related or similar business or activity, but which felony or misdemeanor involved the use of a deadly weapon, traffic in narcotic drugs, or violence against another person, including criminal sexual assault and sexual abuse, within the past ten (10) years; 
c.  The applicant has been convicted of a misdemeanor or licensing ordinance violation based upon his conduct or involvement in such business or activity or related or similar business or activity within the past two (2) years; 
d.  The applicant has been convicted of driving under the influence of drugs or alcohol within the past five (5) years; 
e.  The applicant has been convicted of reckless driving within the past five (5) years; 
f.  The applicant's driver's license has been suspended for violations concerning his operation of a motor driven vehicle within the past five (5) years; or 
g.  The owner(s) or applicant(s) has misrepresented facts in the application for a license. 
(5)  The driver shall submit his/her fingerprints to be used in completing the investigation. Applicants are required to present themselves for fingerprints to be taken by the West Chicago Police Department. Driver shall pay a fingerprint fee of fifteen dollars ($15.00). Provided, in the case of a renewal application, fingerprints and the fingerprint fee shall not be required from a renewal applicant whose fingerprints are on file, unless the city determines that there may be reason to believe that the renewal applicant may have unreported convictions. 
(6)  The applicant for a taxicab driver's license shall provide to the police department with his application evidence that he holds a valid Illinois operator's license that allows him to operate taxicabs under the laws of the state. 
(7)  The taxicab to be driven by the driver applying or reapplying for the license shall pass a taxicab safety inspection within thirty (30) days of application for a taxicab driver's license. The city shall conduct such inspections. These safety inspections shall be valid for one (1) year. Taxicabs shall be re-inspected during the term of the driver's license whenever the certificate of inspection expires. If the driver changes taxicabs, the new taxicab shall be inspected pursuant to this subsection before it can be operated in the city. No taxicab shall be operated within the city without displaying a current and valid city certificate of safety inspection. Upon issuance of a taxicab driver's license, the driver shall at all times when operating a taxicab in the city carry a license card that contains his name, license number and year for which the license is valid. The taxicab driver shall exhibit this card upon the request of any passenger or police officer. 
(8)  Failure to comply with the application and disclosure requirements of this section shall constitute grounds for the chief of police to deny issuance of a taxicab driver's license to any driver. 
(9)  The chief of police shall, within forty-five (45) days after submittal of a properly completed application, or within such other period of time as the city and the applicant shall otherwise agree, either issue or deny issuance of a taxicab driver's license pursuant to this article. Provided, if after forty-five (45) days a criminal history background investigation has not been completed, the chief of police may issue a temporary taxicab driver's license during the investigation period. The temporary taxi cab driver's license shall only be valid for ninety (90) days from the date of issuance and shall automatically terminate at the end of the ninety-day term. The chief of police has the right to revoke the temporary taxicab driver's license immediately upon an unsatisfactory completion of a criminal history background investigation. 
(Ord. No. 02-O-0090, § 1, 7-1-2002)  
Sec. 9-267. - Denial, suspension or revocation of licenses. 
(a)  If a license is denied this chapter, the applicant may file a written appeal of the decision to the chief of police within seven (7) days of receipt of the decision. The written appeal shall set forth the reasons why the applicant believes the decision to deny the license should be reversed. The chief of police shall respond to the appeal within fourteen (14) days either affirming or reversing the decision to deny the license. 
(b)  A license issued under the provisions of this chapter may be revoked or suspended by the chief of police for a violation of any provision of this chapter. If the chief of police determines after investigation that cause exists for the suspension or revocation of a license, the chief of police shall notify the licensee in writing that its license will be revoked or suspended, setting forth the reasons therefor, and advising the licensee of the right to appeal pursuant to section 9-268 of this chapter. Unless a timely appeal is filed as provided in section 9-268, such revocation or suspension shall be final and effective on the eleventh business day following receipt of the notice by the licensee. If a timely appeal is filed as provided in section 9-268, such revocation or suspension shall not be final and effective until the appeal has been processed. 
(c)  Any cab company license or taxicab driver's license issued to a cab company or driver shall be automatically revoked as follows: 
(1)  If owners of the cab company or a driver is convicted of such offenses as are enumerated in subsections 9-261(4)a and b and subsection 9-266(4)a and b; 
(2)  If an owner of the cab company or driver is found in possession of narcotics; 
(3)  If the driver of any taxicab is convicted of drunken driving or reckless driving; 
(4)  If a driver's state driver's license has been suspended; and 
(5)  If there is a loss of insurance for a taxicab. 
(d)  Suspension of a license shall be for a period of not to exceed thirty (30) days. No revocation or suspension shall require return by the city of any license fee. 
(e)  Any revocation of a license shall preclude the licensee (or any subsequent cab company that has twenty (20) percent or more common identity/ownership interest with the licensee) from receiving another license under this chapter for two (2) years from the date of revocation; except that upon automatic revocation, as provided above, the license (or any subsequent cab company that has twenty (20) percent or more common identity/ownership interest with the licensee) shall not be permitted to receive another license for ten (10) years from the date of revocation for violations of subsections 9-267(c)(1) and (2) and five (5) years for violation of subsections 9-267(c)(3) and (4). 
(f)  Revocation or suspension of a license shall not preclude the imposition of a fine by a court of competent jurisdiction for violation of any part of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 02-O-0090, § 1, 7-1-2002)  
Sec. 9-268. - Appeals. 
(a)  Any permit holder who receives a notice of revocation or suspension may file an appeal with the city administrator as provided herein. Such appeal shall be filed with the city administrator, in writing, no later than ten (10) business days following receipt of the notice of revocation or suspension, and shall include a response to the notice. Such response shall include a brief statement addressing the substantive deficiencies cited in the police department's notice and shall set forth the basis for why the license should not be revoked or suspended. 
(b)  The city administrator shall schedule an informal public hearing as soon as possible following receipt of such appeal. The purpose of the hearing will be to offer the applicant or licensee an opportunity to show cause why the license should not be suspended or revoked. A record shall be made of the informal public hearing and documents may be submitted and/or testimony given, either in person or through sworn affidavit. This record may be made by electronic recording. The city administrator shall have the power to administer oaths and to continue the hearing from time to time to permit the applicant to provide additional information. 
(c)  Within thirty (30) days after such hearing, the city administrator shall make written findings of fact and issue an appropriate order. If the city administrator determine that the license or permit should be revoked or suspended, the reasons supporting such determination shall be included in the written order. A copy of such order shall be served upon the permittee. 
(d)  The decision of the city administrator as provided in subsection (c) above shall be the final administrative action of the city with respect to the permit and shall be subject to the immediate appeal by the permittee to the circuit court. Such appeal to the circuit court shall be filed not later than thirty-five (35) days following receipt of the city administrator's findings and order. Failure to timely file such appeal as provided herein shall render the city administrator's decision final. 
(e)  The city administrator may delegate any duty or power set forth in this section, including but not limited to, the conduct of the informal hearing and issuance of any final order, to such city officer as the city administrator may designate. 
(Ord. No. 02-O-0090, § 1, 7-1-2002)  
Secs. 9-269—9-275. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XIV. - LANDSCAPE WASTE TRANSFER STATIONS 
 
Sec. 9-276. - License required. 
(a)  No person, firm, corporation or other legal entity shall engage in the business of operating a landscape waste transfer station within the city without first having obtained a license therefor from the city. For the purposes of this article, a landscape waste transfer station shall mean any facility which accepts landscape waste generated offsite for the purpose of transferring the same to a permanent disposal facility or other offsite entity which may lawfully accept the same. 
(b)  For the purposes of this article, landscape waste shall mean grass clippings, leaves, brush, branches and other such materials accumulated as a result of the care of lawns, shrubbery, vines, and trees, but shall specifically exclude decomposed or composted materials. 
(Ord. No. 2960, § 1, 2-5-96)  
Sec. 9-277. - Application for license. 
(a)  Applications for landscape waste transfer station licenses shall be made in writing to the city administrator. Each application shall contain such information as may be prescribed by the city administrator, including, but not limited to, the name and address of the applicant, the location of the landscape waste transfer station, a certificate of zoning compliance demonstrating that said location is properly zoned for such purpose, the location and identity of each other landscape waste transfer station, or other pollution control facility, presently or previously owned and/or operated by the applicant, whether any license, permit or other local, state or federal approval with respect to such other station or facility has been revoked or any criminal or civil sanction has been imposed in connection therewith and, if so, the reasons for such revocation or sanction, and, if the applicant is other than a natural person, the names and addresses and/or persons having, beneficially or otherwise, any ownership interest in the applicant. 
(b)  If the applicant is not the owner of the real property, upon which the landscape waste transfer station is, or will be, located, then the application shall be made jointly by the operator of said station and the owner(s) of said real property, and shall contain all of the information required by this section with respect to both the operator of said station and the owner(s) of said real property. For the purposes of this section if legal title to said real property is held in trust, the term owner(s) shall mean the beneficial owner or owners of said trust. 
(Ord. No. 2960, § 1, 2-5-96)  
Sec. 9-278. - License term; fee; renewal. 
(a)  Each license issued, or renewed, pursuant to this article shall be for a term of not more than one (1) calendar year, commencing at 12:01 a.m. on January 1 of such year, or if such license is used after January 1 of the year for which such license is issued, at 12:01 a.m. of the day following the date of issuance. Each license issued, or renewed pursuant to this article shall expire at 12:01 a.m. on January 1 of the year following the year for which such license is issued or renewed. 
(b)  No license shall be issued, or renewed, without there first having been paid with respect thereto an annual license fee as prescribed in Appendix G. Said license fee shall not be prorated in the event that a license is issued for less than a full calendar year, nor shall any portion thereof be rebated or refunded in the event that any license is revoked or the use of such license is discontinued for any reason. 
(c)  A license issued, or renewed, pursuant to this article, which has not been revoked pursuant to section 9-282 of this Code, may be renewed at its expiration upon written application therefor to the city administrator. Each application for renewal of such license shall contain the information set forth at section 9-277 of this Code and shall be made on or before December 1 of the year preceding the year for which such renewal is sought. 
(Ord. No. 2960, § 1, 2-5-96; Ord. No. 03-O-0110, § 7, 12-15-2003; Ord. No. 07-O-0105, § 3, 12-7-2007, eff. 1-1-2008; Ord. No. 11-O-0007, § 26, 5-16-2011)  
Sec. 9-279. - Transfer of license. 
(a)  A license issued, or renewed, pursuant to this article shall be a personal privilege to operate a landscape waste transfer station on the site set forth in such license, good for a term not to exceed one (1) year unless sooner revoked as provided in section 9-282 of this Code, and shall not constitute property, nor shall it be subject to attachment, garnishment or execution, nor shall it be alienable or transferable, voluntarily or involuntarily, or subject to being encumbered or hypothecated. 
(b)  Such license shall cease upon the death of the licensee and shall not descend by the laws of testate or intestate succession; provided, that executors or administrators of the estate of any deceased licensee, and the trustee of any insolvent or bankrupt licensee, may continue to operate under the order of the appropriate court, and may exercise the privileges of the deceased or insolvent or bankrupt licensee after the death of such decedent, or such insolvency or bankruptcy until the expiration of such license, but not longer than six (6) months after the death, bankruptcy or insolvency of such licensee. 
(c)  Any license issued to a corporation for profit shall terminate upon transfer of ownership from one (1) individual or individuals to another of more than thirty (30) percent of the corporate stock and a new application and license fee shall be required. Whenever a licensee under this article forms a corporation to operate in lieu of said licensee, the license issued thereto shall terminate and a new application and license fee shall be required, even when the shareholder or shareholders of said corporation and the licensee or licensees are one and the same persons. Whenever ownership of the real property, upon which a landscape waste transfer station is located, is transferred in whole or in part, the license issued therefor shall terminate, and a new application and license fee shall be required. 
(Ord. No. 2960, § 1, 2-5-96)  
Sec. 9-280. - Expansion or change of location. 
No licensee under this article shall expand the operation of a landscape waste transfer station beyond, or change the location thereof from, the real property set forth in the license therefor. Any such expansion or change of location shall require a new license, including a new application and application fee. 
(Ord. No. 2960, § 1, 2-5-96)  
Sec. 9-281. - Operations. 
It shall be the duty of the licensee of each landscape waste transfer station to: 
(a)  Limit the operations on the site to the transfer of landscape waste, and to refuse and prevent the deposit or storage upon, or transfer at, the site of any decomposed or composted materials; 
(b)  Limit the operations on the site to the portion of each calendar year commencing on March 1 and ending on December 15, and, within said portion of each calendar year, to limit the operations on the site to the portion of each week commencing on Monday and ending on Saturday; 
(c)  Limit the portion of the operations on the site involving transfer of landscape waste onto the site to the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. each day on which the operations are permitted, as provided in subsection (b) hereinabove; 
(d)  Limit the portion of the operations on the site involving the mulching and/or chipping of brush and branches and the transfer of landscape waste off of the site to the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. each day on which the operations are permitted, as provided in subsection (b) hereinabove; 
(e)  Cause the removal from the site of all landscape waste transferred onto the site, and the placement of the site in a clean and sanitary condition, not later than 7:00 p.m. on each day that operations are permitted, as provided in subsection (b) hereinabove; 
(f)  Cause the site to be secured from entry at all times when operations are not permitted on the site, as provided in subsection (b) hereinabove; 
(g)  Cause the inspection of the neighboring properties and public rights-of-way, and the removal therefrom of landscape wastes which fall, shift, blow, drop or escape from the site or the trucks operated in connection therewith, on a daily basis; 
(h)  Cause not less than one (1) employee to be present on the site at all times when the site is not secured from entry; 
(i)  Cause all brush and branches transferred onto the site to be mulched and/or chipped, so as to minimize their volume, prior to being transferred off of the site; 
(j)  Cause all trucks operated in connection with the transfer of landscape waste off of the site to be securely covered with a tarpaulin or other cover, or otherwise secured, as is necessary to prevent the falling, shifting, blowing, dropping or escaping of any landscape wastes from such trucks, and to be operated in all respects in conformity with all applicable local, state and/or federal statutes, ordinances, rules and/or regulations, and to refuse to accept transfer of landscape waste onto the site from trucks which are not so covered or secured; 
(k)  As a precondition to commencement and continuation of operations upon the site, secure and thereafter renew and maintain all necessary permits, licenses and other approvals required by any applicable local, state and/or federal statutes, ordinances, rules and/or regulations, and fully comply with all terms and conditions in connection therewith; 
(l)  Permit the city to inspect the site at any time during which operations are taking place, without prior notice, and at any other times, upon reasonable notice; 
(m)  Refrain from any processing of landscape waste upon the site, except mulching and chipping of brush and branches, as provided in subsection (i) hereinabove; 
(n)  Refrain from any retail sales of landscape waste or the mulched or chipped byproducts thereof from or on the site; 
(o)  Conduct the operations on the site so as to avoid any nuisance in fact, danger to life or detriment to health. 
(Ord. No. 2960, § 1, 2-5-96)  
Sec. 9-282. - Suspension or revocation of license; hearing; appeal. 
(a)  When the operation of a landscape waste transfer station constitutes a nuisance in fact or a clear and present danger to the public health, safety or general welfare, the city administrator shall be authorized to summarily order the cessation of business, the closing of the premises and the suspension of the license for a period not to exceed ten (10) days. 
Within eight (8) days after he or she has so acted, the city administrator shall call a hearing for the purpose of determining whether or not the license should be revoked. 
(b)  A landscape waste transfer station license may be revoked by the city administrator after notice and hearing as provided in subsection (c) hereinbelow, for any of the following causes: 
(1)  Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application for the license; 
(2)  Any violation by the licensee of ordinance provisions relating to the license or the licensed site; 
(3)  Conviction of the licensee of any felony or of a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude; 
(4)  Failure of the licensee to pay any fine or penalty owing to the city; or 
(5)  Refusal to permit an inspection, or any interference with a duly authorized city officer or employee while in the performance of his or her duties in making an inspection. 
Such revocation, if ordered, shall not preclude prosecution and imposition of any other penalties provided for the violation of other applicable ordinances of the city. 
(c)  Notice of the hearing for revocation of a landscape waste transfer station license shall be given in writing setting forth specifically the grounds of the complaint and the time and place of the hearing. Such notice shall be sent by certified mail (return receipt requested) to the licensee at his or her last known address at least five (5) days prior to the date set for the hearing. 
At the hearing, the city prosecutor shall present the complaint and shall represent the city. The licensee shall be permitted counsel and shall have the right to submit evidence and cross examine witnesses. The city administrator shall preside and shall render the decision. 
(d)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the city administrator in connection with the revocation of a license for a landscape waste transfer station shall have the right to appeal to the city council. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the city administrator, within ten (10) days after notice of revocation of a license, a written statement under oath setting forth specifically the grounds for appeal. The city council shall thereupon set the time and place for a hearing on such appeal, and notice of such hearing shall be given to the licensee in the same manner as provided in subsection (c) hereinabove. The decision of the city council on such appeal shall be by vote of a majority of all the members then holding office and shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 2960, § 1, 2-5-96)  
Secs. 9-283—9-300. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XV. - LICENSING OF RESIDENTIAL RENTAL PROPERTY[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 11-O-0063, § 1, adopted November 7, 2011, repealed the former Art. XV, §§ 9-301—9-317, and enacted a new Art. XV as set out herein. The former Art. XV pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 11-O-0013, § 1, adopted June 20, 2011 and Ord. No. 11-O-0057, adopted October 3, 2011. 
 
Sec. 9-301. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning: 
Abandoned vehicle: All motor vehicles or other vehicles in a state of disrepair which renders the vehicle incapable of being driven in its condition; or any motor vehicle or other vehicle that has not been moved or used for seven (7) consecutive days or more and is apparently deserted. 
Applicant: The legal titleholder to the rental property as shown on a deed, including, but not limited to, any individual, firm, sole proprietor, association, partnership, corporation, trust or any other legal entity. 
Boarding house: Any single-family dwelling, or any part thereof, containing one (1) or more rooms forming a single habitable unit used, or, intended to be used, for living and sleeping, but not for cooking or eating purposes, which space is rented or leased by the owner or operator to any one (1) or more persons. 
Building: Any structure that is designed and built as a group of individual dwelling units, and is separated from another building by virtue of a firewall or fire separation assembly. 
Common areas (exterior): The private roads and streets and private sidewalks adjacent thereto, landscaping, detention ponds, utility facilities, trash enclosures, playground equipment, swimming pools, tennis courts, basketball courts or any other recreational facilities, trail areas, parking areas, private drives, detached garages, lighting fixtures, signage, mailboxes, street benches, entrance monuments, perimeter fencing and such other improvements or structures from time to time or at any time located or constructed on a common area. Such common areas may serve, in whole or in part, one (1) or more multiple-family dwellings. 
Common areas (interior): Any portion or part thereof of a multiple-family dwelling having communal areas (laundry, furnace, storage rooms, hallways, stairways, meeting rooms) and all other areas located within a dwelling, outside of a dwelling unit. Interior common areas shall also include stoops, entrance doors, roofs, attics, balconies, lighting fixtures, signage, railings, patios, storage areas, garages, exterior building surfaces, gutters and downspouts and any other areas of a multiple-family dwelling or building to which the owner is directly responsible for the proper maintenance thereof. 
Condominium dwelling: For the purpose of this article: any one (1) or more dwelling units, each under individual, separate ownership, designed and built as a group of individual dwelling units, in which units may touch by virtue of common or party walls, floors, ceilings and hallways, and which contains two (2) or more dwelling units per building. 
Dwelling unit: Any rooms or group of rooms located within a structure and forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating. 
Habitable: Any structure which is suitable and fit for a person or persons to live in, which is free of building code violations and which is free from defects that endanger the health, safety and welfare of the occupants. 
Managing agent: Any person or firm, acting for another, with authority to rent, enter into a lease on behalf of the owner, manage and/or make expenditures. 
Multiple-family dwelling: For the purpose of this article: one (1) or more residential buildings under one (1) ownership, designed and built as a group of individual dwelling units, in which units may touch by virtue of common or party walls, floors, ceilings and hallways, and which contains three (3) or more dwelling units per building. Each building that is separated by another building by virtue of a firewall or fire separation assembly, and has its own address, shall be considered a separate building. When a condominium association, homeowners' association or other legal entity has the charge, care or control of any common area which serves, in whole or in part, one (1) or more multiple-family dwellings not owned by such condominium association, homeowners' association or other legal entity, then in that event such common area shall be deemed to be a multiple-family dwelling for purposes of this chapter. 
Owner: Any person who alone, jointly or severally with others has legal title to any single-family dwelling, single-family townhouse dwelling, condominium dwelling, or, multiple-family dwelling, or dwelling unit, with or without accompanying actual possession thereof; or who has charge, care or control of any single-family dwelling, single-family townhouse dwelling, condominium dwelling, or, multiple-family dwelling, or dwelling unit, as owner, or other person; or is an executor, administrator, trustee or guardian of the estate of the owner; is a mortgagee in possession, or is a senior officer or a trustee of the association of unit owners of a condominium or homeowners' association, or any person with an ownership interest whatsoever. Any person thus representing the owner shall be bound to comply with the provisions of this article and the rules and regulations pursuant thereto, to the same extent as if he were the owner. Owner shall also mean any condominium association, homeowners' association or other legal entity having the charge, care or control of any common area that serves in whole or in part one (1) or more multiple-family dwellings. 
Person: Any individual, firm, sole proprietor, association, partnership, corporation, trust or any other legal entity. 
Rent-to-own agreement: An agreement sometimes referred to as "articles for agreement for deed" or "contract for deed" wherein the owner of residential property agrees to transfer title to one (1) or more individuals in possession of the property, only after receiving multiple monthly installment payments and under which the one (1) or more individuals in possession have no vested ownership right, title, or interest, legal or equitable, in the premises until the deed is delivered to the one (1) or more individuals in possession. 
Rental property: For the purpose of this article: any single-family dwelling, any single-family townhouse dwelling, any condominium dwelling, any multiple-family dwelling, or dwelling unit that is offered for rent or lease, or which has previously been rented or leased by the current owner and not occupied by said owner, or is subject to a rent-to-own agreement such as an "articles of agreement for deed" or a "contract for deed," but not including a boarding house. 
Single-family dwelling: For the purpose of this article: a single residential building under one (1) ownership, designed and built as an individual dwelling unit. 
Single-family townhouse dwelling: For the purpose of this article: a single residential building under one (1) ownership, designed and built as an individual dwelling unit, in which separate units touch by virtue of common or party walls. Each building that has its own address shall be considered a separate building. 
(Ord. No. 11-O-0063, § 1, 11-7-2011; Ord. No. 16-O-0005, § 1(Exh. A), 2-7-2016)  
Sec. 9-302. - License required. 
No person shall operate a rental property without having first obtained a license therefore from the city. Licenses shall be issued by the community development department in accordance with the provisions of this article. Once an owner has obtained a rental license for a dwelling unit, that unit will be deemed a rental property and an annual license will be required until such time as the owner of the property provides proof, to the satisfaction of the city, that he is legally residing in the dwelling unit, maintaining said unit at the domicile and physically inhabiting said unit, or that the property has been sold, or ownership has otherwise relinquished. 
(Ord. No. 11-O-0063, § 1, 11-7-2011; Ord. No. 16-O-0005, § 1(Exh. A), 2-7-2016)  
Sec. 9-303. - License application. 
No such license shall be issued except upon written application filed with the community development department. A complete application for a license shall be filed not less than thirty (30) days prior to the issuance thereof. The legal titleholder to the rental property shall sign said application. Any person seeking to renew a license issued pursuant to this article shall file a completed application prior to the expiration of the currently valid license. Application forms may be obtained from the community development department and shall contain such information as the department may, from time to time, require, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Name, address, birth date, work and home telephone numbers of each owner of the rental property. When the owner is a land trust, the application shall include the name and address of each person(s) holding a beneficial interest and/or power of direction therein. 
(2)  Name, address, birth date, work and twenty-four-hour emergency contact telephone numbers of any person appointed or serving as managing agent of the rental property. If the managing agent is other than a natural person, the above information shall also be provided for that employee of the managing agent specifically assigned to the rental dwelling. Said managing agent shall respond to any on-site emergency within sixty (60) minutes of notification by the city or other emergency services agency. 
(3)  A copy of the written management agreement between the owner and the managing agent shall be attached to the application. If no written agreement exists, the owner and managing agent shall attach an executed statement setting forth the terms of the managing agent's authority to rent, manage, and make expenditures with respect to the rental property. 
(4)  Name, address, work and home telephone numbers of the property manager(s) in charge of the maintenance of the rental property and its heating, cooling, plumbing and electrical systems. 
(5)  Name, address, birth date, work and home telephone numbers of any person(s) (other than those listed pursuant to subsections (1), (2) and (4) of this section), if any, having authority to make any decision with respect to the management and/or maintenance of the rental property. Attached to the application shall be a statement of such person's authority to manage, lease and/or maintain the rental property. 
(6)  If no managing agent has been appointed, hired or utilized, the name, address, birth date, work and home telephone numbers of an agent authorized by the owner to accept notices and process. 
(7)  An irrevocable written consent by the owner, permitting the city and its inspectors to enter upon any and all portions of the licensed rental property, during reasonable hours, for purposes of making the inspections required and/or permitted under this article, including the right to inspect individual dwelling units, upon notice first being tendered to the unit dweller. Said irrevocable written consent for inspections shall be executed at the time of the issuance of a license as provided for herein, in a form substantially similar to appendix "A." Individual dwelling unit notice of inspection shall be secured in the following manner: 
The city shall serve written notice to the landlord of any inspection to be conducted by mailing such notice by first class mail at least seven (7) days in advance of the inspection. Such notice shall contain: i. a description of the property sufficient for identification; ii. the proposed date and time of the inspection; and iii. the contact information for the city. The landlord shall notify any tenants or other occupants of said unit regarding the inspection and shall provide the city with written verification of said tenant notification of the scheduled inspection. 
(8)  An irrevocable written consent and agreement to pay any money owed by the applicant to the city for any purpose whatsoever and any outstanding, fees, costs or charges associated with the rental dwelling for which a license is sought, plus all enforcement costs provided for by section 9-317 of this article. Said irrevocable written consent shall be executed at the time of the issuance of a license as provided for herein, in a form substantially similar to appendix "B." 
(9)  A copy of the most recent test results of annual testing of fire alarm and emergency lighting systems as required under subsection 9-310(4) of this article. 
(10)  A copy of the deed to the rental property. 
(11)  A statement that the applicant will not violate any of the ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. No. 11-O-0063, § 1, 11-7-2011; Ord. No. 16-O-0005, § 1(Exh. A), 2-7-2016) 
Editor's note— Appendices "A" and "B" are not set out herein, but are on file with the city.  
Sec. 9-304. - License term. 
Each license granted hereunder shall be an annual license, the term of which shall commence on January 1 of a given year and shall terminate on December 31 of the same year. 
(Ord. No. 11-O-0063, § 1, 11-7-2011; Ord. No. 16-O-0005, § 1(Exh. A), 2-7-2016)  
Sec. 9-305. - License fees. 
(a)  The annual required license fee for a rental shall include a base license fee as prescribed in appendix G of this Code plus, if applicable, any money owed by the applicant to the city for any purpose whatsoever and any outstanding fees, costs or charges associated with the rental dwelling for which a license is sought. Any partial payment shall first be applied to outstanding debt associated with either the applicant or with the rental property for which a license is sought. However, said base license fee may be reduced by ten (10) percent provided the license fee as described above is paid in full prior to December 1, and no other additional fees, costs, fines or charges exist. 
(b)  If a completed license application is not submitted together with the annual required license fee prior to January 1 in any given year, the base license fee shall be increased by an additional twenty (20) percent on the first day of each subsequent month, until such time as a complete license application and the required license fee is paid. In the event that said application, along with the required license fee, is not filed as provided herein, said license shall, at the discretion of the city, not be issued. 
(c)  If the ownership of a dwelling unit changes during the license year, a new license shall be required. No refund of any license fee paid shall be made and no license fee shall be prorated. The new owner shall comply with the terms set forth herein. 
(d)  Notwithstanding any provision contained hereunder to the contrary, no license shall be renewed until such time as all money owed by the applicant to the city for any purpose whatsoever, and all outstanding fees, costs or charges associated with the rental dwelling for which a license is sought have been paid. 
(Ord. No. 11-O-0063, § 1, 11-7-2011; Ord. No. 16-O-0005, § 1(Exh. A), 2-7-2016; Ord. No. 19-O-0033, § 2, 11-4-2019)  
Sec. 9-306. - Inspections. 
(a)  Compliance required. Every rental property shall be owned, operated and maintained in full compliance with all applicable ordinances, codes and regulations of the city. 
(1)  The first license applied for with respect to any rental property under this article shall not be issued to any owner for any rental property, in the event, at the time of application: 
a.  An existing inspection report identifies any code violation which has not been corrected, and the time for correction of said violation as noted in such inspection report has expired; 
b.  Litigation is pending with respect to code violations at such rental dwelling; or 
c.  There remains either any money owed by the applicant to the city for any purpose whatsoever or there are outstanding fees, costs or charges associated with the rental dwelling for which the license is sought. 
(2)  Thereafter, the managing agent or owner shall annually schedule and the city shall conduct annual inspections of rental properties according to section 9-306(b) during the license year to determine if said rental property is in full compliance with all applicable ordinances, codes and regulations of the city. Said inspection is specifically consented to by the managing agent or owner and renter by virtue of submitting said application. 
(b)  Scope of inspections. Any inspections conducted pursuant to this section shall include the interior and exterior common areas and shall be limited to the detection of zoning, property maintenance and building code violations as well as conditions affecting the health, safety and welfare of the occupants. The inspection shall include the interior of the dwelling units according to the following schedule: 
(1)  In single-family and townhouse buildings, the entire dwelling unit. 
(2)  In buildings containing from two (2) to and including eight (8) dwelling units, the entire building. 
(3)  In buildings containing from nine (9) to and including eighteen (18) dwelling units, a minimum of four (4) dwelling units in each building. 
(4)  In buildings containing more than eighteen (18) dwelling units, a minimum of twenty (20) percent of the dwelling units in each building. 
(5)  No dwelling unit having received an approved inspection as required by subsections (1), (2), (3), or (4) above shall receive another inspection until all dwelling units in the building or multi-family dwelling in which it is located have been inspected and comply with the Code. 
(c)  Common areas classified as multiple-family dwellings. 
(1)  Where any common area is served by a multiple-family dwelling, no multiple-family dwelling served in whole or in part by such common area shall be deemed to be in compliance with this article unless and until such common area is in full compliance with this article. 
(2)  Where any multiple-family dwelling is served in whole or in part by any common area defined by this article as a multiple-family dwelling, no such common area shall be deemed to be in compliance with this article unless and until all multiple-family dwellings served in whole or in part by such common area are in full compliance with this article. 
(d)  Exterior areas of single-family and townhouse dwellings. Where there exists an exterior area, yard, garage, and/or accessory structure under control and/or ownership by the owner of a single-family or townhouse dwelling, no single-family or townhouse dwelling served by such exterior area shall be deemed to be in compliance with this article unless and until such exterior area is in full compliance with this article. 
(e)  Condominium common areas. Common exterior and interior areas of condominiums need not be inspected as required by this article. 
(Ord. No. 11-O-0063, § 1, 11-7-2011; Ord. No. 16-O-0005, § 1(Exh. A), 2-7-2016)  
Sec. 9-307. - License transferability. 
A license issued pursuant to this article shall be valid with respect to one (1) specific rental property and may not be transferred to any other rental property or any other owner. 
(Ord. No. 11-O-0063, § 1, 11-7-2011; Ord. No. 16-O-0005, § 1(Exh. A), 2-7-2016)  
Sec. 9-308. - License terminates upon sale. 
Notwithstanding any provision contained in this article to the contrary, a license issued pursuant to this article shall terminate upon the sale of the rental property described in such license and shall not be transferable. 
(Ord. No. 11-O-0063, § 1, 11-7-2011; Ord. No. 16-O-0005, § 1(Exh. A), 2-7-2016)  
Sec. 9-309. - Inspection upon sale. 
(a)  Inspection report required. No rental property shall be sold or title otherwise transferred unless the seller furnishes the buyer with a pre-sale/change-of-occupancy inspection report dated no later than the day of the closing on the sale of said rental property. Said report shall be based on an inspection of the dwelling unit, or units, and all interior and exterior common areas performed by the community development department. The report shall state that the rental property complies with all applicable ordinances, codes and regulations of the city or, in the alternative, list with specificity the manner in which the rental property does not comply with all applicable ordinances, codes and regulations. 
(b)  Request for inspection. The request for a pre-sale/change-of-occupancy inspection must be made not less than sixty (60) days prior to the scheduled date of the closing. The fee for said inspection shall be the same as that established for permits issued pursuant to change of occupancy as prescribed in appendix G. 
(c)  Violation. An inspection made pursuant to this section satisfies the annual inspection requirement of section 9-306 of this article. A sale for purposes of this section includes contract sales, exchanges, conversions to condominiums and transfers of possession or control of any rental property. Any person participating in such a sale in violation of this section, either as seller, buyer or by receipt of a sales commission, in connection therewith, shall be deemed in violation of this section and be subject to the penalties as provided for in this Code. Any contract executed in violation of this section shall be voidable by the buyer. 
Notwithstanding the foregoing, any seller shall be responsible for complying with each and every provision of this article. 
(Ord. No. 11-O-0063, § 1, 11-7-2011; Ord. No. 14-O-0020, § 2, 7-7-2014; Ord. No. 16-O-0005, § 1(Exh. A), 2-7-2016)  
Sec. 9-310. - Additional requirements. 
In addition to all other requirements set forth in this Code, the following additional requirements shall be applicable to rental property: 
(1)  No owner or other person shall occupy or allow another person to occupy any dwelling or dwelling unit unless a rental license has been issued by the city and the rental unit is clean, safe, sanitary, fit for human occupancy and complies with all applicable ordinances, codes and regulations of the city. 
(2)  Every owner shall maintain in a safe, clean and sanitary condition, the interior and exterior common areas. 
(3)  The owner of any rental property shall be responsible for the removal of any and all abandoned vehicles located on the premises of said rental property. Such removal shall be accomplished within seven (7) days of receiving notice from the city. Such removals shall be accomplished as otherwise provided for in chapter 10, article IV of this Code. 
(4)  The owner shall be responsible for the maintenance and annual testing of fire alarm and emergency lighting systems. These systems shall be tested by an approved service company and a written report provided. The owner shall retain all test results. 
(5)  No owner shall permit the maximum occupancy of any dwelling unit to be exceeded. The maximum occupancy of any dwelling unit shall be as specified in chapter 7, article II of this Code. 
(6)  In the event that the owner of a rental property resides more than thirty (30) miles outside the corporate limits of the city, the owner shall appoint a managing agent, authorized to receive notices and process on behalf of the owner, that: 
a.  Has an office at the multiple-family dwelling with regular business hours; 
b.  Lives at the multiple-family dwelling and has regular business hours thereat; 
c.  Has an office or is otherwise available within the corporate limits of the city during regular business hours; or 
d.  Has a residence or office no more than thirty (30) miles outside the corporate limits of the city. 
(7)  Every owner, or managing agent, if one is required or otherwise appointed, shall have in its possession and immediately available for inspection or use by the city: 
a.  Keys to all common-area locks at the rental property. 
b.  Copies of all current leases and their respective applications. 
c.  Copies of all lease applications for the past year. 
d.  Copies of an emergency action plan showing details for providing assistance to affected residents as a result of fire, explosion or other event which renders any building or dwelling unit as uninhabitable. Said plan shall include, but not be limited to: 
1.  Resources available for providing immediate shelter for displaced residents, 
2.  Contact names and phone numbers for short term (one (1) to two (2) days) temporary housing, food and clothing for displaced residents, 
3.  Contact names and phone numbers for long term housing for displaced residents, 
4.  Emergency contact numbers for business providing emergency board-up services, and 
5.  Property owner policy for handling lease issues during long term displacement of residents. 
(8)  If any clubhouse or recreation building or facility at a multiple-family dwelling is to be rented with or without consideration for an event attended by thirty-five (35) people or more, the owner shall be responsible for making sure a written application for such rental is completed stating the applicant's name, address, date of birth, home and work telephone numbers, reason for rental, if alcohol will be served or sold and the date, beginning time and ending time of rental. The owner is also responsible for making sure that proper security is provided as approved by the chief of police or his designated representative. If alcohol is to be present, the owner shall be responsible for compliance with all applicable codes and ordinances of the city relating to the sale and consumption of alcohol. 
(9)  Every owner shall report to the community development department any change in the designation of any managing agent, at least seven (7) days prior to such change. 
(10)  Any contract for the sale of a rental property shall be reported to the community development department and a copy of said contract shall be provided to the city within seven (7) days of the execution thereof. 
(11)  Every rental property owner shall cause to be kept records itemizing all repairs, and alterations in excess of five hundred dollars ($500.00) per expenditure for a period of three (3) years after such expenditure. Upon request, such records shall be made available to the city during normal business hours upon request of the community development department. 
(12)  No dwelling unit shall be rented without a written lease having been executed on behalf of the owner and the tenant. Each such lease shall contain the following provisions: 
a.  The consent of the tenant to the inspections required or otherwise permitted under this article, upon the giving of tewnty-four-hour prior written notice posted on the door of each dwelling unit. 
b.  An acknowledgment by the tenant that the city is entitled to go upon such property for the purpose of discontinuing water service on due notice, whenever the payments for service or usage are in arrears and whenever payment for refuse disposal service is in arrears. 
(13)  No dwelling unit shall be rented without the owner having first obtained a written application containing or having attached thereto the following information from the tenant(s): 
a.  Name, address, birth date, work and home telephone numbers of each applicant. 
b.  A list of the current and all residences during the previous three (3) years, including addresses, name of landlord and reason for leaving. 
c.  Name, address, birth date, work and home telephone numbers of all other persons who will be residing in the dwelling unit. 
d.  Name, address and telephone number of nearest relative or friends (at least two (2) for emergency contact purposes). 
e.  The make, model, color, year and current license plate numbers of all motor vehicles and recreational vehicles, including automobiles, boats, trailers, campers, motorcycles, etc., owned or used by the persons who will reside in the dwelling unit. 
f.  A certification as to the correctness of the information being provided. 
(Ord. No. 11-O-0063, § 1, 11-7-2011; Ord. No. 16-O-0005, § 1(Exh. A), 2-7-2016)  
Sec. 9-311. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 16-O-0005, § 1(Exh. A), adopted Feb. 7, 2016, repealed § 9-311, which pertained to crime free multi-housing program seminar and derived from Ord. No. 11-O-0063, § 1, 11-7-2011.  
Sec. 9-312. - Nuisance residential rental property—Defined. 
A property shall be classified as a nuisance residential rental property if: 
(1)  The tenants or their guests, either invited or uninvited, incur three (3) or more documented incidents of nuisance activity, as specified in this Code, either on the rental property or within the city limits in a twelve-month period. Nuisance activity shall not include any incidents in which a tenant or guest, invited or uninvited: (A) contacts police or other emergency services, if: (i) the contact was made with the intent to prevent or respond to domestic violence or sexual violence; (ii) the intervention or emergency assistance was needed to respond to or prevent domestic violence or sexual violence; or (iii) the contact was made by, on behalf of, or otherwise concerns an individual with a disability and the purpose of the contact was related to that individual's disability; (B) an incident or incidents of actual or threatened domestic violence or sexual violence against a tenant, household member, or guest occurring in the dwelling unit or on the premises; (C) criminal activity or a local ordinance violation occurring in the dwelling unit or on the premises that is directly relating to domestic violence or sexual violence engaged in by a tenant, member of a tenant's household, guest, or other party, and against a tenant, household member, guest, or other party. Notwithstanding the foregoing, and in compliance with Illinois law, a perpetrator of the domestic violence, sexual violence, or other criminal activity may be considered a "nuisance" on the residential rental property subject to eviction or other penalty. 
(2)  Any tenant commits vandalism on the property in which the tenant's dwelling unit is located, and/or permits vandalism to occur or shall violate any of the provisions of this article or any applicable ordinance, code or regulation of the city in the dwelling unit leased by the tenant. In such event, both landlord and tenant shall receive written notice of any alleged nuisance activity and an opportunity to challenge the validity of the authorized penalty. 
(Ord. No. 11-O-0063, § 1, 11-7-2011; Ord. No. 16-O-0005, § 1(Exh. A), 2-7-2016)  
Sec. 9-313. - Inspections; violations; suspension and revocation of license. 
(a)  Whenever, upon inspection of the licensed rental property, it is determined that conditions or practices exist which are in violation of the provisions of this article or any applicable ordinance, code or regulation of the city, or is classified as a nuisance residential rental property per section 9-312, the city shall serve the owner with a notice of violation. Such notice shall identify the specific violations and state that unless they are corrected within the time specified in the notice, the owner shall be cited and its license may be suspended. Notice pursuant to this section may be sent by: 
(1)  First class mail or by overnight or two-day commercial delivery service at the owner's last known address or if the owner is a business entity, at any address identified for its registered agent or at its principal place of business; 
(2)  Personal service; 
(3)  Posting upon the property that is the site of the alleged violation(s); or 
(4)  Any other means permitted by law for service of civil summons. 
(b)  At the end of the time allowed for correction of any violation cited, the rental property shall be re-inspected by the city, which inspection is specifically consented to by the owner. If it is determined that the conditions have not been corrected, or they are not in the process of being corrected to the satisfaction of the city, the city may suspend or revoke the license. In addition to any fine imposed by either an administrative law judge within his authority as defined in chapter 8 of this Code or by a court of competent jurisdiction, the following reinstatement fees shall be paid by the owner: 
(1)  The first suspension of a rental license shall be a thirty-day suspension. Compliance and payment of a reinstatement fee of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) is required before reissuance of the license. 
(2)  The second suspension of a license shall be for six (6) months. Compliance and payment of a reinstatement fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00) is required before reissuance of the license. 
(3)  A rental license shall be revoked upon any subsequent violation; said revocation shall be permanent and the owner will no longer be issued a rental license for the property in question. 
(c)  Any person whose license to operate a rental property has been suspended shall be given the opportunity to be heard by the city council in connection with the violations. Said person must submit his or her request to be heard in writing to the city and must explain in detail, the violations cited, why they have not been corrected, and a compliance time frame for completion. However, if no written request for hearing is received within twenty-one (21) days following the date the order of suspension is issued, the suspension shall remain as ordered. The city council, as a result of such hearing, may grant additional time, uphold the suspension, or may revoke the license. Prior to revocation any person whose license has been suspended may request a re-inspection upon a showing that the violation or violations cited in the notice have been corrected. 
(d)  If, upon re-inspection, it is determined by the city that the violations cited in the notice have been corrected, the license shall be reinstated by the community development department. A request for re-inspection must be filed within the twenty-one-day time period for requesting a hearing, unless the official responsible for sending the violation notice so requests. 
(e)  If the licensee is found guilty in a court-of-law of a violation of any provision of this article or any applicable ordinance, code or regulation in connection with the licensed rental property, then the license may be subject to revocation without further notice. 
(f)  In the event a condition of extreme hazard to health or safety is found to exist, the city may immediately revoke the license. 
(g)  Each day a rental property continues to operate after a license has been revoked shall constitute a separate violation of this article. 
(h)  The first re-inspection provided for in subsection (b) of this section shall be without charge to the owner. Thereafter, each additional re-inspection shall be as prescribed in appendix G and shall be payable prior to such re-inspection. 
(Ord. No. 11-O-0063, § 1, 11-7-2011; Ord. No. 16-O-0005, § 1(Exh. A), 2-7-2016)  
Sec. 9-314. - Consent to inspection; search warrants. 
(a)  Each owner, by operating under a license issued pursuant to this article, irrevocably consents to inspections by the city entering any and all portions of the rental property subject to owner's license during reasonable hours, for purposes of making the inspections required and/or permitted pursuant to this article, including the right to inspect individual dwelling units, the scope of said inspection shall be for purposes of ensuring that no zoning or building code violations exist in the property. 
(b)  Each lease entered into by an owner shall contain an irrevocable consent by the lessee granting unto the city the right to inspect for the limited purpose of determining if there are violations of the City Code. 
(c)  Upon notice to the owner and tenant as provided for in section 9-303(7), owner and/or lessee shall provide access to such portions of the rental property, including dwelling units, which are otherwise inaccessible to city inspections. During any inspection of an inaccessible portion of the rental property, owner shall designate a representative to accompany the city inspector(s) during such inspection. 
(d)  Despite the irrevocable consent to inspections provided by this section, in the event that an owner or lessee objects to any such inspection, then prior to making any such inspection or taking any further action, the city shall apply for an administrative search warrant to conduct such inspection. 
(e)  An administrative warrant sought pursuant to this section shall be sought in a court of competent jurisdiction based on the existence of probable cause to believe that a violation of the article has occurred or is occurring. For the purposes of this section, probable cause is not the same standard as used in obtaining criminal search warrants. In addition to a showing of specific evidence of an existing violation, probable cause can be found upon a showing of facts justifying further inquiry, by inspection, to determine whether a violation of any local ordinance is occurring. This finding can be based upon the following factors along with such other matters as it deems pertinent in its decision as to whether a warrant shall issue: 
(1)  Eyewitness account of violations; 
(2)  Citizen complaints; 
(3)  Tenant complaints; 
(4)  Plain view violations; 
(5)  Violations apparent from city records; 
(6)  Property deterioration; 
(7)  Age of property; 
(8)  Nature of alleged violations; 
(9)  Nature of surrounding area; 
(10)  Similar properties in the area; 
(11)  Documented violation on similar properties in the area; 
(12)  Passage of time since last inspection; 
(13)  Previous violations on the property; 
(14)  The inspection of the premises in question was to be made pursuant to an administrative plan containing neutral criteria supporting the need for the inspection; 
(15)  Previous inspections have shown violations of law and the present inspection is necessary to determine whether those violations have been abated; 
(16)  Any other showing consistent with constitutional standards for probable cause in administrative inspections. 
(Ord. No. 11-O-0063, § 1, 11-7-2011; Ord. No. 16-O-0005, § 1(Exh. A), 2-7-2016)  
Sec. 9-315. - Owner liability for acts and omissions. 
Every act or omission of whatsoever nature constituting a violation of any provision of this article by any officer, director, trustee, employer, agent or managing agent of any owner shall be deemed to be the act of such owner and shall be punishable in the same manner as if such act or omission had been committed or omitted by owner personally. 
(Ord. No. 11-O-0063, § 1, 11-7-2011; Ord. No. 16-O-0005, § 1(Exh. A), 2-7-2016)  
Sec. 9-316. - Nonrenewal of license. 
A license issued pursuant to this article shall not be renewed unless the applicant is otherwise in conformance with the provisions of this article, including the correction of existing code violations in accordance with the provisions of this article and all other provisions of this Code, and any money owed by the applicant to the city for any purpose whatsoever, and all outstanding, fees, costs or charges associated with the rental dwelling for which a license is sought have been paid. 
(Ord. No. 11-O-0063, § 1, 11-7-2011; Ord. No. 16-O-0005, § 1(Exh. A), 2-7-2016)  
Sec. 9-317. - Enforcement costs. 
If any administrative law judge or court of competent jurisdiction finds that any licensee has violated any provision(s) of this Code, such court shall award to the city all of the city's costs allowed by law and related to the enforcement of this Code, including, but not limited to, court costs, attorney fees, city staff and consultant/contractor costs and administrative costs and, pursuant to 65 ILCS 5/1-2.1-8, all allowable fees and costs associated with the enforcement of any judgment rendered hereunder. In the event of any judgment or award, the administrative law judge or any other judge may, in their discretion require that any rent due and owing on the property be turned over to the city to satisfy any deficiency, delinquency, unpaid application fee, fees, costs, or charges to the city for any purpose whatsoever. 
(Ord. No. 11-O-0063, § 1, 11-7-2011; Ord. No. 16-O-0005, § 1(Exh. A), 2-7-2016)  
Sec. 9-318. - Penalty. 
In addition to any and all penalties provided for in this article, any individual, firm, sole proprietor, association, partnership, corporation, trust or any other legal entity who shall violate any provision of this article shall be subject to the general penalty provisions as provided for in chapter 1, section 1-8 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 11-O-0063, § 1, 11-7-2011; Ord. No. 16-O-0005, § 1(Exh. A), 2-7-2016)  
Secs. 9-319, 9-320. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XVI. - DAY AND TEMPORARY LABOR AGENCIES[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 04-O-0099, § 1(15.1, Exh. A), adopted Sept. 7, 2004, set out provisions intended for use as Art. XV. At the city's instruction these provisions were included as Art. XVI, §§ 9-321—9-335. 
 
Sec. 9-321. - Definitions. 
Whenever used in this article the following terms, as defined in the Day and Temporary Labor Services Act, 820 ILCS 175/1 et seq., shall have the following meanings: 
City means the City of West Chicago. 
Day or temporary laborer means a natural person who contracts for employment with a day and temporary labor service agency. 
Day and temporary labor means labor or employment that is occasional or irregular at which a person is employed for not longer than the time period required to complete the assignment for which the person was hired and where wage payments are made directly or indirectly by the day and temporary labor service agency or the third party employer for work undertaken by day or temporary laborers pursuant to a contract between the day and temporary labor service agency with the third party employer. "Day and temporary labor" does not include labor or employment of a professional or clerical nature. 
Day and temporary labor service agency means any person or entity engaged in the business of employing day or temporary laborers to provide services to or for any third party employer pursuant to a contract with the day and temporary labor service and the third party employer. Does not include professional and clerical agencies. A day and temporary labor agency that places in excess of fifty (50) percent of its workers in professional and clerical positions and assigns workers solely via telephone is hereby exempted from these regulations. 
Director means the director of administrative services or his designee who is responsible for enforcing these regulations. 
Third party employer means any person that contracts with a day and temporary labor service agency for the employment of day or temporary laborers. 
(Ord. No. 04-O-0099, § 1(15.1, Exh. A), 9-7-2004; Ord. No. 11-O-0007, § 28, 5-16-2011)  
Sec. 9-322. - License required. 
No person shall engage in the business of a day and temporary labor agency without first having obtained an annual license pursuant to this article issued by the city. 
(Ord. No. 04-O-0099, § 1(15.2, Exh. A), 9-7-2004; Ord. No. 11-O-0007, § 28, 5-16-2011)  
Sec. 9-323. - License application; contents. 
An application for a license under this article shall be made in writing to the director in accordance with such requirements as may be required by the director. The application shall contain: 
(1)  The full name of the applicant; provide D/B/A name if applicable; 
(2)  The business address and telephone number of the applicant; 
(3)  The full name, residence address and telephone number of each beneficial owner of more than twenty-five (25) percent of the business; 
(4)  The full name, residence address and telephone number of every officer, director, partner and manager of the applicant; 
(5)  A description of the applicant's day and temporary labor agency business in any other jurisdiction, including name, address, location and disciplinary history; 
(6)  A copy of the applicant's license under the Illinois day and temporary labor services act; 
(7)  The owner's Social Security number and birth date; 
(8)  The State of Illinois IBT# and Federal Tax # (FEIN #); 
(9)  Hours of operation; 
(10)  The average daily number of day and temporary laborers at the agency. 
(11)  The license fee specified in section 9-324 of this article; 
(12)  Such other information as the director may require concerning the operation of the applicant's business. 
(Ord. No. 04-O-0099, § 1(15.3, Exh. A), 9-7-2004; Ord. No. 11-O-0007, § 28, 5-16-2011)  
Sec. 9-324. - Application and renewal fee. 
The application and renewal fee shall be as prescribed in Appendix G. 
(Ord. No. 04-O-0099, § 1(15.4, Exh. A), 9-7-2004; Ord. No. 11-O-0007, § 28, 5-16-2011)  
Sec. 9-325. - Eligibility for license. 
No applicant shall be eligible for a license under this article if the applicant or any of its officers, directors, partners, manager or owners: 
(1)  Has been adjudicated guilty, or has admitted guilt of, or has been under any portion of a sentence for any crime involving moral turpitude or dishonesty within the past five (5) years prior to filing the application; or 
(2)  Has been involved as owner, officer, director, partner or manager of any day and temporary labor agency whose license has been revoked, suspended or application denied within the past ten (10) years prior to filing the application; or 
(3)  Is under the age of eighteen (18) years. 
For purposes of this section, an adjudication or admission of guilt may be in either civil or criminal proceedings, and in any jurisdiction. For purposes of subsection (2) of this section, "license" means any license, permit, certificate or other form of authorization given by any unit, officer or agency of any government for the operation of a day and temporary labor agency in any jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 04-O-0099, § 1(15.5, Exh. A), 9-7-2004; Ord. No. 11-O-0007, § 28, 5-16-2011)  
Sec. 9-326. - Application review and license issuance. 
(a)  Upon receipt of an initial or renewal application, the director, or his authorized representative, shall review the application as deemed necessary to ensure that it has been properly and completely submitted and as otherwise necessary to ensure the protection of the public health, safety and general welfare. An inspection of the premises of a day and temporary labor agency shall be conducted as part of the application review process. Any inspections of a premises of a day and temporary labor agency, either as part of the application process, or to otherwise determine compliance with the provisions of this article or other requirements of law shall be conducted. 
(b)  If the director, or his authorized representative, finds the application, including the inspection of the premises, to be satisfactory, the director, or his authorized representative, shall endorse his approval on the application and shall, upon payment of the prescribed fee, deliver the required license to the applicant. 
(c)  The license shall show the name, address and FEIN # of the licensee, the date of issuance and the length of time the license shall be in effect. A record of all licenses issued pursuant to this article shall be maintained by the city. 
(d)  A license will not be issued sooner than seven (7) days following receipt of the application and fee. Notice shall be mailed to the applicant at the address shown on the application form. Failure of the city to issue a license within thirty (30) days from the date of submission of the application shall be deemed a denial. 
(e)  A copy of the city license shall be posted in the facility in a location visible to the public. 
(Ord. No. 04-O-0099, § 1(15.6, Exh. A), 9-7-2004; Ord. No. 11-O-0007, § 28, 5-16-2011)  
Sec. 9-327. - Denial of license. 
(a)  Upon the director's review of the application, the director may refuse to issue a license to the applicant under this article for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  An investigation reveals the applicant falsified or omitted information on the application; 
(2)  The applicant is ineligible for a license pursuant to section 9-325 of this article; 
(3)  The applicant does not meet the requirements of other city ordinances or other applicable requirements of law; or 
(4)  In the case of any annual renewal, the applicant has been denied a license under this article within the immediate past year, unless the applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the director the reasons for such earlier denial no longer exist or have been corrected. 
(b)  The director's denial, and the reasons for denial, shall be noted on the application, and the applicant shall be notified that his application is denied and that no permit will be issued. Notice shall be mailed to the applicant at the address shown on the application form. 
(Ord. No. 04-O-0099, § 1(15.7, Exh. A), 9-7-2004; Ord. No. 11-O-0007, § 28, 5-16-2011)  
Sec. 9-328. - Annual license; termination date. 
Licenses issued pursuant to this article shall be an annual license and shall expire on December 31 of each year; the fee for said license is included in section 9-324. Licenses shall be renewed January 1 of each year and payment must be received by December 31 of the prior year; licenses not renewed by December 31 of any year shall be subject to a late fee in the amount of two (2) times the fee included in section 9-324. 
(Ord. No. 04-O-0099, § 1(15.8, Exh. A), 9-7-2004; Ord. No. 11-O-0007, § 28, 5-16-2011)  
Sec. 9-329. - Operating standards. 
(a)  The waiting area at a day and temporary labor agency where day or temporary laborers await referral or transportation to a third party employer, must provide toilet facilities within its place of business to accommodate the needs of day or temporary laborers using the agency, which facilities shall be handicapped accessible. The day and temporary labor agency may not charge a day or temporary laborer for the use of toilet facilities. 
(b)  The temperature in the waiting area at a day and temporary labor agency where day or temporary laborers await referral or transportation to a third party employer shall not differ from the temperature of the area reserved for the agency's manager or other non-day or temporary labor employees, by more than three (3) degrees Fahrenheit. 
(c)  An occupancy card indicating the permitted capacity of the waiting area of the day and temporary labor agency where day or temporary laborers await referral or transportation to a third party employer shall be obtained and posted in a conspicuous location. Benches, chairs or a combination of benches and chairs shall be provided for the number of persons indicated on the occupancy card. 
(d)  All day and temporary labor agencies shall: 
(1)  Acquire and maintain liability insurance for the building and any surrounding area owned or leased by the day and temporary labor agency in the minimum amount of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) combined single limit for bodily injury, wrongful death, or property from any one (1) occurrence. Proof of workers; compensation insurance shall be provided. 
(2)  Not allow or permit disorderly conduct, loitering around the exterior of the facility for longer than thirty (30) minutes, or the possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages in its building or in the surrounding area owned or leased by the day or temporary labor agency. 
(3)  Post permanent signs at the inside of each entrance to the day and temporary labor agency containing: 
a.  In letters and numbers not less than two (2) inches in height, the days of operation and hours of operation of the day and temporary labor agency. 
b.  In letters not less than three (3) inches in height, the words "NO DISORDERLY CONDUCT, POSSESSION OR CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES ALLOWED ON THESE PREMISES." 
(4)  Provide a minimum of two (2) trash receptacles of at least thirty (30) gallons in capacity for the day and temporary labor agency's outdoor area, if the day and temporary labor agency owns or leases outdoor areas surrounding the building from which it operates. 
(5)  Based upon past experience of unwanted behavior and at the sole discretion of the chief of police, a day or temporary labor agency shall install and maintain, in proper working order at all times, a video surveillance system designed to monitor the day and temporary labor agency from at least two (2) different locations on the site. In conjunction with this video surveillance requirement, a day and temporary labor agency shall post signs at each entrance to its facility stating that the property is under video surveillance. 
(6)  Park all vehicles used by the day labor and temporary agency to transport day or temporary laborers from the agency's site to and/or from a third party employer in an area not visible from the public rights-of-way. 
(7)  Provide a waiting room area for day and temporary laborers large enough to accommodate a permitted occupancy as determined by the building official, equal to twenty-five (25) percent of the average daily number of anticipated number of associates. 
(8)  Provide parking spaces in conformance with the zoning regulations or to serve fifty (50) percent of the average daily number of anticipated associates. 
(e)  A day and temporary labor agency shall pay a day or temporary laborer for each hour the laborer works, or for each hour for which the agency receives compensation from a third party employer in relation to that day or temporary laborer, whichever number of hours is greater. 
(f)  All fees charged to day and temporary laborers by the agency shall be posted, in English and Spanish, in the waiting area for the public to view. No fees will be charged for such services as testing, training, orientation, or for any services provided at no charge by any governmental agency, including workers' compensation. 
(g)  No day and temporary labor agency may require, as a condition of placing a day or temporary laborer with a third party employer, that the day or temporary laborer purchase or rent from the agency or from the third party employer any item of clothing or equipment, if the employee has in his possession substantially equivalent clothing or equipment. 
(h)  At the time a day or temporary laborer applies for placement with a third party employer, a day and temporary labor agency must disclose the cost of each item of clothing or equipment required to be used by a day or temporary laborer in connection with that placement. The day and temporary labor agency may not charge a day or temporary laborer for any item of equipment or clothing that he or she returned to the agency in a timely manner and in good condition, normal wear and tear excepted. 
(i)  A day and temporary labor agency is responsible for the conduct and performance of any person who transports a day or temporary laborer from the agency to a work site, unless the transporter is: 1) Pace or another component of the regional transportation authority; or 2) the day or temporary laborer providing his or her own transportation; or 3) is paid for by the day or temporary laborer for transportation in a vehicle not owned or operated by the day and temporary labor agency. Any day and temporary labor agency that provides transportation in vehicles owned or operated by the day and temporary labor agency is responsible for the safety of the day or temporary laborers during the period of transportation, must limit the occupancy of these vehicles to their allowable legal seating and comply with the State of Illinois. If the agency employs drivers pursuant to subsections 9-309 (c) and (d) above, a copy of each employee's drivers license shall be included as part of the application. The number of occupants of each vehicle used to transport day and temporary laborers shall not exceed the number of seatbelts provided. 
(j)  A day and temporary labor agency or a third party employer shall charge no more than the actual cost to transport a day or temporary laborer to or from the designated work site; however, the total cost to each day or temporary laborer shall not exceed three (3) percent of the day or temporary laborer's daily wages. Any motor vehicle that is owned or operated by the day and temporary labor agency or a third party employer, or a contractor of either, which is used for the transportation of day or temporary laborers, shall have proof of financial responsibility as provided for in Article 8 of the Illinois Vehicle Code. 
(k)  A day and temporary labor agency must post in a conspicuous location a sign in English and Spanish, describing the rights and obligations of the agency and day or temporary laborers. The content of the notice shall be determined by the director, but at a minimum the sign shall include language indicating that all allegations of illegal behavior shall be reported to the city, together with the phone number and mailing address of city hall. 
(l)  In addition to the requirements above, any new or relocated day and temporary labor agency after October 1, 2004, cannot be located within five hundred (500) feet of a school, public library, public playground, house of worship, single-family residential zoning district, residential dwelling unit or an establishment with a liquor license. 
(Ord. No. 04-O-0099, § 1(15.9, Exh. A), 9-7-2004; Ord. No. 11-O-0007, § 28, 5-16-2011)  
Sec. 9-330. - Unfair employment practices. 
It is an unfair employment practice for any employment agency to fail to refuse to classify properly, accept applications and register for employment, refer for apprenticeship, or to otherwise discriminate against any person because of his race, color, religion, creed, sex, national origin, age, ancestry, sexual orientation, place of birth, or handicap, to accept from any person any job order, requisition or request for referral of applicants for employment or apprenticeship which makes, or has the effect of making race, color, religion, creed, sex, national origin, age, ancestry, place of birth, or handicap a condition of referral except for a bona fide occupational qualification. Any applicant found utilizing unfair labor practices shall result in a revocation of the license, as provided for herein. 
(Ord. No. 04-O-0099, § 1(15.10, Exh. A), 9-7-2004; Ord. No. 11-O-0007, § 28, 5-16-2011)  
Sec. 9-331. - Duty to retain records. 
A day and temporary labor agency shall create an accurate record of each transaction by which a day or temporary laborer was sent to a third party employer. The record shall include: 
(1)  The name of the day or temporary laborer and date of the transaction; 
(2)  The address of the day or temporary laborer; 
(3)  The name, address and telephone number of the third party employer; 
(4)  The name and title of the individual at the third party employer's place of business responsible for the transaction; 
(5)  The type of work to be performed; 
(6)  Any specific qualifications or attributes of a day or temporary laborer, requested by the third party employer; 
(7)  The hourly rate of pay to the day or temporary laborer; 
(8)  The number of hours worked by the day or temporary laborer; 
(9)  Copies of federal and state W-4 forms, I-9 forms, and a record of employees' Social Security numbers. 
(10)  Actual deductions from the day or temporary laborer's compensation made either by the third party employer or by the agency for the day or temporary laborer's transportation, food, equipment, withheld federal and state income tax, withheld Social Security and Medicare tax, and every other deduction. 
(11)  Copies of all W-2's issued to employees at the end of the year. 
(12)  Copies of quarterly Form 941 Payroll Tax Return filings. 
(13)  The nature, brand and unit price of any equipment given to the day or temporary laborer and a listing of all fees, taxes or other items for which a deduction is taken from the laborer's pay. 
The day and temporary labor agency shall maintain all records under this section for a period of five (5) years from their creation. The records shall be open to inspection by the city during normal business hours. It is a violation of this section to make any false, inaccurate or incomplete entry into any record required by this section, or to delete required information from any such record. The record maintenance and retention obligations hereunder are in addition to any state or federal requirements. 
(Ord. No. 04-O-0099, § 1(15.11, Exh. A), 9-7-2004; Ord. No. 11-O-0007, § 28, 5-16-2011)  
Sec. 9-332. - Day or temporary laborer to receive work ticket. 
Upon request by a day or temporary laborer, a day and temporary labor agency shall provide to each day or temporary laborer a work ticket, signed by the manager of the agency. If the day or temporary laborer is placed with a third party employer, the ticket shall include the information described in subsections (1), (3), (7)—(10) of section 9-331, plus the time of day that the temporary laborer is dispatched to the third party employer and the time of return. 
(Ord. No. 04-O-0099, § 1(15.12, Exh. A), 9-7-2004; Ord. No. 11-O-0007, § 28, 5-16-2011)  
Sec. 9-333. - License revocation. 
Any license issued under this article may be revoked or suspended by the director after notice and hearing, for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Fraud, misrepresentation, false statement or any material omission contained in the application for a license; 
(2)  Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made by the licensee in the course of conducting the business of a day and temporary labor agency; 
(3)  Conducting the business of a day and temporary labor agency contrary to the provisions of this article or other requirements of law; 
(4)  Failure to carry the proper and/or current insurance; 
(5)  Conviction of the licensee or any of its owners, officers, partners or managers for any crime involving moral turpitude or dishonesty; or 
(6)  Commission of an unfair labor practice. 
(Ord. No. 04-O-0099, § 1(15.13, Exh. A), 9-7-2004; Ord. No. 11-O-0007, § 28, 5-16-2011)  
Sec. 9-334. - Notice and hearing. 
Notice of a hearing for revocation or suspension of a license issued under this article shall be provided in writing and shall set forth specifically the grounds for the proposed revocation and the time and place of the hearing. Notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to the licensee at the address shown on the license application or at the last known address of the licensee. 
(Ord. No. 04-O-0099, § 1(15.14, Exh. A), 9-7-2004; Ord. No. 11-O-0007, § 28, 5-16-2011)  
Sec. 9-335. - Penalty for violations. 
Any person who violates any portion of this article, including but not limited to operating without a license, shall be subject to a fine or fines as set forth in the general penalty section of the City Code,. Each day that a violation shall continue shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. Any licensee who violates any provision of this article shall also be subject to suspension or revocation of his license. 
(Ord. No. 04-O-0099, § 1(15.15, Exh. A), 9-7-2004; Ord. No. 11-O-0007, § 28, 5-16-2011)  
ARTICLE XVII. - HOME KITCHEN AND COTTAGE FOOD OPERATIONS 
 
Sec. 9-336. - Home kitchen and cottage food operations. 
(a)  Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the definitions found in the Illinois Food Handling Regulation Enforcement Act at 410 ILCS 625 et seq. are hereby adopted by reference as if fully set forth herein. 
(b)  Home kitchen and cottage food operations. Subject to all applicable city ordinances, the statutory provisions contained within the Illinois Food Handling Enforcement Act (the "Act") regarding home kitchen and cottage food operations, as now or hereafter amended [410 ILCS 625 et seq.] are hereby adopted by reference as if fully set forth herein allowing the direct sale of baked goods as described in the Act in West Chicago. 
(Ord. No. 17-O-0043, § 1, 12-4-2017)  
Secs. 9-337—9-399. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XVIII. - MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS AND THERAPISTS[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 4153, § 1, adopted June 7, 1999, deleted §§ 9-400—9-419 which pertained to massage parlors and was derived from Ord. No. 1381, § 1 adopted Aug. 21, 1978. Exhibit A attached to Ord. No. 4153, § 1, adopted June 7, 1999 was incorporated herein as set out, §§ 9-400—9-415. 
 
Sec. 9-400. - Definitions. 
(a)  Adult business use. A business use as defined in the city's zoning ordinance, appendix A to this Code. 
(b)  Compensation. Compensation means the payment, loan, advance, donation, contribution, deposit, or gift of money or anything of value. 
(c)  License or massage establishment license. A massage license as provided in section 9-402(a). 
(d)  Massage. "Massage" or "massage therapy" means a system of structured palpitation or movement of the soft tissue of the body. The system may include, but is not limited to, techniques such as effleurage or stroking and gliding, petrissage or kneading, tapotement or percussion, friction, vibration, compression and stretching activities as they pertain to massage therapy. These techniques may be applied by a licensed massage therapist with or without the aid of lubricants, salt or herbal preparations, hydromassage, thermal massage, or a massage device that mimics or enhances the action possible by human hands. The purpose of the practice of massage, as licensed under the Massage Licensing Act, 225 ILCS 57/1 et seq., is to enhance the general health and well-being of the mind and body of the recipient. "Massage" does not include the diagnosis of a specific pathology. "Massage" does not include those acts of physical therapy or therapeutic or corrective measures that are outside the scope of massage therapy practice as defined in this section. 
(e)  Massage establishment. Any establishment having a source of income or compensation derived from the practice of massage defined in subsection (d), above, and which has a fixed place of business where any person, firm, association or corporation engages in or carries on any of the activities described in subsection (d), above. 
(f)  Massage therapist. Any individual who practices massage or massage therapy as defined herein for compensation. 
(g)  Ordinance. Chapter 9, article XVIII, of this Code, commonly referred to as the massage ordinance, as from time to time amended. 
(h)  Patron. Any person who receives a massage under such circumstances that it is reasonably expected that he or she will give compensation for it. 
(i)  Director. The director of community development of the city, or the director's designee. 
(j)  Transfer of ownership or control of a massage establishment. Any of the following: 
(1)  The sale, lease, or sublease of the business; 
(2)  The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange, or similar means; 
(3)  The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal devise which transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by bequest or other operations of law upon the death of the person possessing the ownership or control; or 
(4)  Any person not previously listed as an applicant pursuant to section 9-404 acquiring an ownership interest in the business of ten (10) percent or more. 
(k)  Sex acts. Prostitution, sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation, bestiality, flagellation, kissing with an intent to arouse, or the fondling of the genitals, pubic area, anus or perineum of any person, and the vulva and breasts of a female. 
(l)  Massage establishment personnel. The owners, employees, independent contractors, or agents of a massage establishment business or any other person, other than a patron, whose presence on the massage establishment premise is authorized or known to the owner, manager, or any employee thereof. 
(Ord. No. 4153, § 1, 6-7-99; Ord. No. 04-O-0050, § 1, 5-17-2004; Ord. No. 04-O-0075, § 1A, 7-19-2004)  
Sec. 9-401. - Administration. 
The director shall be responsible for the administration and interpretation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 4153, § 1, 6-7-99)  
Sec. 9-402. - Licenses required. 
(a)  City massage establishment license required. No person shall engage in the business of operating a massage establishment in the city without a valid and current license therefore issued by the city pursuant to the terms of this article. A separate license shall be required for each massage establishment location regardless of whether such multiple establishments are operated by the same person. 
(b)  State massage license required. No individual shall practice massage or massage therapy for compensation whether as a massage establishment personnel or otherwise, without being duly licensed pursuant to the Massage Licensing Act 225 ILCS 57/1 et seq., unless exempted by Section 25 of that Act, 225 ILCS 57/25. No city massage permit shall be required for the practice of massage therapy within the city. 
(Ord. No. 4153, § 1, 6-7-99; Ord. No. 04-O-0050, § 1, 5-17-2004; Ord. No. 04-O-0075, § 1B, 7-19-2004; Ord. No. 11-O-0007, § 29, 5-16-2011)  
Sec. 9-403. - Exemptions. 
(a)  No license or massage permit shall be required for any hospitals, nursing homes or medical clinics. 
(b)  No license or massage permit shall be required for any barbershop or cosmetologist lawfully carrying on their respective businesses to the extent authorized under a valid license or certificate of registration issued by the state. Provided, this exemption is only intended to permit normal and customary barbershop or cosmetologist services which involve incidental physical contact, such as scalp rubs and facials, which would otherwise qualify as massage activities. This exemption is not intended, and does not permit, general massage activities as part of any barbershop or cosmetologist business beyond that authorized by the state license or certification. 
(c)  Where massage services are actually performed on an out-call basis, including massage services performed at the patron's place of business or residence, a massage establishment license shall not be required. 
(Ord. No. 4153, § 1, 6-7-99; Ord. No. 04-O-0050, § 1, 5-17-2004; Ord. No. 04-O-0075, § 1C, 7-19-2004)  
Sec. 9-404. - Application for license or permit. 
(a)  Application for a massage permit and massage establishment license shall be made in writing to the director, upon forms provided, and shall include the following: 
(1)  The name (including any nicknames or aliases) and address, telephone number, or Social Security number, and age of the applicant, the registered agent of the applicant if the applicant is a corporation, and the general or managing partners, if the applicant is a partnership. 
(2)  The location of the massage establishment. 
(3)  For an applicant not licensed under the Massage Licensing Act, a complete statement of all convictions of the applicant as provided in this section. If the applicant is a corporation, such statement shall include applicant's officers, and directors thereof, and any stockholder or stockholders owning in the aggregate more than ten (10) percent of the stock of such corporation. If the applicant is a partnership, such statement shall include all general partners, and any limited partner owning more than ten (10) percent of the aggregate ownership interest in the limited partnership. For each officer, director, or stockholder or partner of the ten (10) percent or more of the aggregate stock or ownership interest who is not licensed under the Massage Licensing Act, such listings shall include the following: 
i.  Any offense involving sexual misconduct with children or other sex offenses as defined in article 11 of the Criminal Code of 1961, as amended, within the past ten (10) years; 
ii.  Any felony based upon conduct or in a massage business or activity, or in an adult business use or activity, within the past ten (10) years; 
iii.  Any felony unrelated to conduct or in a massage business or activity, or in any adult business use or activity, but which felony involved the use of a deadly weapon, traffic in narcotic drugs, or violence against another person, including criminal sexual assault, within the past five (5) years; and/or, 
iv.  Any misdemeanor or licensing ordinance violation based upon conduct or involvement in a massage business or activity, or in an adult business use or activity, within the past two (2) years. 
(4)  A description of the proposed massage establishment, including the number of massage therapists, other activities or business conducted at the same location, and the physical facilities to be used. 
(5)  A statement of whether the business will be conducted by a manager. In such case the manager's name, address, telephone number and age shall be provide, and, if not licensed under the Massage Licensing Act, a statement of any convictions as set forth under subsection (3) above. 
(6)  A current certificate of inspection for the premises from the DuPage County Board of Health, if applicable. 
(7)  The license fee as provided in section 9-408. 
(8)  Business, occupation, or employment of the application for three (3) years immediately preceding the date of application. 
(b)  In the event the applicant is made aware that any information or document submitted as part of this application process is inaccurate or incomplete, applicant shall immediately notify the city and provide appropriate corrections. Failure to accurately and completely provide, or as necessary update, required information may delay the processing of such application or result in its denial. 
(c)  In addition to the requirements of subsection (a) above, applicants for a massage establishment license who are not licensed under the Massage Licensing Act shall submit their fingerprints to be used in completing the investigation. Such applicants are required to present themselves for fingerprints to be taken by the city's police department as provided by the director. If the applicant is a corporation, fingerprints shall be required of all of the applicant's officers, directors, and any stockholder or stockholders owning in the aggregate more than ten (10) percent of the stock of such corporation who are not licensed under the Massage Licensing Act. If the applicant is a partnership, fingerprints shall be required of all general partners, and any limited partners owning more than ten (10) percent of the aggregate limited partners' interest in such partnership who are not licensed the Massage Licensing Act. If the applicant's business will be run by a manager, fingerprints shall be required of the manger if the manager is not licensed under the Massage Licensing Act. Applicant shall pay the fingerprint fee as provided in section 9-408 for each person required to submit fingerprints. In the case of a renewal application, fingerprints and the fingerprint fee shall not be required from a renewal applicant whose fingerprints are on file. 
(d)  Additionally, all persons required by the preceding paragraph to be fingerprinted shall provide two (2) passport size photographs (1 inch by 1.5 inches) of the head and shoulders area (face forward) shall be provided to be used in the investigation of the applicant. Provide, in the case of renewal application, the director may waive the requirement for new photographs if the applicant has photographs on file. 
(Ord. No. 4153, § 1, 6-7-99; Ord. No. 04-O-0050, § 1, 5-17-2004; Ord. No. 04-O-0075, § 1D, 7-19-2004)  
Sec. 9-405. - Processing of application. 
(a)  An application shall not be considered proper or filed until all information and material required of the applicant pursuant to section 9-404(a) and/or 9-404(b) has been submitted. 
(b)  Upon receipt of a proper application, the director shall investigate the information contained in the application and shall determine whether the applicant and premises designated, if applicable, are in full compliance with all applicable laws of the city. 
(c)  The investigation, including any required inspections and background checks, shall be completed within twenty (20) business days after receipt of a proper application. Provided, the director may extend this investigation period an additional period, not to exceed an additional ten business days, upon a finding that such additional period is needed to properly complete the investigation. Provided, whenever such an extension period is invoked, notice shall be provided to the applicant along with specific reasons for such extension. 
(d)  If, within ten (10) business days following completion of the investigation, the director determines that the applicant and premises are in compliance with the applicable ordinances of the city, the director shall issue the license. 
(e)  If, within ten (10) business days following completion of the investigation, the director determines that the applicant or premises are not in compliance with the applicable ordinances of the city, the director shall notify the applicant in writing that its license has been denied, setting forth the reasons therefore, and advising the applicant of his or her right to appeal pursuant to section 9-415. Unless a timely appeal is filed as provide in section 9-415, such denial shall be final and effective on the eleventh day following receipt of the notice by the applicant. The fee paid by the applicant pursuant to section 9-408(a) shall be returned, less fifty dollars ($50.00), which will be retained as a processing fee. Any fees paid by the applicant pursuant to section 9-408(b) and 9-408(c) shall be retained as a processing fee. 
(Ord. No. 4153, § 1, 6-7-99; Ord. No. 04-O-0050, § 1, 5-17-2004)  
Sec. 9-406. - Limitation on issuance of license or permit. 
(a)  No massage permit or massage establishment license shall be issued or renewed as follows: 
(1)  To an applicant who has been convicted of the following offenses: 
i.  Any offense involving sexual misconduct with children or other sex offenses as defined in article 11 of the Criminal Code of 1961, as amended, within the past ten (10) years; 
ii.  Any felony based upon conduct or in a massage business or activity, or in an adult business use or activity, within the past ten (10) years; 
iii.  Any felony unrelated to conduct or in a massage business or activity, or in any adult business use or activity, but which felony involved the use of a deadly weapon, traffic in narcotic drugs, or violence against another person, including criminal sexual assault, within the past five (5) years; and/or, 
iv.  Any misdemeanor or licensing ordinance violation based upon conduct or involvement in a massage business or activity, or in an adult business use or activity, within the past two (2) years. 
(2)  To an applicant whose massage permit or massage establishment license issued under this article has been revoked or whose massage license issued under the Massage Licensing Act has been revoked or suspended. 
(3)  To an applicant who at the time of application for renewal of any permit or license issued hereunder would not be eligible for such license or permit upon a first application. 
(4)  To an applicant under the age of eighteen (18). 
(5)  To an applicant where grounds for revocation exists as provided under section 9-412(b). 
(b)  In addition to the provisions in subsection (a), above, no massage permit or massage establishment license shall be issued or renewed as follows: 
(1)  To a partnership, if any general partner thereof, or any limited partner owning more than twenty (20) percent of the aggregate limited partner interest in such partnership would not be eligible to receive massage permit or massage establishment license hereunder. 
(2)  To a corporation, if any officer or director, or any stockholder or stockholders owning in the aggregate more than ten (10) percent of the stock of such corporation, would not be eligible to receive a massage permit or massage license hereunder. 
(3)  To a corporation unless it is incorporated in Illinois, or unless it is a foreign corporation which is qualified under the "Business Corporation Act of 1983" to transact business in Illinois. 
(4)  To an applicant whose place of business in conducted by a manager unless the manager is holds a massage permit from the city or is licensed under the Massage Licensing Act. 
(5)  To an applicant who is not a beneficial owner of the business to be operated by the licensee. 
(c)  In addition to the provisions in subsection (a), above, no massage permit shall be issued or renewed unless the applicant establishes that he or she has received training and/or is certified by an institution or nationally recognized professional association which teaches theory and method of massage as follows: 
(1)  The applicant has graduated from a five hundred-hour massage therapy school approved by the American Massage Therapy Association Commission on Accreditation and Training and/or approved by the Illinois State Board of Education; 
(2)  The applicant has achieved active membership status within the American Massage Therapy Association or a professional organization with standards comparable to the American Massage Therapy Association, with mandated continuing education requirements and written code of ethics; or 
(3)  The applicant has achieved a state license from a state, which regulates massage therapy by means of a written examination. 
(Ord. No. 4153, § 1, 6-7-99; Ord. No. 04-O-0050, § 1, 5-17-2004; Ord. No. 04-O-0075, § 1E, 7-19-2004)  
Sec. 9-407. - Premises restrictions. 
(a)  No massage establishment shall be located in any premises in which an adult business use is located. 
(b)  No massage establishment shall be located in any premises for which a license to sell alcoholic liquor has been issued. 
(c)  Adequate toilets and sink facilities shall be provided in each massage establishment. 
(d)  The massage establishment premises shall be in compliance with applicable codes and ordinances of the city, including but not limited to, zoning, building and life safety codes. 
(e)  When any massage permit or massage establishment license hereunder shall have been revoked for cause, no such permit or license shall be granted to any person for the period of one (1) year thereafter for the conduct of a massage establishment in the premises described in the revoked license. Where such permit or license is revoked due to delinquency in the payment of taxes pursuant to section 9-412(b)[7], the restriction on issuance of a subsequent license provided under this subsection (e) shall not apply. 
(Ord. No. 4153, § 1, 6-7-99; Ord. No. 04-O-0050, § 1, 5-17-2004; Ord. No. 04-O-0075, § 1F, 7-19-2004)  
Sec. 9-408. - Fees. 
The annual fee for a massage establishment license shall be as prescribed in Appendix G. All fees shall be non-refundable and shall not be prorated. In addition, a fingerprint fee, as prescribed in Appendix G, shall be paid for each person required to submit fingerprints under this article. 
(Ord. No. 4153, § 1, 6-7-99; Ord. No. 04-O-0050, § 1, 5-17-2004; Ord. No. 04-O-0075, § 1G, 7-19-2004; Ord. No. 11-O-0007, § 30, 5-16-2011)  
Sec. 9-409. - General regulations. 
The following regulations shall be applicable to all massage establishments in the city: 
(1)  All massage establishment personnel must wear clean, nontransparent outer garments covering the sexual and genital areas and the buttocks. The term "sexual and genital areas" means the genitals, pubic area, anus or perineum of any person, and the vulva and breasts of a female. 
(2)  The sexual and genital areas of patrons must be covered by towels, cloths or undergarments when in the presence of massage establishment personnel. 
(3)  No massage establishment personnel shall knowingly commit any sex act on another person while on the massage establishment premises. 
(4)  No massage establishment personnel shall perform, offer or agree to perform any act which would require the touching of a patron's genital or sexual area. 
(5)  No massage establishment personnel shall administer a massage to any part of a patron's body which exhibits any skin fungus, skin infection, skin inflammation or skin eruption, unless a physician duly license by the state certifies in writing that such persons may be safely massaged, any prescribing the conditions, if any thereof. 
(6)  All oils, lotions and other preparations used in the practice of massage shall be uncontaminated and kept in clean, closed containers. 
(7)  The occurrence of any event which would render the holder of massage establishment license unqualified for issuance of such license or permit under this article shall be grounds for revocation or suspension of the existing license issued hereunder. 
(8)  A massage permit or massage establishment license issued under this article shall be displayed in a conspicuous location within the customer area of a licensed establishment. 
(9)  At all times during the hours of operation of a massage establishment there shall be present a manager or other employee of the licensee who shall not be less than eighteen (18) years of age. 
(10)  Every portion of each massage establishment, including all appliances, fixtures, equipment, instruments and other facilities and materials, shall be maintained in good repair and in clean and sanitary condition at all times. Each massage establishment shall provide an adequate supply of clean, laundered towels and sheets. All appliances, fixtures, and facilities and not disposable equipment, instruments and materials shall be disinfected and/or laundered after each use. Nondisposable equipment, instruments and materials shall be kept in adequate receptacles, segregated from all clean equipment, instruments and materials, until the same has bee disinfected and/or laundered. 
(11)  No massage establishment licensee under the provision of this article shall knowingly permit any person who commits any act of public indecency or obscenity as provide in sections 11-91 and 11-92 of this Code to remain in or upon licensed premises. 
(12)  No massage establishment licensee shall employ any person as a massage therapist or permit any person to administer massages unless said person is holds a valid massage permit from the city or is duly licensed under the Massage Licensing Act or exempted therefrom as provided in Section 25 of the Act. 
A person hold a massage establishment license shall not violate the conditions and regulations set forth in this section, or suffer or permit noncompliance with such conditions and regulations within any license premises. 
(Ord. No. 4153, § 1, 6-7-99; Ord. No. 04-O-0050, § 1, 5-17-2004; Ord. No. 04-O-0075, § 1H, 7-19-2004)  
Sec. 9-410. - Relocations, transfers and changes in ownership of licensees. 
(a)  Any massage permit or massage establishment license issued pursuant to this article shall be applicable only to the specific permittee or licensee and, in the case of the a massage establishment license, only for the location designated, and may not be sold, transferred, or otherwise assigned. 
(b)  Relocation of a licensed massage establishment, or transfer in the ownership or control of a massage establishment, shall automatically terminate the license. A new application shall be filed and processed as provided in this article, and a new license must be issued, prior to such relocation or transfer. Any relocation or transfer in the ownership or control of a massage establishment in violation of this section shall constitute operation of such business without a license. 
(c)  Notice shall be provided prior to any change of the designated manager conducting business for the massage establishment licensee. The new manager must be qualified to operate the massage establishment as provided in this article. The licensee shall, not less than ten (10) business days before such change is to take effect, give the director written notice of such change. The notice shall include any information concerning the new manage, which is required in section 9-404 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 4153, § 1, 6-7-99; Ord. No. 04-O-0050, § 1, 5-17-2004; Ord. No. 04-O-0075, § 1I, 7-19-2004)  
Sec. 9-411. - Term of licenses and permits. 
Each massage permit and establishment license shall terminate on the thirty-first day of December next following its issuance, unless such permit or license is sooner revoked in the manner provided under this article. 
(Ord. No. 4153, § 1, 6-7-99; Ord. No. 04-O-0050, § 1, 5-17-2004; Ord. No. 04-O-0075, § 1J, 7-19-2004)  
Sec. 9-412. - Suspension or revocation of license or permit. 
(a)  The director shall suspend a massage permit or massage establishment license for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days if the director determines that the permittee or licensee has violated or is not in compliance with section 9-409 of this article. 
(b)  The director shall revoke such permit or license if the director determines that: 
(1)  A permittee or licensee has violated or is not in compliance with section 9-409 of this article and the permit or license has been suspended within the preceding twenty-four (24) months. 
(2)  A permittee or licensee has violated or is not in compliance with section 9-406 of this article, including any permittee or licensee who has been convicted of the offenses identified in section 9-406(a)(1) of this article. The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the revocation of the permit or license. 
(3)  A permittee, licensee, or a licensee's agent gave false or misleading information in the material submitted to the director during the application process. 
(4)  A permittee, licensee, or massage establishment personnel has knowingly allowed a sex act to occur on the massage establishment premises. 
(5)  A permittee, licensee, or massage establishment personnel knowingly conducted massage activities on the massage establishment premises during a period of time when the licensee's license was suspended. 
(6)  On two (2) or more occasions within a twenty-four-month period, a person or persons committed an offense as listed in section 9-406(a)(1), which substantially occurred in or on a licensed premises, and for which a conviction has been obtained, and the person or persons were massage establishment personnel at the time the offenses were committed. The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the revocation of the license. 
(7)  A permittee or licensee is delinquent in payment of ad valorem taxes or sales taxes related to the massage establishment. 
(c)  When the director revokes a permit or license for a reason other than delinquency in the payment of taxes as provided in subsection (b)[7], the revocation shall continue for one (1) year and the permittee or licensee shall not be issued a permit or license for one (1) year from the date revocation became effective. If, subsequent to revocation, the director finds that the basis for the revocation has been corrected or abated, an applicant may be granted a permit or license if at least ninety (90) days have elapsed since the date the revocation be came effective. 
(d)  If the director determines that cause may exist for the suspension or revocation of a permit or license, the director shall notify the permittee or licensee in writing that the permit or license will be revoked or suspended, setting forth the reasons therefore, and advising the applicant of his or her right to appeal pursuant to section 9-415. Unless a timely appeal is filed as provided in section 9-415, such revocation shall be final and effective on the eleventh business day following receipt of the notice by the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 4153, § 1, 6-7-99; Ord. No. 04-O-0050, § 1, 5-17-2004; Ord. No. 04-O-0075, § 1K, 7-19-2004)  
Sec. 9-413. - Processing of application. 
The provisions of this article shall apply to all current practitioners of massage therapy and existing massage establishments within the city. Such application for current practitioners or existing businesses shall be processed as provide herein according to the applicants meeting all requirements for issuance of a permit or license as provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 4153, § 1, 6-7-99; Ord. No. 04-O-0050, § 1, 5-17-2004; Ord. No. 04-O-0075, § 1L, 7-19-2004)  
Sec. 9-414. - Renewal of licenses and permits. 
(a)  Application for renewal of a massage permit or massage establishment license shall be made in writing to the director, on forms provide by the city. As a part of such application the applicant shall provide the same information required for a new permit or license, as set forth in section 9-404, provided, however, if the information previously provide remains true and valid, an application may submit a certification as to such information in lieu of a full submittal. An application for renewal shall be processed as provided in section 9-405. An application for renewal should be made not less that forty-five (45) business days prior to the expiration of the permit or license. An application for renewal made less than forty-five (45) business days prior to the expiration date shall not extend the expiration date. 
(b)  When the director denies renewal of a permit or license, the applicant shall not be issued a permit or license for one (1) year from the date of denial. Provided, if subsequent to denial the director finds that the basis for denial of the renewal permit or license has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a license. 
(Ord. No. 4153, § 1, 6-7-99; Ord. No. 04-O-0050, § 1, 5-17-2004; Ord. No. 04-O-0075, § 1M, 7-19-2004)  
Sec. 9-415. - Appeal. 
(a)  Any applicant, permittee, or licensee who receive a notice of denial, revocation or suspension, may file an appeal with the city administrator as provide herein. Such appeal shall be filed with the city administrator, in writing, no later than ten (10) business days following receipt of the notice, and shall include a response to the director's notice. Such response shall include a brief statement addressing the substantive deficiencies cited in the director's notice and hall set forth the reason(s) that the permit or license should not be denied, revoked or suspended. An appeal of an order of the director suspending or revoking a permit or license shall stay such suspension or revocation pending final order of the city administrator as provided in this section. 
(b)  The city administrator shall schedule an informal public hearing not later than ten (10) business days following receipt of such appeal. The purpose of the hearing will be to offer the applicant, permittee, or licensee an opportunity to show cause why the application should not be denied, or why the permit or license should not be suspended or revoked. A record shall be made of the informal public hearing and documents may be submitted and/or testimony give, either in person or through sworn affidavit. This record may be made by electronic recording. The city administrator shall have the power to administer oaths and to continue the hearing from time to time to permit the applicant to provide additional information. Provided, the city administrator may designate a hearing officer to schedule, convene and conduct the public hearing. In such case, the hearing officer shall have the same powers as the city administrator to administer oaths and to continue the hearing from time to time to allow the applicant, permittee, or licensee to provide additional information. Where such designation has been made, the hearing officer shall submit proposed findings and recommendations to the city administrator within twenty-one (21) days of the close of the hearing. 
(c)  Within twenty-eight (28) days after close of the hearing set forth in subsection (b), the city administrator shall make written findings of fact and issue an appropriate order. A copy of such order shall be promptly served upon the applicant, permittee, or licensee. If the city administrator determines that the permit or license should be revoked or suspended, the suspension or revocation shall take effect immediately upon receipt unless otherwise specified. The decision of the city administrator with respect to the permit or license or application shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 4153, § 1, 6-7-99; Ord. No. 04-O-0050, § 1, 5-17-2004; Ord. No. 04-O-0075, § 1N, 7-19-2004)  
Secs. 9-416—9-500. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XIX. - SPECIAL EVENTS[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 10-O101, § 3, adopted December 6, 2010, in effect repealed the former Art. XIX, §§ 9-501—9-510, and enacted a new Art. XIX as set out herein. The former Art. X pertained to parades, processions, demonstrations, open-air meetings, mass gatherings and derived from Ord. No. 1472, adopted May 19, 1980 and Ord. No. 1641, adopted February 22, 1983. 
 
Sec. 9-501. - Special events policy established. 
The city council shall adopt, by resolution, a special events policy which shall contain such terms, conditions, and restrictions as the city deems appropriate governing the approval and conduct of special events. 
(Ord. No. 10-O-0101, § 3, 12-6-2010)  
Sec. 9-502. - Special events—Approval required, compliance with policy. 
It is unlawful for any person to conduct a special event within the city, unless approval therefore has first been obtained in accordance with and as provided for in the special events policy, and for which a special events permit has been issued by the city administrator or his designee. It is further unlawful for any person to conduct a special event in violation of any provision of the special events policy. 
(Ord. No. 10-O-0101, § 3, 12-6-2010; Ord. No. 14-O-0001, § 1, 2-3-2014)  
Sec. 9-503. - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be subject to the general penalty provisions provided for in Chapter 1, section 1-8 of the Code of Ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. No. 10-O-0101, § 3, 12-6-2010)  
Secs. 9-504—9-549. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XX. - POLICE TOWING LICENSE SYSTEM[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 07-O-0045, § 1, adopted June 4, 2007, amended the former Art. XX, §§ 9-550—9-562, and enacted a new Art. XX as set out herein. The former Art. XX pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 06-O-0061, § 1, adopted July 6, 2006. 
 
Sec. 9-550. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings: 
Abandoned vehicles: For the purposes of this article, an abandoned vehicle is any motor vehicle in a state of disrepair rendering the vehicle incapable of being driven in its condition; or any motor vehicle upon public roads, or property that has not been moved or used for seven (7) consecutive days or more and is apparently deserted. 
Heavy duty: Involving vehicles, and vehicle combinations, twenty-six thousand and one pounds (26,001) GVWR/GCWR or heavier. 
Light duty: Involving vehicles up to, and including, ten thousand pounds (10,000) GVWR. 
Medium duty: Involving vehicles from ten thousand and one pounds (10,001) up to, and including, twenty-six thousand pounds (26,000) GVWR. 
Normal business hours: Licensee towing businesses shall have normal business hours of at least Monday through Friday 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., and 8:00 a.m. to noon on Saturday, except for official City of West Chicago holidays as set forth in the City Ordinances. 
Police tow: A tow requested by the West Chicago Police Department for: 
(1)  Vehicles that are disabled where the person in charge of the vehicle has no preference for any particular tow service or is unable to make such decision. 
(2)  City-owned vehicles. 
(3)  Vehicles impounded by the West Chicago Police Department for evidentiary, investigative or seizure purposes, or arrests. 
(4)  Abandoned vehicles that are towed pursuant to West Chicago Police Department procedures. 
(5)  Illegally parked vehicles that pose a traffic hazard. 
Specifically excluded from this article is the moving by tow truck, of vehicles within, or from one (1) city lot to another for purposes related to auctioning or seizure. 
Police towing license: A license issued by the City of West Chicago authorizing a person or firm to engage in the business of vehicle towing at the request of the West Chicago Police Department. 
Police towing licensee: A person or firm engaged in the business of, or offering the services of, vehicle towing whereby motor vehicles are or may be towed or otherwise relocated from one (1) place to another, or serviced on scene, by use of a tow truck, and by request of the West Chicago Police Department and approved by the West Chicago Police Department. 
Police towing licensee list: A list maintained by the West Chicago Police Department containing the names of those licensees approved by the chief of police to respond to requests by the West Chicago Police Department for the towing of vehicles. 
Stand by: When a licensee is called out and the tow driver is asked by police or fire personnel to wait at the scene before the tow driver can start the requested service. 
Tow driver: An agent that works for a licensee, driving or operating a tow truck, or working at the scene of a license call. 
Tow truck: As defined in the Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/1-205.1, as amended. 
Unclaimed vehicle: Vehicles that have been towed by a licensee to their storage lot and have not been picked up or disposed of by their owner. 
Uprighting: Bringing a vehicle that is either overturned or on its side to the upright position to tow. 
Winching: Bringing a vehicle that is completely off of the road surface onto the road surface for the purpose of towing. 
(Ord. No. 07-O-0045, § 1, 6-4-2007)  
Sec. 9-551. - Application for police towing license. 
Any person/business desiring to perform police towing work at the request of the West Chicago Police Department shall submit an "Application for Police Towing License" to the chief of police. Application forms may be obtained from the West Chicago Police Department. The tow license application period will be from October 1 to October 15 of each year, with the licenses issued for a period from January 1 to December 31. Each licensee applying must have a completed and correct application returned to the West Chicago Police Department by 3:00 p.m. October 15, or the next business day where October 15 falls on a weekend or holiday. There will be a maximum of four (4) police tow licenses for each list issued pursuant to section 9-553 herein. 
No person shall be approved as a licensee or a tow driver, nor shall any licensee knowingly permit such a person to be a tow driver pursuant to a license call who: 
(1)  Has any felony conviction within the last five (5) years in any state; or 
(2)  Is a sex offender, as defined in Illinois law, 730 ILCS 150/2, as amended; or 
(3)  Has been convicted under the laws of Illinois or any other state of an offense that under the laws of the State of Illinois would be a felony theft of a vehicle or vehicle parts. 
(Ord. No. 07-O-0045, § 1, 6-4-2007)  
Sec. 9-552. - Investigation and approval. 
By November 15 of each year, after receiving a complete application for a police towing license, the West Chicago Police Department will conduct an investigation to determine the truth and accuracy of the information contained in said application. The West Chicago Police Department may check to determine whether the location(s) meet applicable zoning and fire code requirements. The towing equipment and business may also be inspected. Upon completion of the investigation, the applicant will be notified in writing that the application is either approved or disapproved and if disapproved the notification will state the reasons for such disapproval. 
(1)  Reasons for disapproval include, but not limited to, the following: 
a.  The applicant has furnished false or misleading information or has failed to provide relevant information on the application. 
b.  The applicant has not obtained insurance as required by this article. 
c.  The location(s) where the applicant will conduct business fail to meet applicable zoning and/or fire codes or the requirements of section 9-560 storage facility. 
d.  The applicant or any of the owners/partners have been permanently removed from the police towing licensee list for cause pursuant to section 9-558 removal from police towing licensee list. 
e.  The applicant does not meet all of the requirements of this article or the towing license agreement. 
(2)  If an application is rejected for not meeting the qualifications set forth in the ordinance, except for subsection (1) above, the applicant can, within ten (10) days of being notified of disapproval, reapply after correcting the deficiencies. 
(3)  Any applicant deemed ineligible by the chief of police will have the right to appeal the chief of police's decision to the city administrator, or his/her designee. Appeals must be made by filing a written notice of appeal with the city administrator or his/her designee within ten (10) days of notice of the chief of police's decision. The city administrator or his/her designee will hear the appeal within fourteen (14) days after the appeal is filed, unless otherwise agreed. The city administrator or his/her designee will notify the applicant of the decision within seven (7) days after the decision is made. The city administrator or his/her designee may affirm or overrule the chief of police's decision. The decision of the city administrator or his/her designee will be final. 
(4)  After the investigation and approval process has been completed, a final eligibility list will be created for use in issuing police towing licenses. 
(Ord. No. 07-O-0045, § 1, 6-4-2007)  
Sec. 9-553. - Tow license limit. 
The City of West Chicago will limit the number of police tow licenses that it issues to four (4) per list. 
(1)  The three (3) lists are: 
a.  Light duty 
b.  Medium duty 
c.  Heavy duty 
(2)  Preference in issuing the licenses will be given to those companies that were issued a license in the last prior year, as long as they still meet the criteria for the issuance of a license set forth in section 9-555. Even if issued a police tow license the prior year, all persons/businesses wishing to retain such license must submit a renewal application pursuant to section 9-551 for the subsequent year. 
(3)  After the deadline for submitting applications, an initial eligibility list will be created. The first names on the initial eligibility list will be those firms that held a license the previous year, as long as they have submitted a renewal application. The remainder of the initial eligibility list will be filled with the remaining applicants, through a drawing. 
(4)  The final eligibility list will be used at the beginning of and throughout the term of the tow license year, in numeric order, for the issuance of licenses based on the investigation and approval pursuant to section 9-552, and with the aforementioned limit of four (4) licensees, per list. 
(5)  The date, time, and location of the drawing will be announced at the time the application period begins. All interested parties will be allowed to attend the drawing. 
(Ord. No. 07-O-0045, § 1, 6-4-2007)  
Sec. 9-554. - Insurance. 
(a)  The licensee will obtain and maintain general liability, automobile liability, garage keeper's legal liability and worker's compensation insurance throughout the period of the agreement as determined by the City of West Chicago and provided for in the towing license agreement, attached hereto as Exhibit "A." 
(b)  The city will be named as an additional insured by the licensee on each insurance policy. 
(c)  The licensee will provide certificates of insurance to the city which indicate coverage under the above-mentioned insurance, which carries the provision that said insurance will not be cancelled without giving the city at least thirty (30) days' notice of cancellation or material change. 
(Ord. No. 07-O-0045, § 1, 6-4-2007) 
Editor's note— It should be noted that Exhibit "A" referenced above is not set out at length herein, but is on file and available for inspection in the office of the city clerk.  
Sec. 9-555. - Duties and requirements of licensee. 
(a)  All applicants issued a license, and their agents, will enter into a towing license agreement with the city, with separate signatures for each licensee and agent. The written agreement will be in a form attached hereto and incorporated herein as Exhibit "A." 
(b)  Each licensee will defend, indemnify and hold harmless the city, the city council, and city officers and employees, from any suits, claims, or actions brought, or disease, injury, illness or damages sustained or arising out of the operation of towing services and storage of vehicles and arising out of the performance of any requirement of this section by the licensee or in consequence thereof. 
(c)  All tow trucks shall have working two-way communication equipment with their base station located at the point where calls are received. 
(d)  All tow trucks (except flatbed car carriers) shall carry at least one (1) set of wheel dollies at all times. 
(e)  All licensees shall be able to safely transport motorcycles. 
(f)  Each licensee shall provide twenty-four-hour per day service each day of the year. There shall be an attendant or answering service on duty at all times for the purpose of receiving calls, and there shall be a person on call at all times for the purpose of releasing stored vehicles or for receiving vehicles. Prior to the release of a licensee-towed vehicle, the licensee shall contact the West Chicago Police Department's Records Section of the release of said vehicle. 
(g)  All tow trucks shall be equipped with warning lights and all other equipment required by federal, state or city laws. 
(h)  Licensees must immediately, and in writing, inform the West Chicago Police Department regarding any changes of information on their original application for police towing license. Failure to comply with this requirement may constitute grounds for removal from the police towing licensee list. 
(i)  Licensees on the light-duty tow list must maintain at least two (2) operational tow trucks at all times. However, all tow operators either currently on the city's police towing license list or with a pending application to be on said list that have only one (1) tow truck are exempt from this requirement until January 1, 2009. 
(j)  Every licensee or tow driver shall remove or cause to be removed all glass and debris deposited on any street or highway by the vehicle being serviced. The licensee or tow driver shall also spread oil-dry upon that portion of any street or highway where any fluids have been deposited by the vehicle being serviced, unless the fire department has taken charge of the clean up, at which point the licensee will follow the instructions of fire department personnel regarding clean up. 
(k)  While at the scene of any call for a license tow, every license tow driver will wear safety apparel compliant with the Class 2 or 3 standard of the International Safety Equipment Association standard: ANSI/ISEA 107-2004 (as amended) Standard for high visibility safety apparel, as appropriate to the task being performed and the conditions present. 
(l)  While at the scene of any call for a license tow, every license tow driver will wear outer apparel that clearly identifies the company for which they work and the tow driver's first name. The name of the tow driver shall be on the front of their apparel. This identification must be able to be read by a person with normal vision at a distance of at least ten (10) feet. This identification can be incorporated into the requirement for high visibility safety apparel. 
(m)  No licensee or tow driver shall respond to a license call for service while having any alcohol, controlled substances, or both in their system. They shall also not have prescribed or over the counter medication in their system that renders them incapable of safely driving or operating the tow truck. 
(n)  All licensees shall comply with section 9-560 storage facility. 
(o)  Tow drivers are not allowed to be on duty for more than one (1) tow company at any one (1) time. 
(Ord. No. 07-O-0045, § 1, 6-4-2007) 
Editor's note— It should be noted that Exhibit "A" referenced above is not set out at length herein, but is on file and available for inspection in the office of the city clerk.  
Sec. 9-556. - Operation of police towing licensee lists. 
(a)  The City of West Chicago Police Department will maintain three (3) police towing licensee lists as set forth in section 9-553, and will issue four (4) licenses per list. Licensees may be on more than one (1) list. 
(b)  The West Chicago Police Department will ensure that licensees are called in rotation as fair as is reasonable and practicable. Except upon request of the owner, operator or person legitimately in possession of the vehicle to be serviced, the West Chicago Police Department will not call any tow truck not on the police towing licensee list unless all such licensees are unavailable. 
(c)  The West Chicago Police Department may deviate from the order of normal rotation if, in the West Chicago Police Department's judgment, deviation is necessary to protect the public health, safety, and/or welfare or to ensure proper traffic, incident, or accident management. The West Chicago Police Department may also deviate from the order of normal rotation if the licensee next on rotation is, in the West Chicago Police Department's sole discretion and judgment, incapable or improperly equipped for handling a specific task. 
(d)  If a licensee is unable to respond to a request for service within the time frame required in the towing license agreement, the licensee or their employee shall advise the West Chicago Police Department that they are not available because they require an extended response time. The licensee will then be placed at the bottom of the list. No substitute tow company or licensee will be allowed. The police telecommunicator will then call the next licensee on the list. 
(e)  When a request for service is cancelled after being dispatched off the police towing licensee list, the licensee will be put back at the top of the list. 
(f)  The city reserves the right to terminate or modify its license procedure unilaterally at any time without any notice and without recourse. 
(Ord. No. 07-O-0045, § 1, 6-4-2007)  
Sec. 9-557. - License nontransferable. 
Any license granted pursuant to this chapter shall be personal to the individual or entity to whom issued and may not be transferred to any other person or entity. Such license shall not be sold, leased, transferred, assigned, or otherwise disposed of, either in whole or in part, whether by forced sale, merger, consolidation, bankruptcy, reorganization under bankruptcy laws, or otherwise, without reapplication pursuant to section 9-551. 
(Ord. No. 07-O-0045, § 1, 6-4-2007)  
Sec. 9-558. - Removal from police towing licensee list. 
(a)  Removal of licensee. The chief of police, or designee, may remove any licensee temporarily or permanently when it is determined that: 
(1)  The license was secured by fraud or concealment of a material fact, which if known would have caused disapproval of the application. 
(2)  The licensee has violated any of the provisions of this article, or the West Chicago Police Department Towing License Agreement. 
(3)  The service provided by the licensee has been substantially inadequate, which shall include, but not be limited to, failing to be available for or not accepting calls, slow response time, excessive damage claims, theft, repeated complaints from citizens, inadequate services or towing equipment. 
(4)  During the term of the license, any licensee or a tow driver: 
a.  Is convicted of any felony in any state; 
b.  Is determined to be a sex offender, as defined in Illinois law, 730 ILCS 150/2, as amended; or 
c.  Is convicted under the laws of Illinois or any other state of an offense that under the laws of the State of Illinois would be a felony theft of a vehicle or vehicle parts. 
(5)  If the chief of police, or designee, determines that a licensee presents an immediate threat to the health, safety or welfare of the public, or if the licensee has not provided proof of valid insurance in the amounts required by ordinance, the chief of police shall provide the licensee with written notice that the licensee is being removed from the police towing licensee list immediately. Said written notice shall be delivered to the licensee's place of business on the first day the removal is effective, and shall state: 
(b)  Temporary removal. If the removal of the licensee from the police towing licensee list is temporary, such temporary removal shall not be for more than thirty (30) days at any one (1) time. 
(Ord. No. 07-O-0045, § 1, 6-4-2007)  
Sec. 9-559. - Allowable fees. 
The fee structure shall be adjusted annually based on the U.S. Department of Labor, Consumer Price Index (CPI). This calculation will be done yearly at the time the application period starts. Each fee shall be calculated and adjusted separately. The calculation will be cumulative each year but adjustments to the fees contained herein will only be made in increments of five dollars ($5.00) and rounded up to the nearest five dollars ($5.00), except for mileage and accident clean-up fees which will be rounded up to the nearest one dollar ($1.00). Yearly adjusted rates, subsequent to 2011, will be contained within the West Chicago Police Department Towing License Agreement, without any need to amend the city code. No licensee shall impose any fee not specifically provided for below for any tow performed pursuant to a police towing license. 
(1)  The following schedule of maximum fees shall be in effect for the year 2011, for all tows performed pursuant to the police towing license. 
Service Description 
Towing rates (conventional or flatbed tow truck):     Price 
Light duty vehicle tow ..... $140.00 
Medium duty vehicle tow ..... 165.00 
Heavy duty vehicle tow ..... 275.00 
Service call (lockout, vehicle starting, tire changing, vehicle out of gas) ..... 65.00 
Winching/up righting vehicle (in addition to the service call fee or applicable tow fee) ..... 65.00 
Accident clean-up (all accidents) ..... 23.00 
Clean-up of spilled cargo (per ¼ hour after first ¼ hour) ..... 23.00 
After hours release (per occasion) ..... 55.00 
Mileage: 
Within city limits or to the storage facility designated on the licensees' application: ..... No charge 
Outside city limits when not going to the storage facility designated on the licensee's application: 
Light duty vehicles, per mile ..... 6.00 
Medium duty vehicles, per mile ..... 7.00 
Heavy duty vehicles, per mile ..... 8.00 
Standby: (per ¼ hour, after the first ¼ hour on scene) 
Light duty tow, per truck ..... 20.00 
Medium duty, per truck ..... 40.00 
Heavy duty, per truck ..... 60.00 
Storage: (per vehicle, no charge for first day) 
Light duty, per day ..... 25.00 
Medium duty, per day ..... 35.00 
Heavy duty, per day ..... 45.00 
(2)  A copy of the completed invoice shall be provided to the West Chicago Police Department and the owner of the vehicle serviced. 
(3)  The towing of city-owned light duty vehicles within city limits is performed at no charge to the city. 
(Ord. No. 07-O-0045, § 1, 6-4-2007; Ord. No. 11-O-0023, § 1, 5-2-2011)  
Sec. 9-560. - Storage facility. 
(a)  Each licensee shall maintain a secure storage lot of adequate size to store all towed vehicles safely, but in no event shall the capacity be smaller than twenty (20) vehicles. For the purpose of this section one (1) vehicle shall equal one hundred twenty (120) square feet (eight (8) feet by fifteen (15) feet). Said lot shall be completely enclosed by a fence not less than six (6) feet in height and shall have a lockable and securable gate. All storage facilities must meet applicable zoning and fire code requirements. A clearance of at least twenty-four (24) inches must be maintained around all vehicles in licensee's storage lot. 
(b)  The licensee shall maintain an office at said storage lot that is staffed and open to the public during normal business hours. 
(c)  The storage lot for light duty tows shall be located within the planning boundary of West Chicago or within five (5) miles of the city limits of West Chicago. 
(d)  The storage lot for medium duty tows and heavy duty tows shall be located within the planning boundary of West Chicago or within fifteen (15) miles of the city limits of West Chicago. 
(e)  When instructed by the West Chicago Police Department that a vehicle in storage must be secured from tampering, the operator shall store said vehicle so that it is not accessible to any person except upon specific approval of the West Chicago Police Department. The licensee will not allow anyone but West Chicago Police Department personnel to access the vehicle. This storage will be at the licensee's storage facility and can be within the fenced lot or within a building at the storage lot, at the discretion of the licensee. 
(Ord. No. 07-O-0045, § 1, 6-4-2007)  
Sec. 9-561. - Inspections. 
The West Chicago Police Department may conduct an inspection of all licensees, upon reasonable notice to licensees. This inspection shall include the vehicles used by the licensee for license tows and service calls. It will also include the physical location of the business and any place where license vehicles are stored, all records associated with license calls, a check of employees for criminal and traffic records, and anything else related to the licensee as deemed appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 07-O-0045, § 1, 6-4-2007)  
Sec. 9-562. - Violation and penalty. 
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each offense. 
(Ord. No. 07-O-0045, § 1, 6-4-2007)  
Secs. 9-563—9-649. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1558, § 1, adopted Dec. 21, 1981, repealed former §§ 9-600—9-605 which pertained to tow trucks and were derived from Ord. No. 1494, § 1, adopted Oct. 20, 1980.  
ARTICLE XXI. - ALARMS[13] 

Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 17-O-0040, § 1, adopted Nov. 6, 2017, amended Art. XXI in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. XXI, §§ 9-650—9-659, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 04-O-0010, § 1, adopted Mar. 1, 2004. 
 
Sec. 9-650. - Definitions. 
Alarm system. Any burglar and/or holdup alarm system referred to in this article. 
Burglar alarm system. An alarm system signaling an entry or attempted entry into the area protected by the system. 
Burglar and holdup alarm business. Any business operated by a person for a profit, which engages in the activity of altering, installing, leasing, maintaining, repairing, replacing, selling, serving or responding to a burglar or holdup alarm system, or which causes any of these activities to take place. 
Central station. Any premises, usually maintained by an alarm company, equipped to receive and displace signals from intruder alarm systems. 
Communicator panel. The device that receives alarm signals from subscribers whose lines terminate at the police dispatch point. 
Direct alarm. Any police alarm device running directly from a specific location to the police dispatch point, connected by leased telephone lines. 
False alarm. Activation or transmission of any alarm signal caused by human error, mechanical or electronic malfunction, negligence of the alarm user or alarm user's employee, whether or not the exact cause of the alarm activation is determined, or any other activation or transmission of any alarm signal where no actual or attempted burglary or robbery exists. Severe weather, power outages, transmission line malfunctions, acts of God, malicious acts of persons not under the control of the alarm user, or any other cause clearly beyond the control of the alarm user will be considered in determining if an alarm activation was false and whether or not any occurrence, fine, warning or other punitive action will be taken against the alarm user as provided for by this article. 
Holdup alarm system. An alarm system signaling a robbery or attempted robbery. 
Indirect alarm. Any police alarm device running indirectly from a specific location to the police dispatch point through an alarm company's receiving location to the police dispatch point. The alarm may be connected to the police dispatch point by leased telephone lines or called in by the alarm company's receiving location personnel. 
Interconnect. To connect an alarm system to the voice grade telephone line, either directly or through a mechanical device that utilizes a standard telephone, for the purpose of using the telephone line to transmit an emergency message upon the activation of the alarm system. 
Local alarm (audible type). These alarms sound audibly on the premises whether or not connected as a "direct" or "central station" alarm. 
Person. Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind. 
Subscriber. A person who contracts for or receives service or maintenance with respect to any alarm system from an alarm business. 
(Ord. No. 17-O-0040, § 1, 11-6-2017)  
Sec. 9-651. - Responsibility to answer alarms. 
(a)  Generally. When an alarm has been activated at a business or private residence and the police respond, the owner or his representative shall be present at such location after being requested to do so by a representative of the West Chicago Police Department. Response shall be as soon as possible but should not exceed thirty (30) minutes from time of request. 
(b)  Audible alarms. Every local alarm shall be constructed, equipped, and installed in such a fashion that the alarm shall be incapable of sounding for more than thirty (30) minutes following a single activation. The sounding of such audible alarm for a continuous period of more than thirty (30) minutes shall constitute a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 17-O-0040, § 1, 11-6-2017)  
Sec. 9-652. - Interconnected alarm systems, regulations and standards. 
No automatic dialing service shall be interconnected to the police department or police dispatch unit. 
(Ord. No. 17-O-0040, § 1, 11-6-2017)  
Sec. 9-653. - Transmission of excessive false alarms, grounds for revocation of permit. 
(a)  Except due to factors beyond the control of the subscriber, it shall be unlawful for any person to transmit more than two (2) false alarms within any calendar year from any single alarm system. 
False alarms shall not include alarms activated by the following: 
(1)  Attempted or actual criminal activity or forcible or unauthorized entry; 
(2)  Structural damage to the protected premises due to earthquake, high winds, lightning or flooding caused by the overflow of natural drainage; 
(3)  Telephone line malfunction; 
(4)  Electrical service interruption; and 
(5)  System malfunction within thirty (30) days of a new installation or modification of an existing system, provided that the chief of police has received prior notice of the work performed. 
(b)  For the purpose of this section, factors within the "control of the subscriber" shall be defined as follows: 
(1)  Any act or omission by a subscriber or his employee; 
(2)  Faulty equipment; 
(3)  Equipment not properly maintained or serviced. 
(Ord. No. 17-O-0040, § 1, 11-6-2017)  
Sec. 9-654. - Penalties. 
(a)  False alarm response charges. When the West Chicago Police Department responds to false alarms received from the same premises more than two (2) times in a calendar year (January through December), the alarm user or subscriber shall pay the city the following amount within thirty (30) days after receiving billing notification. 
One through two (1—2) responses: Free. 
After the second alarm, each false alarm is one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
If payment is not received within the thirty-day period, as provided above, the charge for said response shall be increased to double the amount of the initial response charge. 
(b)  Informal hearing. Each alarm user shall be entitled to an informal hearing with the chief of police or his designate for each false alarm in excess of two (2). At the informal hearing, the subscriber may offer evidence that the alarm activation for which he is charged was not under his control as stated in section 9-653. The hearing must be requested, in writing, by certified or registered mail, directed to the Chief of the West Chicago Police Department, seven (7) days after the mailing of the statement of charges for the false alarm(s). Failure to timely request a hearing shall constitute an admission that the service charge is justified and payable to the city and shall further constitute an irrevocable waiver of such hearing. 
(Ord. No. 17-O-0040, § 1, 11-6-2017)  
Sec. 9-655. - Municipal liability. 
The city and its officers, agents, employees or assignees shall not be liable for any defects in the equipment or operation of the alarm system or use of signaling systems. Nothing contained herein shall be construed as a warranty by the city that any system will work or that any equipment or services will be without defect. The city shall not be held liable for any damages, consequential or otherwise, for any claim or dispute arising out of or in connection with an alarm or signaling system. 
(Ord. No. 17-O-0040, § 1, 11-6-2017)  
Sec. 9-656. - Severability. 
Should any section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this article be declared unconstitutional or invalid for any other reason, the remainder of this article shall not be affected thereby and shall remain in full force and effect and the same shall not affect validity of the remaining portions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 17-O-0040, § 1, 11-6-2017)  
Secs. 9-657—9-664. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XXII. - GAME ROOMS AND ARCADES 
 
Sec. 9-665. - Definitions. 
The term "coin-operated amusement device" as used herein shall mean any machine or apparatus which, upon the insertion of the coin, slug, token, plate or disk, may be operated by the public generally for use as a game, entertainment or amusement, whether or not registering a score. "Coin-operated amusement device" shall also include those machines or devices which may be activated by the attendant, operator, owner, or agent of the establishment through his own actions in exchange for consideration from the patron. "Coin-operated amusement devices" shall include, but are not limited to, devices such as skeeball, mechanical grab machines, billiards or pool tables, bowling games, foosball, air hockey, and all other games, operations or transaction similar thereto under whatever name they may be known. 
(Ord. No. 1569, § 1, 4-5-82; Ord. No. 1730, § 2, 5-7-84; Ord. No. 02-O-0125, § 3, 11-4-2002)  
Sec. 9-666. - License required. 
(a)  No person shall keep or display for operation or patronage by the public within the city any coin-operated amusement device without having first obtained a license therefore from the city as provided herein. 
(b)  No person shall engage in the business of keeping or providing any coin-operated amusement device, as defined above for public use within the city without having first obtained necessary licenses from the city. For the purposes of this section, any person that keeps or provides not more than three (3) coin-operated amusement devices on a premises that is devoted to the conduct of another principal business shall be conclusively presumed not to be engaged in the principal business of keeping or providing coin-operated amusement devices for public use. 
(Ord. No. 1569, § 1, 4-5-82)  
Sec. 9-667. - Application for license; investigation; issuance. 
(a)  Applications for the licenses required as specified above shall be filed in triplicate with the city administrator for the hearing board and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  If the applicant is a corporation: 
a.  Corporate name, address, state of incorporation. 
b.  Names, dates of birth and addresses of all corporate officers and directors. 
c.  Statements of principal kinds of business in which the corporate engages. 
d.  Statement of whether the local business will be conducted by a manager, and the name, address and title of any such manager or agent. 
e.  Names, dates of birth and addresses of all persons, firms, and organizations owning of record five (5) percent or more of the corporation stock. 
f.  Statement of whether an officer, manager, director or shareholder owning five (5) per cent or more of the stock of the corporation has ever been convicted of a felony or has ever forfeited an appearance bond on a felony charge. 
g.  The location of the place of business and the place where the coin-operated amusement device or devices are to be kept or displayed. 
h.  Statement of personal history of the manager or agent conducting business for the corporation. 
i.  The names of all persons who while not associated with the corporation will be responsible for the maintenance and operation of the amusement devices. 
(2)  If the applicant is an individual or partnership or other such entity: 
a.  Name and address and date of birth of applicant. 
b.  Location and place of business. 
c.  Principal kind of business which the business is engaged in. 
d.  Statement of whether business will be conducted by a manager or agent, and the name and address and date of birth of any such manager or agent. 
e.  The place where the coin-operated amusement devices are to be displayed and a description of the devices. 
f.  Statement of personal history of the manager or agent conducting business for applicant. 
g.  Names and addresses of all owners of said individual partnership or other such entity. 
(b)  The city clerk, chief of police, and the superintendent of building inspection and zoning control of the city shall investigate the information contained in the application, and shall determine if the premises designated by the applicant as the location of the business complies with the provisions of the zoning ordinance of the city. The report of such investigation and determination, together with a copy of the application, shall be transmitted to the mayor. Upon the compliance of the applicant with the requirements of this article and zoning ordinance of the city, the mayor and city collector shall issue the license and upon payment by the applicant of a license fee hereunder required, such license shall be issued. 
(Ord. No. 1569, § 1, 4-5-82)  
Sec. 9-668. - License fees. 
The license fee shall be as prescribed in Appendix G. 
(Ord. No. 1569, § 1, 4-5-82; Ord. No. 02-O-0125, § 2, 11-4-2002; Ord. No. 11-O-0007, § 46, 5-16-2011)  
Sec. 9-669. - Conditions and regulations; inspection of premises prior to issuance of license; violations; penalty. 
(a)  In addition to any other condition or regulation contained in this article or in the statutes of the State of Illinois, the following conditions and regulations shall be applicable to and shall govern and control the business of keeping or providing coin-operated amusement devices for public use within the city: 
(1)  The walls, ceiling or floor, or any combination thereof, of the structure or building, or portion thereof, containing such devices shall be insulated or otherwise constructed so that no noise or vibration that is detectable without the aid of any mechanical device or instrument will be allowed beyond the outer perimeter of the licensed premise. 
(2)  No coin-operated amusement device shall be used for purposes of or in connection with the wagering of money, goods or merchandise upon the outcome of the use or manipulation of such device or otherwise used for purposes of gambling as defined in Chapter 38, Section 28-1, et seq., Illinois Revised Statutes. 
(3)  No person under twelve (12) years of age shall be allowed on the licensed premises unless accompanied by a parent, guardian, or an adult member of the immediate family of such person. An adult for the purposes of this article shall be any person eighteen (18) years old or older. No person under twelve (12) years of age shall be allowed to operate any coin-operated amusement device unless accompanied by a parent, guardian or an adult member of the immediate family of such person. 
(4)  At all times during the hours of operation of the licensed premises there shall be present a manager or other agent of the licensee who shall be not less than eighteen (18) years of age. This manager, agent or authorized attendant shall have the responsibility to provide adequate control and supervision of the licensed premises and the use of the coin-operated amusement devices present therein. 
(5)  No coin-operated amusement devices shall be associated with or based upon a game of gambling, including, but not limited to, electronic or mechanical games simulating or based upon card games, poker, blackjack, baccarat, twenty-one, roulette, or other such wagering type of game. 
(6)  A licensee further covenants to the city by the acceptance of the license that each game mechanical or electronic in nature shall be structurally sound and electrically safe. Building codes must be complied with so that no fire hazard shall be resulting from the operation of said mechanical or electronic game. 
(7)  The licensee further agrees to provide adequate fire protection facilities and devices including, but not limited to, fire extinguishers on the premises. 
(8)  All premises where coin-operated amusement devices are housed shall be adequately lighted at all times during operation by natural or artificial light. 
(b)  All premises where coin-operated amusement devices are housed shall be inspected by the building inspector and fire inspector prior to the issuance of a license. No license shall be issued until written certification has been supplied to the city that all electrical outlets and equipment serving the premises meet the current city building code requirements. Additionally, the premises where coin-operated amusement devices are housed shall meet all other city building and safety codes as applicable. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person licensed to engage in the business of keeping or providing coin-operated amusement devices for public use within the city to fail to comply with the conditions and regulations set forth herein or suffer or permit noncompliance with such conditions and regulations on or within the licensed premises. 
(d)  Any person convicted of a violation of the conditions or regulations of this article shall be subjected to a fine not less than ten dollars ($10.00) or more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). Each day of such offense shall be considered a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 1569, § 1, 4-5-82)  
Sec. 9-670. - Suspension or revocation of license. 
Nothing in the provisions of this article shall preclude the right of the city or any duly appointed agent to suspend or revoke the license of the licensee. 
(a)  The city may temporarily suspend any license issued under the terms of this article when it has reason to believe that the continued operation of a particular licensed premises will immediately threaten the welfare of the community or create an imminent danger of violation of applicable law. In such case, the city may, upon the issuance of a written order stating the reason for such determination, and without notice or hearing, order the licensed premises closed for not more than seven (7) days, provided that the licensee shall be given an opportunity to be heard at a public hearing during the seven-day period, and further provided that if such licensee shall also be engaged in the conduct of other principal businesses on the licensed premises, such order shall not be applicable to such other principal businesses, the city council shall establish rules for the hearing board. 
(b)  The city may suspend or revoke a license issued under the terms of this article upon due notice to the licensee of the time and place of a public hearing, and a public hearing. If the city so determines upon hearing that the licensee has failed or refused to comply with the terms of this article or has failed or refused to comply with any other applicable law in keeping or providing coin-operated amusement devices, a suspension or revocation may enter. 
(Ord. No. 1569, § 1, 4-5-82)  
Sec. 9-671. - Hearing board. 
(a)  A hearing board shall be appointed by the mayor of the city. The hearing board shall consist of the mayor and two (2) aldermen of the city. The mayor shall appoint the two (2) other members for the hearing board. 
(b)  Each member shall serve for the duration of his term in office. Decisions of the hearing board are final administrative decisions and shall be reviewable as the law provides. Licensees subject to the hearing are responsible for the costs of conducting the hearing. 
(Ord. No. 1569, § 1, 4-5-82)  
Secs. 9-672—9-674. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XXIII. - RAFFLES[14] 

Footnotes: 
--- (14) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1722, § 1, adopted Apr. 2, 1984, provided for the addition of provisions designated as Art. XXIII, §§ 9-675—9-684, to read as herein set out. 
 
Sec. 9-675. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the terms defined in this section have the meanings given them. 
Net proceeds means the gross receipts from the conduct of raffles, less reasonable sums expended for prizes, local license fees and other reasonable operating expenses incurred as a result of operating a raffle. 
Raffle means a form of lottery, as defined in Section 28-2(b) of the "Criminal Code of 1961", conducted by an organization licensed under this article, in which: 
(1)  The player pays or agrees to pay something of value for a chance, represented and differentiated by a number or by a combination of numbers or by some other medium, one (1) or more of which chances is to be designated the winning change; 
(2)  The winning chance is to be determined through a drawing or by some other method based on an element of chance by an act or set of acts on the part of persons conducting or connected with the lottery, except that the winning chance shall not be determined by the outcome of a publicly exhibited sporting contest. 
(Ord. No. 1722, § 1, 4-2-84)  
Sec. 9-676. - Who may be issued a license. 
(a)  Licenses shall be issued only to bona fide religious, charitable, labor, fraternal, education or veterans' organizations that operate without profit to their members and which have been in existence continuously for a period of five (5) years immediately before making application for a license and which have had during that entire five-year period a bona fide membership engaged in carrying out their objects. 
(b)  For purposes of this article, the following definitions apply: 
Nonprofit. An organization or institution organized and conducted on a not-for-profit basis with no personal profit inuring to anyone as a result of the operation. 
Charitable. An organization or institution organized and operated to benefit an indefinite number of the public. The service rendered to those eligible for benefits must also confer some benefit on the public. 
Educational. An organization or institution organized and operated to provide systematic instruction in useful branches of learning by methods common to schools and institutions of learning which compare favorably in their scope and intensity with the course of study presented in tax-supported schools. 
Religious. Any church, congregation, society or organization founded for the purpose of religious worship. 
Fraternal. An organization of persons having a common interest, the primary interest of which is to both promote the welfare of its members and to provide assistance to the general public in such a way as to lessen the burdens of government by caring for those that otherwise would be cared for by the government. 
Veterans. An organization or association comprised of members of which substantially all are individuals who are veterans or spouses, widows, or widowers of veterans, the primary purpose of which is to promote the welfare of its members and to provide assistance to the general public in such a way as to confer a public benefit. 
Labor. An organization composed of workers organized with the objective of betterment of the conditions of those engaged in such pursuit and the development of higher degree of efficiency in their respective occupations. 
(Ord. No. 1722, § 1, 4-2-84)  
Sec. 9-677. - License; applications, issuance, restrictions; persons ineligible. 
Licenses issued by the City of West Chicago, are subject to the following restrictions: 
(1)  No person, firm or corporation shall conduct raffles or chances without having first obtained a license therefor pursuant to this article; 
(2)  The license and application for license must specify the area or areas within the licensing authority in which raffle changes will be sold or issued, the time periods during which raffle chances will be sold or issued, the time of determination of winning chances and the location or locations at which winning chances will be determined; 
(3)  The license application must contain a sworn statement attesting to the not-for-profit character of the prospective license organization, signed by the presiding officer or the officer responsible to the State of Illinois and the secretary of that organization. 
(4)  A license authorizes the licensee to conduct one (1) raffle as defined in this article. Each such license shall be as prescribed in Appendix G and shall be valid for one (1) year. 
(5)  The following are ineligible for any license under this article: 
a.  Any person who has been convicted of a felony; 
b.  Any person who is or has been a professional gambler or gambling promoter; 
c.  Any person who is not of good moral character; 
d.  Any firm or corporation in which a person defined in (a), (b) or (c) has a proprietary, equitable or credit interest, or in which such a person is active or employed; 
e.  Any organization in which a person defined in (a), (b) or (c) is an officer, director, or employee, whether compensated or not; 
f.  Any organization in which a person defined in (a), (b) or (c) is to participate in the management or operation of a raffle as defined in this article. 
(Ord. No. 1722, § 1, 4-2-84; Ord. No. 11-O-0007, § 31, 5-16-2011)  
Sec. 9-678. - Conduct of raffles. 
The conducting of raffles is subject to the following restrictions: 
(1)  The entire net proceeds of any raffle must be exclusively devoted to the lawful purposes of the organization permitted to conduct that game. 
(2)  No person except a bona fide member of the sponsoring organization may participate in the management or operation of the raffle. 
(3)  No person may receive any remuneration or profit for participating in the management or operation of the raffle. 
(4)  A licensee may rent a premises on which to determine the winning chance or chances in a raffle only from an organization which is also licensed under this article. 
(5)  Raffle chances may be sold or issued only within the area specified on the license and winning chances may be determined only at those locations specified on the license. 
(6)  No person under the age of eighteen (18) years may participate in the conducting of raffles or chances. A person under the age of eighteen (18) years may be within the area where winning chances are being determined only when accompanied by his parent or guardian. 
(Ord. No. 1722, § 1, 4-2-84)  
Sec. 9-679. - Raffles; manager, bond. 
All operation of and the conduct of raffles shall be under the supervision of a single raffles manager designated by the organization. The manager shall give a fidelity bond in the sum of an amount determined by the city in favor of the organization conditioned upon his honesty in the performance of his duties. Terms of the bond shall provide that notice shall be given in writing to the city not less than thirty (30) days prior to its cancellation. The City of West Chicago may waive this bond requirement by including a waiver provision in the license issued to an organization under this article, provided that a license containing such waiver provision shall be granted only by unanimous vote of the members of the licensed organization. 
(Ord. No. 1722, § 1, 4-2-84)  
Sec. 9-680. - Records. 
(a)  Each organization licensed to conduct raffles and chances shall keep records of its gross receipts, expenses and net proceeds for each single gathering or occasion at which winning chances are determined. All deductions from gross receipts for each single gathering or occasion shall be documented with receipts or other records indicating the amount, a description of the purchased item or service or other reason for the deduction, and the recipient. The distribution of net proceeds shall be itemized as to payee, purpose, amount and date of payment. 
(b)  Gross receipts from the operation of raffles programs shall be segregated from other revenues of the organization, and placed in a separate account. Each organization shall have separate records of its raffles. The person who accounts for gross receipts, expenses and net proceeds from the operation of raffles shall not be the same person who accounts for other revenues of the organization. 
(c)  Each organization licensed to conduct raffles shall report monthly to its members, and to the city, its gross receipts, expenses and net proceeds from raffles, and the distribution of net proceeds itemized as required in this section. 
(d)  Records required by this section shall be preserved for three (3) years, and organizations shall make available their records relating to operation of raffles for public inspection at reasonable times and places. 
(Ord. No. 1722, § 1, 4-2-84)  
Sec. 9-681. - Application procedures. 
(a)  An application to conduct a raffle shall be submitted to the city administrator of the City of West Chicago. The application shall include all necessary information as provided in this article. Any application failing to disclose all required information shall be denied. 
(b)  Following review and investigation of all disclosures as the corporate authorities deem appropriate, the applicant will be informed as to whether or not the license will issue. The city administrator shall issue licenses to all qualified applicants. The city administrator shall inform those applicants refused a license. 
(Ord. No. 1722, § 1, 4-2-84)  
Sec. 9-682. - Suspension or revocation of license. 
(a)  Nothing in the provisions of this article shall preclude the right of the city council of the City of West Chicago or its duly authorized agent to suspend or revoke the license of the licensee. 
(b)  Pending further investigation by the City of West Chicago, the city council may cause a license to raffle to be temporarily suspended. Reasons for the suspension of a license shall include, but are not limited to nondisclosure of information, fraudulent or incorrect information contained in the application, misappropriation of raffle funds, misconduct in raffle administration, and subsequent illegality. Any raffle funds collected prior to suspension shall be deposited in an escrow account in a duly licensed escrow agency in the State of Illinois during the period of suspension. 
(c)  In the case of a suspension of license, the licensee shall be given an opportunity to be heard in a public hearing within thirty (30) days. The hearing shall be conducted by the raffle hearing board as provided further herein. 
(Ord. No. 1722, § 1, 4-2-84)  
Sec. 9-683. - Raffle hearing board. 
(a)  Within thirty (30) days of the temporary suspension of a raffle license, the raffle hearing board shall convene for the purpose of determining the merits of the temporary suspension. 
(b)  The raffle hearing board shall consist of three (3) members. The mayor shall be the chairman. Two (2) residents of the City of West Chicago shall be appointed by the mayor. The mayor shall serve a term consecutively with the term of his office. The other members are appointed for a term of one (1) year each. 
(c)  In the event the raffle hearing board concurs in the findings of the temporary suspension it may order either a further suspension or revocation of the license. In the event a revocation is deemed appropriate, the funds collected for the purpose of the raffle to that date may be caused to be refunded as a court of competent jurisdiction may decide. The officers of the organization or the organization itself shall be responsible for all costs incurred by the City of West Chicago in obtaining a final determination of this matter. 
(Ord. No. 1722, § 1, 4-2-84)  
Sec. 9-684. - Penalty for violation. 
Any person who violates this section shall be subject to a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(Ord. No. 1722, § 1, 4-2-84)  
ARTICLE XXIV. - TOBACCO SALES[15] 

Footnotes: 
--- (15) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 19-O-0022, adopted July 1, 2019, amended art. XXIV in its entirety to read as herein set out as §§ 9-685—9-698. Former art. XXIV, §§ 9-685—9-700, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from 18-O-0019, adopted June 4, 2018. 
 
Sec. 9-685. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
Adult-only facility means a facility or restricted area (whether open-air or enclosed) where the operator ensures or has a reasonable basis to believe (such as by checking identification as required under state law, or by checking the identification of any person appearing to be under the age of thirty (30)) that no person under legal age is present. A facility or restricted area need not be permanently restricted to persons under twenty-one (21) years of age to constitute as adult-only facility, provided that the operator ensures or has a reasonable basis to believe that no person under twenty-one (21) years of age is present during the event or time period in question. 
Age restricted area means a signed designated area in a retail establishment to which persons under twenty-one (21) years of age are not permitted access unless accompanied by a parent or legal guardian. 
Alternative nicotine product means a product or device not consisting of or containing tobacco that provides for the ingestion into the body of nicotine, whether by chewing, smoking, absorbing, dissolving, inhaling, snorting, sniffing, or by any other means. Alternative nicotine product does not include: cigarettes as defined in Section 1 of the Cigarette Tax Act and tobacco products as defined in Section 10-5 of the Tobacco Products Tax Act of 1995; tobacco product and electronic cigarette as defined in this section; or any product approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration for sale as a tobacco cessation product, as a tobacco dependence product, or for other medical purposes, and is being marketed and sold solely for that approved purpose. 
Electronic cigarettes means (1) any device that employs a battery or other mechanism to heat a solution or substance to produce a vapor or aerosol intended for inhalation; (2) any cartridge or container of a solution or substance intended to be used with or in the device or to refill the device; or (3) any solution or substance, whether or not it contains nicotine intended for use in the device. Electronic cigarette includes, but is not limited to, any electronic nicotine delivery system, electronic cigar, electronic cigarillo, electronic pipe, electronic hookah, vape pen, or similar product or device, and any components or parts that can be used to build the product or device. Electronic cigarette does not include: cigarettes as defined in Section 1 of the Cigarette Tax Act and tobacco products as defined in Section 10-5 of the Tobacco Products Tax Act of 1995; tobacco product and alternative nicotine product as defined in this section; any product approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration for sale as a tobacco cessation product, or for other medical purposes, and is being marketed and sold solely for that approved purpose; any asthma inhaler prescribed by a physician for that condition and is being marketed and sold solely for that approved purpose; or any therapeutic product approved for use under the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Pilot Program Act. 
Line of sight means visible to a cashier or other employee. 
Lunch wagon means a mobile vehicle designed and constructed to transport food and from which food is sold to the general public. 
Nicotine means any form of the chemical nicotine, including any salt or complex, regardless of whether the chemical is naturally or synthetically derived. 
Tobacco products means any product containing or made from tobacco that is intended for human consumption, whether smoked, heated, chewed, absorbed, dissolved, inhaled snorted, sniffed, or ingested by any other means, including, but not limited to, cigarettes, cigars, little cigars, chewing tobacco, pipe tobacco, snuff, snus and any other smokeless tobacco product which contains tobacco that is finely cut, ground, powdered, or leaf and intended to be placed in the oral cavity. Tobacco products includes any component, part, or accessory of a tobacco product, whether or not sold separately. Tobacco product does not include: an electronic cigarette and alternative nicotine product as defined in this section; or any product that has been approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration for sale as a tobacco cessation product, as a tobacco dependence product, or for other medical purposes, and is being marketed and solely for that approved purpose. 
Tobacco products, electronic cigarettes, and alternative nicotine product may be sold through a vending machine only if such tobacco products, electronic cigarettes, and alternative nicotine products are not placed together with any non-tobacco product, other than matches, in the vending machine and the vending machine is in any of the following locations: 
(1)  Places to which persons under 21 years of age are not permitted access at any time. 
(2)  Places where alcoholic beverages are sold and consumed on the premises and vending machine operation is under the direct supervision of the owner or manager. 
Tobacco specialty store means a tobacco retailer whose business exclusively or primarily involves the sale of tobacco products and related goods. 
Vending machine means any mechanical, electric or electronic, self-service device which, upon insertion of money, tokens or any other form of payment, dispenses tobacco products or electronic smoking devices. 
(Ord. No. 19-O-0022, § 1, 7-1-2019)  
Sec. 9-686. - License—Required. 
It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale at retail, to give away, deliver or to keep with the intention of selling at retail, giving away or delivering tobacco products, electronic cigarettes and alternative nicotine products within the city without having first obtained a tobacco dealer's license therefor pursuant to this article. Such license shall be in addition to any other license required by this Code. 
(Ord. No. 19-O-0022, § 1, 7-1-2019)  
Sec. 9-687. - Same—Application. 
Application for tobacco sales license should be made to the city clerk on forms provided by the city. Licenses shall run for a one-year period based on the city's fiscal year. A licensee may be prorated for a portion of the year. 
(Ord. No. 19-O-0022, § 1, 7-1-2019)  
Sec. 9-688. - Same—Fee. 
The annual fee for a tobacco license shall be as prescribed in appendix G. Said license is not refundable, in part or in full. 
(Ord. No. 19-O-0022, § 1, 7-1-2019)  
Sec. 9-689. - Prohibited sales, delivery; signs and displays. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, including any licensee, to sell, offer for sale, give away or deliver tobacco products, electronic cigarettes, and alternative nicotine products to any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years. 
(b)  Signs informing the public of the age restrictions provided for herein shall be posted by every licensee at or near every display of tobacco products and electronic smoking devices and on or upon every vending machine, which offers tobacco products and/or electronic smoking devices for sale. Each such sign shall be plainly visible and shall state: 
"THE SALE OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS, ELECTRONIC CIGARETTES, AND ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE PRODUCTS TO PERSONS UNDER TWENTY-ONE YEARS OF AGE, IS PROHIBITED BY LAW." 
The text of such signs shall be in red letters on a white background, said letters to be at least one (1) inch high. 
(c)  All single packs of cigarettes, and electronic cigarettes, and alternative nicotine products must be sold from behind the counter or in an age-restricted area or in a sealed display case. Any other tobacco products must be sold in line of sight. The restrictions described in this section do not apply to a retail tobacco store that: 
(1)  Derives at least ninety (90) percent of its revenue from tobacco and tobacco related products; 
(2)  Does not permit persons under the age of twenty-one (21) to enter the premises unless accompanied by a parent or legal guardian; and 
(3)  Posts a sign on the main entrance way stating that persons under the age of twenty-one (21) are prohibited from entering unless accompanied by a parent or legal guardian. 
(Ord. No. 19-O-0022, § 1, 7-1-2019)  
Sec. 9-690. - Minimum age to sell tobacco products. 
It shall be unlawful for any licensee or any officer, associate, member, representative, agent or employee of such licensee, to engage, employ or permit any person under sixteen (16) years of age to sell tobacco products, electronic cigarettes, and alternative nicotine products in any licensed premises. 
(Ord. No. 19-O-0022, § 1, 7-1-2019)  
Sec. 9-691. - Purchase by minors prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years to purchase tobacco products, electronic cigarettes, and alternative nicotine products or to misrepresent their identity or age, or to use any false or altered identification for the purpose of purchasing tobacco products, electronic cigarettes, and alternative nicotine products. 
(Ord. No. 19-O-0022, § 1, 7-1-2019)  
Sec. 9-692. - Free distributions. 
A person shall not distribute without charge samples of any tobacco product to any other person, regardless of age, except for smokeless tobacco in an adult-only facility. 
(Ord. No. 19-O-0022, § 1, 7-1-2019)  
Sec. 9-693. - Vending machines; locking devices. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any licensee to sell or offer for sale, give away, deliver or to keep with the intention of selling, giving away or delivering tobacco products or electronic smoking devices by use of a vending machine, unless such vending machine is equipped with manual, electric or electronic locking device controlled by the licensee so as to prevent its operation by persons under the age of twenty-one (21) years. 
(b)  Any premises where access by persons under the age of twenty-one (21) years is prohibited by law, or premises where the public is generally not permitted and where vending machines are strictly for the use of employees of business located at such premises, shall be exempt from the requirements of subsection (a) above. 
(Ord. No. 19-O-0022, § 1, 7-1-2019)  
Sec. 9-694. - Responsibility for agents and employees. 
Every act or omission of whatsoever nature, constituting a violation of any of the provisions of this article, by any officer, director, manager or other agent or employee of any licensee shall be deemed and held to be the act of such licensee; and such licensee shall be punishable in the same manner as if such act or omission had been done or omitted by the licensee personally. 
(Ord. No. 19-O-0022, § 1, 7-1-2019)  
Sec. 9-695. - Suspension; revocation of license; fines, costs. 
(a)  The mayor shall be charged with the administration of this article. The mayor may suspend or revoke any license issued under the provisions of this article, if he determines that the licensee has violated any of the provisions of this article. In lieu of suspension or revocation of a license, the mayor may instead levy a fine on the licensee. The fine imposed shall be per section 1-8, general penalty, of this Code for each violation. Each day on which a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation. However, no such license shall be suspended or revoked and no licensee shall be fined except in a public hearing by the mayor with a seven-day written notice to the licensee affording the licensee an opportunity to appear and defend against the charges contained in such notice. The seven-day notice provisions shall begin the day following delivery by certified mail or by personal service. 
(b)  The mayor shall, within seven (7) days after such hearing, if he determines after such hearing that the license should be revoked or suspended, or that the licensee should be fined, state the reason for such determination in a written order and either the amount of the fine, the period of suspension or that the license has been revoked and serve a copy of such order within the seven (7) days upon the licensee. 
(c)  Any licensee determined by the mayor to have violated any of the provisions of this article shall pay to the city the costs of the hearing before the mayor on such violation. The mayor shall determine the costs incurred by the city for the hearing, including, but not limited to: court reporter's fees, the costs of transcripts or records, attorneys' fees, the cost of preparing and mailing notices and orders and all other miscellaneous expenses incurred by the city or such lesser sum as the mayor may allow. 
(d)  The licensee shall pay said costs to the city within thirty (30) days of notification of the costs by the mayor. Failure to pay the costs within thirty (30) days of notification is a violation of this article and may be cause for license suspension or revocation, or the levy of a fine. 
(Ord. No. 19-O-0022, § 1, 7-1-2019)  
Sec. 9-696. - Use of premises after revocation. 
When any license shall have been revoked for any cause, no license shall be granted to any person for the period of one (1) year thereafter for the conduct of the business of selling tobacco products, electronic cigarettes, and alternative nicotine products in the premises described in such revoked license. 
(Ord. No. 19-O-0022, § 1, 7-1-2019)  
Sec. 9-697. - Penalty. 
In addition to any other relief granted by the courts or the administrative law judge, any person violating section 9-691 of this article shall be subject to a fine per section 1-8, general penalty, of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 19-O-0022, § 1, 7-1-2019)  
Sec. 9-698. - Transfer of license. 
(a)  Nontransferable. A license shall be a personal privilege, in force and effect for that period of time set forth in section 9-687 of this article, unless sooner revoked as in this article provided, and shall not constitute property, nor shall it be subject to attachment, garnishment or execution, nor shall it be alienable or transferable, voluntarily or involuntarily, or subject to being encumbered or hypothecated. Such license shall cease upon the death of the licensee, and shall not descend by the law of testate or intestate devolution. 
(b)  Change in personnel. Any changes in partnerships, officers, directors, persons holding directly or beneficially more than five (5) percent of the stock or ownership interest, or managers of establishments licensed under this chapter, shall be reported in writing to the mayor, within ten (10) days of the change and such new individuals shall meet all the standards of this chapter and must otherwise qualify to hold a tobacco dealers license. 
(1)  When a license has been issued to a partnership and a change of ownership occurs resulting in a partnership interest by one who is not eligible to hold a tobacco dealers license, the license shall terminate. 
(2)  When a license has been issued to a corporation and a change takes place in officers, directors, managers or stockholders of more than five (5) percent of the stock, resulting in the holding of office or such of stock by one who is not eligible for a license, the license shall terminate. 
(3)  When a license has been issued to an individual who is no longer eligible for a license, the license shall terminate. 
(Ord. No. 19-O-0022, § 1, 7-1-2019)  
Secs. 9-699—9-710. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XXV. - RESERVED[16] 

Footnotes: 
--- (16) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 01-O-0083, § 2, adopted Oct. 15, 2001 deleted the former Art. XXV, §§ 9-711—9-341 which pertained to vending machines and derived from Ord. No. 2390, § 1, adopted Mar. 4, 1991. 
 
Secs. 9-711—9-716. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XXVI. - TATTOO AND BODY PIERCING ESTABLISHMENTS 
 
Sec. 9-717. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
Body piercing means any procedure whereby a part or parts of the human body are pierced by a sharp instrument in order to allow insertion of a piece or pieces of jewelry, a ring(s) or other ornamental devices(s) through the orifice(s) thus created. 
Operator means any individual, firm, company, corporation or association that owns or operates an establishment where tattooing is performed and any individual who performs or practices the art of tattooing other human beings. 
Tattoo, tattooed, or tattooing means any method of placing designs, letters, scrolls, figures, symbols or any other marks upon or under the skin by the aid of needles or other instruments designed to touch or puncture the skin. 
(Ord. No. 4393, § 4, 2-5-2001)  
Sec. 9-718. - License—Required. 
No person shall maintain a tattoo establishment, with or without body piercing, without first having obtained a license as hereinafter provided. Such license shall be effective from January 1 through December 31 of each year, and shall be renewed annually. The fee for such license shall be as prescribed in Appendix G. All fees shall be non-refundable and shall not be prorated. 
(Ord. No. 4393, § 4, 2-5-2001; Ord. No. 11-O-0007, § 33, 5-16-2011)  
Sec. 9-719. - Application—Fees. 
Every applicant for a license to maintain or operate a tattoo establishment shall file an application upon a form provided by the city clerk and pay a nonrefundable filing fee as prescribed in Appendix G to the city administrator. The city administrator shall, within two (2) days, refer copies of such completed application to the police department, building department and mayor. The city departments shall, within thirty (30) days, inspect the premises proposed to be operated as a tattoo establishment, and make recommendations to the mayor concerning compliance with the codes and ordinances of the city. Upon receipt of the recommendations of the respective city departments, the city administrator shall notify the applicant as to whether his application has been granted, denied or held for further investigation. The period of such additional investigation shall not exceed an additional thirty (30) days. 
(Ord. No. 4393, § 4, 2-5-2001; Ord. No. 11-O-0007, § 34, 5-16-2011)  
Sec. 9-720. - Premises. 
No tattoo establishment shall receive a license or be operated, established or maintained unless the establishment shall comply with each of the following minimum regulations: 
(1)  The establishment shall have a certificate of compliance with or inspection by the DuPage County Health Department, if available. 
(2)  The room in which tattooing is done shall have an enclosed area of not less than five hundred (500) square feet. The walls, floors and ceiling shall have an impervious, smooth and washable surface. 
(3)  Toilet facilities shall be provided within the establishment. When five (5) or more employees or patrons of different sexes are on the premises at the same time, separate toilet facilities shall be provided. Lavatories shall be provided with both hot and cold running water and shall be installed in the toilet room. Lavatories shall be provided with soap and a dispenser with sanitary towels. 
(4)  All tables and other equipment shall be constructed of easily cleanable material, shall be painted or finished in a light color, with a smooth washable finish, and shall be separated from waiting customers or observers by a solid wall or door totally eliminating any view into the tattooing room. 
(5)  Closed cabinets shall be provided for use in the storage of clean linens, towels, needles, and other materials and instruments used in tattooing. All used linens, towels, equipment, instruments, and other materials shall be kept in properly covered containers or cabinets which shall be kept separate from the clean storage areas. A steam sterilizer shall be provided to properly sterilize all needles and instruments before use on any patron. Such needles and instruments required to be sterilized shall be so used, handled and temporarily placed during their use so that they will not be contaminated. 
(6)  The entire premises and equipment shall be maintained in a clean, sanitary condition and in good repair. 
(7)  No tattoo establishment shall be open to the public for business between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(8)  The main entrance door of any tattoo establishment shall be visible from a public street and shall remain unlocked during business hours. 
(Ord. No. 4393, § 4, 2-5-2001)  
Sec. 9-721. - Operating requirements. 
All tattoo establishments shall be subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  The operator shall wash his hands thoroughly with antiseptic soap and water before starting any tattoo; his hands shall be dried with individual, single-use towels. 
(2)  The area on the patron to be tattooed shall first be thoroughly washed with a sterile, single-use sponge with warm water containing an antiseptic liquid soap. The area should be shaved with a safety razor, using single service blades for each patron, followed by a solution of seventy (70) percent alcohol to be applied to the area before tattooing is begun. 
(3)  Only petroleum jelly in collapsible metal or plastic tubes shall be used on the area to be tattooed, and it shall be applied with sterile gauze. 
(4)  Single-service or individual containers of dye or ink shall be used for each patron, and the container therefor shall be discarded immediately after completing work on each patron. Any dye in which the needles are dipped shall not be used on another patron. All needles, pigments, dyes, color and any other material used in tattooing and all bandages and surgical dressings used in connection with tattooing shall be sterile and free from bacterial, virus particles and noxious agents and substances. After completing work on any patron, the tattooed area shall be washed with sterile gauze and seventy (70) percent alcohol solution and allowed to dry. A sterile gauze dressing shall be fastened to the tattooed area. 
(5)  Operators shall at all times while in the performance of their services wear uniforms or garments which cover the torso, and said garments shall be kept clean and in a sanitary condition. 
(6)  No person, while on the premises of any tattoo establishment, shall possess, sell, dispense, provide, give, keep or maintain any alcoholic beverage. 
(7)  No intoxicated person shall be tattooed by an operator on the licensed premises. 
(8)  Operators shall at all times comply with the regulations of the Department of Labor's Occupational Safety and Health Administration (29 CFR § 1910.1030), as presently existing or hereafter amended, with respect to occupational exposure to blood, bloodborne pathogens or other potentially infectious materials. 
(9)  Tattooing may be performed within such licensed tattoo establishment but shall be done only by a person licensed to practice medicine in all its branches in the state as set forth in the Illinois Medical Practice Act of 1987, or any amendment thereof. 
(Ord. No. 4393, § 4, 5-14-2001)  
Sec. 9-722. - Inspections. 
Any city department may make an inspection of each establishment granted a license under the provisions of this article for the purposes of determining compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 4393, § 4, 5-14-2001)  
Sec. 9-723. - Revocation and suspension. 
It shall be cause for revocation or suspension that a licensee has violated the provisions of this article or any code or ordinance of the city relative to operation of the business or use of the premises, has made a false statement on any application for license under this article, or in the event that the licensee shall refuse to permit any authorized police officer or authorized member of the police department or building department of the city to inspect the premises or the operations thereof at reasonable times. 
(Ord. No. 4393, § 4, 5-14-2001)  
Sec. 9-724. - Transfer of license prohibited. 
No license for the operation of a tattoo establishment shall be transferable. 
(Ord. No. 4393, § 4, 5-14-2001)  
Sec. 9-725. - Display of license required. 
Each licensee shall display a valid current license in a conspicuous place within the license establishment so that the same may be readily seen by persons entering the establishment. 
(Ord. No. 4393, § 4, 5-14-2001)  
Sec. 9-726. - Exemptions. 
The provisions of this article shall not apply to persons licensed to practice medicine in all its branches in the state as set forth in the Illinois Medical Practice Act of 1987, or any amendment thereof, who perform body piercing or tattoo individuals while in the course of their medical practice. 
(Ord. No. 4393, § 4, 5-14-2001)  
Sec. 9-727. - Requirement for authorized physician for body piercing. 
Body piercing may be performed within such licensed tattoo establishment but shall be done only by a person licensed to practice medicine in all its branches or in the physical presence and under the direct supervision of a person licensed to practice medicine in all its branches in the state as set forth in the Illinois Medical Practice Act of 1987, or any amendment thereof. The piercing of ears shall be exempt from the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 4393, § 4, 5-14-2001)  
Sec. 9-728. - Tattooing of minors. 
In accordance with 720 ILCS 5/12-10, no person under the age of twenty-one (21) may be tattooed except by a person licensed to practice medicine in all its branches in the state as set forth in the Illinois Medical Practice Act of 1987, or any amendment thereof, as hereinabove set forth. 
(Ord. No. 4393, § 4, 5-14-2001)  
Sec. 9-729. - Penalty. 
In addition to license suspension or revocation as hereinabove provided, any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be subject to a fine per section 1-8, general penalty, of this Code, and a separate offense shall be determined to have been committed each day during which or on which the violation occurs or continues. 
(Ord. No. 4393, § 4, 5-14-2001; Ord. No. 03-O-0085, § 6, 10-6-2003)  
ARTICLE XXVII. - VIDEO GAMING PROHIBITED 
 
Sec. 9-730. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the meanings stated below: 
Video gaming means the ownership, placement, maintenance, operation or use of a video gaming terminal in a public place, fraternal or veterans' establishment, as defined by the Video Gaming Act (230 ILCS 40/1 et seq.) including any subsequent amendments thereto. 
Video gaming terminal is ascribed its meaning as defined in the Video Gaming Act (230 ILCS 40/1 et seq.) and any subsequent amendments thereto, but is generally defined as any electronic video gaming machine that, upon the insertion of cash, tokens or other access device, is available to play or simulate the play of video gaming, including but not limited to video poker, line up, and blackjack, as authorized by the Illinois Gaming Board. This term does not include a machine that directly dispenses coins, cash or tokens or is for amusement purposes only. 
(Ord. No. 09-O-0061, § 1, 11-16-2009)  
Sec. 9-731. - Prohibition. 
Video gaming is prohibited within the corporate boundaries of the City of West Chicago. No video gaming license issued by the Illinois Gaming Board shall be effective within the corporate boundaries of the City of West Chicago. The possession of a video gaming terminal is prohibited within the corporate boundaries of the City of West Chicago. 
(Ord. No. 09-O-0061, § 1, 11-16-2009)  
Sec. 9-732. - Removal. 
Any prohibited video gaming terminal shall be immediately removed by the owner or operator from the public place, fraternal establishment or veteran's establishment in which it is located. 
(Ord. No. 09-O-0061, § 1, 11-16-2009)  
Sec. 9-733. - Penalties. 
Any person who violates any provision of this division shall be subject to the imposition of a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each day video gaming occurs or a video gaming terminal remains in a public place, fraternal or veteran's establishment. Each video gaming terminal incurs a separate charge and fine. A violation of this division on a continuing basis for a period of time in excess of twenty-four (24) hours shall be deemed a separate offense for each day that the continuing violation continues. 
(Ord. No. 09-O-0061, § 1, 11-16-2009)  
ARTICLE XXVIII. - JUNK DEALERS AND JUNK PEDDLERS 
 
Sec. 9-734. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following words or phrases shall have the following meaning: 
Junk shall mean and include old iron, brass, copper, tin, lead or other similar basic materials, and rope, bags, rags, wastepaper, paper clippings, scraps of woolens and other textiles, rubber, glass and empty bottles and all articles discarded or no longer used and consisting of any one (1) or more of the materials herein mentioned. 
Junk dealer shall mean and include every person, firm or corporation having an established place of business in the city, defined herein as a junk yard or junk store, and engaged in the business of buying, selling, bartering or exchanging any of the things defined herein as junk, whether dealing at wholesale or at retail. 
Junk peddler shall mean every person who uses a junk wagon as defined herein and travels from place to place within the city for the purpose of engaging in the business of purchasing and/or otherwise collecting junk. 
Junk store shall mean any store, shop, warehouse or building where junk is bought, sold, bartered or exchanged. 
Junk wagon shall mean very truck, wagon, motor vehicle, push cart or other vehicle used by a junk dealer or peddler in the collection, disposition or transportation of junk from one (1) place to another, within the city. 
Junk yard shall mean any yard, place or enclosure where junk is bought, sold or exchanged. 
(Ord. No. 13-O-0002, § 2, 6-3-2013)  
Sec. 9-735. - Exemptions. 
This article shall not apply to businesses or charitable organizations that accept donated goods for resale and individuals who are selling junk obtained from their own residence or business. 
(Ord. No. 13-O-0002, § 2, 6-3-2013)  
Sec. 9-736. - License required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a junk yard, junk store or conduct the business of a junk dealer or junk peddler within the city without a valid license for that purpose, as provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 13-O-0002, § 2, 6-3-2013)  
Sec. 9-737. - Issuance of license. 
The city administrator or his designee may grant a license to such person(s) who shall provide satisfactory evidence, through a fingerprint inquiry conducted by the police department, of good character to operate as a junk dealer or a junk peddler within the city, and upon the payment of the license fees provided for under this article. 
No license shall be granted by the city when any applicant owes the city any money for any purpose whatsoever or if there are unabated violations of the city code at the location for which the applicant is seeking a license to operate as either a junk dealer or junk peddler. 
The city administrator may refuse to issue/renew a license pursuant to this article if said license would be subject to suspension/revocation for any reason set forth in section 9-740 of this article. The city reserves the right to inspect any junk wagon, junk yard, junk store, junk dealer or junk peddler before issuing/renewing a license. 
A junk peddler license shall not authorize a junk peddler to operate as a junk dealer; provided that a junk dealer may employ junk peddlers who each shall obtain a junk peddler license. 
If a license is denied this article, the applicant may file a written appeal of the decision to the chief of police within seven (7) calendar days of receipt of the decision. The written appeal shall set forth the reasons why the applicant believes the decision to deny the license should be reversed. The chief of police shall respond to the appeal within fourteen (14) calendar days either affirming or reversing the decision to deny the license. 
(Ord. No. 13-O-0002, § 2, 6-3-2013)  
Sec. 9-738. - License fees. 
The annual license fees shall be as prescribed in Appendix G. 
(Ord. No. 13-O-0002, § 2, 6-3-2013)  
Sec. 9-739. - License restrictions and conditions. 
(a)  Dealing with minors: It shall be unlawful for any person having a license from the city under the provisions of this article to purchase or receive any articles of property from persons under eighteen (18) years of age.. 
(b)  Plumbing and electrical fixtures: No individual, being licensed as a junk dealer or junk peddler shall purchase from any person, except from duly certified plumbers, electricians, licensed peddlers or the owners of buildings from which the material is taken, any lead or metal pipe, faucets, boilers or other plumbing material or electric wiring or fixtures. 
(c)  Junk wagons: 
(1)  Every licensed junk peddler and/or junk dealer who operates a junk wagon shall possess a valid driver's license and auto liability insurance for his junk wagon(s), as required by the Illinois Vehicle Code. 
(2)  Every person licensed pursuant to this article shall carry a copy of said license, their Illinois driver's license and a copy of the liability insurance whenever operating a junk wagon. 
(3)  Every junk wagon shall bear the name, address, and telephone number of the licensee in letters at least two (2) inches tall. 
(4)  No junk dealer or junk peddler shall collect junk within the city before 7:00 a.m. or after 8:00 p.m. on any day. 
(5)  It shall be unlawful to park a junk wagon before 7:00 a.m. and after 8:00 p.m. on any day, in any public place on a city block wherein more than one-half (½) of the buildings are used for residential purposes. It shall further be unlawful to park a junk wagon on any property in any residential zoning district. 
(d)  Licenses non-transferable: No license shall be transferred to another person. 
(Ord. No. 13-O-0002, § 2, 6-3-2013)  
Sec. 9-740. - Cause for suspension/revocation. 
Any license issued pursuant to the terms of this article shall be subject to suspension or revocation for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  The licensee or his employee(s) violate(s) any of the terms of this article or the City Code. 
(2)  The licensee is charged and/or convicted of theft, possession of stolen property, and/or related offenses. 
(3)  The premises wherein the licensee operates a junk yard or junk store suffers from and/or creates any violations of the following portions of the City Code: Article IV, "Buildings and Building Regulations"; Article XI, "Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions"; or Appendix A, "Zoning". 
(4)  The licensee is deemed to have maintained a Nuisance Premises, in violation of Article 10 Article VII Section 10 [Chapter 10] "Nuisances" of the City Code, on the premises wherein he operates a junk yard or junk store. 
(5)  The city or other governmental agency condemns the premises wherein the licensee operates a junk yard or a junk store. 
(Ord. No. 13-O-0002, § 2, 6-3-2013)  
Sec. 9-741. - Suspension or revocation. 
A license issued under the provisions of this article may be revoked or suspended by the chief of police for a violation of any provision of this article or the City Code. If the chief of police determines after investigation that cause exists for the suspension or revocation of a license, the chief of police shall notify the licensee in writing, via certified mail delivered to the address provided on the license application, that its license will be revoked or suspended, setting forth the reasons therefore, and advising the licensee of the right to appeal pursuant to section 9-742 of this article. Unless a timely appeal is filed as provided in section 9-742, such revocation or suspension shall be final and effective on the eleventh business day following receipt of the notice by the licensee. If a timely appeal is filed as provided in section 9-742, such revocation or suspension shall not be final and effective until the appeal has been processed. 
The suspension of a license shall be for a period of not to exceed thirty (30) days. No revocation or suspension shall require return by the city of any portion of the license fee. 
Any revocation of a license shall preclude the licensee (or any subsequent company that has twenty (20) percent or more common identity/ownership interest with the licensee) from receiving another license under this article for two (2) years from the date of revocation; except that upon automatic revocation, as provided above, the license (or any subsequent company that has twenty (20) percent or more common identity/ownership interest with the licensee) shall not be permitted to receive another license for ten (10) years from the date of revocation for violations of section 9-740. 
Revocation or suspension of a license shall not preclude the imposition of a fine by a court of competent jurisdiction for violation of any part of this article. 
(Ord. No. 13-O-0002, § 2, 6-3-2013)  
Sec. 9-742. - Appeals. 
Any license holder who receives a notice of revocation or suspension may file an appeal with the city administrator as provided herein. Such appeal shall be filed with the city administrator, in writing, no later than ten (10) business days following receipt of the notice of revocation or suspension, and shall include a response to the notice. Such response shall include a brief statement addressing the substantive deficiencies cited in the police department's notice and shall set forth the basis for why the license should not be revoked or suspended. 
The city administrator shall schedule an informal public hearing as soon as possible following receipt of such appeal. The purpose of the hearing will be to offer the applicant or licensee an opportunity to show cause why the license should not be suspended or revoked. A record shall be made of the informal public hearing and documents may be submitted and/or testimony given, either in person or through sworn affidavit. This record may be made by electronic recording. The city administrator shall have the power to administer oaths and to continue the hearing from time to time to permit the applicant to provide additional information. 
Within thirty (30) days after such hearing, the city administrator shall make written findings of fact and issue an appropriate order. If the city administrator determines that the license or permit should be revoked or suspended, the reasons supporting such determination shall be included in the written order. A copy of such order shall be served upon the licensee. 
The decision of the city administrator as provided above shall be the final administrative action of the city with respect to the license and shall be subject to the immediate appeal by the licensee to the circuit court. Such appeal to the circuit court shall be filed not later than thirty-five (35) days following receipt of the city administrator's findings and order. Failure to timely file such appeal as provided herein shall render the city administrator's decision final. 
The city administrator may delegate any duty or power set forth in this section, including but not limited to, the conduct of the informal hearing and issuance of any final order, to such city officer as the city administrator may designate.  
Sec. 9-743. - Penalty. 
Any person, firm, or corporation who shall violate any provision of this article shall be subject to, at minimum, a fine of not less than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) per occurrence. 
(Ord. No. 13-O-0002, § 2, 6-3-2013)  
ARTICLE XIX. - CANNABIS BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENTS PROHIBITED 
 
Sec. 9-744. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases shall, for the purposes of this article, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section, as follows: 
Adult use cannabis business establishments include adult use cannabis cultivation centers (not including medical cannabis cultivation centers as set forth in the West Chicago Zoning Code), adult use cannabis craft growers, adult use cannabis processing organizations, adult use cannabis dispensing organizations (not including medical cannabis dispensing organizations as set forth in the West Chicago Zoning Code), and adult use cannabis transporting organizations. 
Adult use cannabis craft grower means a facility operated by an organization or business that is licensed by the state department of agriculture to cultivate, dry, cure and package cannabis and perform other necessary activities to make cannabis available for sale at a dispensing organization or use at a processing organization, per the definition of craft grower as set forth in the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, (P.A. 101-0027), as may be amended from time-to-time, and regulations promulgated thereunder. 
Adult use cannabis cultivation center means a facility operated by an organization or business that is licensed by the state department of agriculture to cultivate, process, transport and perform necessary activities to provide cannabis and cannabis-infused products to licensed cannabis business establishments, per the definition of cultivation center as set forth in the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, (P.A. 101-0027), as may be amended from time-to-time, and regulations promulgated thereunder. Adult use cannabis cultivation center does not include medical cannabis cultivation centers as set forth in the West Chicago Zoning Code. 
Adult use cannabis dispensing organization means a facility operated by an organization or business that is licensed by the state department of financial and professional regulation to acquire cannabis from licensed cannabis business establishments for the purpose of selling or dispensing cannabis, cannabis-infused products, cannabis seeds, paraphernalia or related supplies to purchasers or to qualified registered medical cannabis patients and caregivers, per the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, (P.A. 101-0027), as may be amended from time-to-time, and regulations promulgated thereunder. Adult use cannabis dispensing organization does not include medical cannabis dispensing organizations as set forth in the West Chicago Zoning Code. 
Adult use cannabis processing organization or processor means a facility operated by an organization or business that is licensed by the state department of agriculture to either extract constituent chemicals or compounds to produce cannabis concentrate or incorporate cannabis or cannabis concentrate into a product formulation to produce a cannabis product, per the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, (P.A. 101-0027), as may be amended from time-to-time, and regulations promulgated thereunder. 
Adult use cannabis transporting organization or transporter means an organization or business that is licensed by the state department of agriculture to transport cannabis on behalf of a cannabis business establishment or a community college licensed under the Community College Cannabis Vocational Training Pilot Program, per the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, (P.A. 101-0027), as it may be amended from time-to-time, and regulations promulgated thereunder. 
Person means a natural individual, firm, partnership, association, joint stock company, joint venture, public or private corporation, limited liability company, or a receiver, executor, trustee, guardian, or other representative appointed by order of any court. 
(Ord. No. 19-O-0036, § 1, 11-4-2019)  
Sec. 9-745. - Prohibited. 
The following adult use cannabis business establishments are prohibited from being located within the city. No person shall locate, operate, own, suffer, allow to be operated or aid, abet or assist in the operation within the city of any of the following: 
(1)  Adult use cannabis craft grower. 
(2)  Adult use cannabis cultivation center. 
(3)  Adult use cannabis dispensing organization. 
(4)  Adult use cannabis processing organization or processor. 
(5)  Adult use cannabis transporting organization or transporter. 
Cannabis business establishments do not include medical cannabis cultivation centers or medical cannabis dispensing organizations as set forth in the West Chicago Zoning Code. 
(Ord. No. 19-O-0036, § 1, 11-4-2019)  
Sec. 9-746. - Public nuisance declared. 
Operation of any prohibited adult use cannabis business establishment within the city in violation of the provisions of this article is hereby declared a public nuisance and shall be abated pursuant to all available remedies. 
(Ord. No. 19-O-0036, § 1, 11-4-2019)  
Sec. 9-747. - Violations. 
Violations of this article may be enforced in accordance with the provisions of section 1-8 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 19-O-0036, § 1, 11-4-2019)  
Chapter 10 - NUISANCES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 2638, adopted Dec. 6, 1993, repealed Ch. 10, Arts. I, II, §§ 10-1—10-4, 10-6—10-22 and added a new Ch. 10 to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 10, Arts. I, II pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1954, Ch. XXVIII, Art. I, §§ 1—3; Ord. No. 1236, adopted June 17, 1974; Ord. No. 1243, adopted Aug. 5, 1974; Ord. No. 1268, §§ 1—10, adopted May 5, 1975 and Ord. No. 1716, § 1, adopted Feb. 21, 1984. 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 4; dangerous buildings declared a nuisance, § 4-27; housing, Ch. 7; pollution control, Ch. 14; water and sewer services, Ch. 18. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 10-1. - Generally, prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful to create, continue or suffer a nuisance to exist, and each day that a nuisance shall exist, after notice to abate the same, shall be considered a separate offense. 
For the purpose of this section, whatever is offensive physically to the senses and by such offensiveness makes life uncomfortable, is a nuisance; and any act or business which causes annoyance that materially interferes with the ordinary comforts of human existence or enjoyment of property is a nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 2638, § 1, 12-6-93)  
Sec. 10-2. - Enumerated. 
The following are hereby declared nuisances, but this section does not exclude common law nuisances not enumerated herein: 
(1)  To cause or suffer the carcass of any animal or any offal, filth or noisome substance to be collected, deposited or to remain in any place to the prejudice of others. 
(2)  To throw or deposit any offal or other offensive matter, or the carcass of any dead animal in any watercourse, lake, pond, spring, well, street or public way. 
(3)  To corrupt or render unwholesome or impure the water of any spring, river, stream, pond or lake to the injury or prejudice of others. 
(4)  To obstruct or encroach upon any public highway, street, alley or public easement. 
(5)  To erect, continue or use by building or other places for the exercise of any trade, hobby, employment or manufacture, which by noxious exhalation, is offensive or dangerous to the health of individuals or of the public. 
(6)  The emission of dense smoke or noxious gases. 
(7)  Suffering any animal to disturb the peace by emission of foul odors or loud or continued noises or noises created at unusual hours. 
(8)  To permit, cause or suffer any scrub trees, bushes, flowers and/or ornamental plants to grow to such height, and/or to such density, that such growths may provide cover or concealment to persons violating the statutes of the state, violating the Code of Ordinances of the city, and/or fleeing and/or eluding law enforcement personnel, or such growths would physically hinder law enforcement personnel in the pursuit of any such persons. 
*For the purposes of this subsection "scrub trees" shall mean trees not exceeding six (6) inches in caliper as measured one (1) foot above the ground. 
(9)  To permit, cause or suffer the transmission of excessive false alarms from any alarm system within the city. For the purposes of this subsection, "alarm system" shall have the meaning ascribed to that term in section 9-650 of this Code, and "excessive false alarms" shall mean any alarm signals proscribed in section 9-655 of this Code. 
(10)  To undertake the construction, reconstruction, remodeling or demolition of a building or structure within three hundred (300) feet of a residential structure before 7:00 a.m. or after 8:00 p.m. Monday through Friday and before 8:00 a.m. or after 7:00 p.m. Saturday and Sunday, if said construction, reconstruction, remodeling or demolition causes loud noises. 
(11)  To permit the storage of garbage and/or debris on private property within the city where such storage is not otherwise authorized under the terms of this Code. 
(12)  To maintain or permit the maintenance of a massage establishment, as defined in section 9-400 of article XVIII of this Code of Ordinances: (a) that does not have a license as provided for in that article or whose license as provided for there has been revoked; (b) where massages, as defined in section 9-400 of that article, are administered by persons not licensed under the Massage Licensing Act, 225 ILCS 57/1 et seq. or (c) where sex acts, as defined as defined in section 9-400 of that article, occur on the premises of such establishment. The abatement procedure provide for in section 10-4 of this chapter shall be in addition to any other remedies provided for in chapter 9, article VXIII of this Code of Ordinances for such actions in violation of that article. 
(13)  To operate any powered lawn, tree or landscaping equipment within three hundred (300) feet of a residential structure before 7:00 a.m. or after 8:00 p.m. Monday through Friday and before 8:00 a.m. or after 8:00 p.m. Saturday and Sunday. 
Exceptions: 
a.  Lawn maintenance operations on golf courses or on publicly owned property. 
b.  Equipment specifically designed, engineered and manufactured for the purpose of snow removal. 
c.  As deemed necessary by the city administrator in the event of emergency situations or with respect to work conducted by public agencies to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public. 
(14)  To urinate or defecate in or on a public street, alley, sidewalk, yard, park, building, structure, plaza, public or utility right-of-way, or other public place other than a restroom, or in public view. For the purposes of this subsection, "public place" shall mean any place where the conduct may reasonably be expected to be viewed by others. 
(Ord. No. 2638, § 1, 12-6-93; Ord. No. 2820, § 2, 8-1-94; Ord. No. 2952, § 1, 11-6-95; Ord. No. 4259, § 2, 12-6-99; Ord. No. 04-O-0050, § 2, 5-17-2004; Ord. No. 11-O-0028, § 1, 6-20-2011; Ord. No. 13-O-0018, § 2, 6-3-2013)  
Sec. 10-3. - Weed control. 
(a)  Height. It shall be unlawful for any property owner to permit any weeds or grass to grow to a height exceeding eight (8) inches anywhere in the city; any weeds or grass exceeding such height are hereby declared to be a nuisance. This height restriction shall not apply to the cultivation and maintenance of trees, shrubs, ornamental plantings, vegetable gardens, or naturally landscaped areas as defined in section 10-5. 
(b)  Noxious, exotic and nuisance weeds. It shall be unlawful for any property owner to permit the growth of any of the following within the city regardless of height, and all of the following are hereby declared to be nuisances: 
(1)  Noxious weeds: Common ragweed, giant ragweed, marijuana, musk thistle, Canada thistle, kudzu, perennial sowthistle, soughum-almum, Queen Anne's lace, garlic mustard, Johnson grass, and any weed as defined in the Illinois Noxious Weed Law (8 IL Administrative Code 220). 
(2)  Nuisance weeds: Tall, common or European barberry, further known as Barberis vulgaris or its horticultural varieties. 
(c)  Parkway maintenance . The owner and/or occupant of any premises abutting any public street, road or way shall maintain the landscaped area between the edge of pavement or curb and their property line, commonly known as parkway, in a neat, clean and orderly condition and in conformance with the provisions of paragraphs (a) and (b) hereof. 
(d)  Notice of violation . The city shall serve or cause to be served a notice upon the owner of any premises in violation of the provisions of paragraphs (a), (b) or (c) hereof, in any of the following ways: 
(1)  By first class mail or by overnight or two-day commercial delivery service to the person to whom was sent the tax bill for the general taxes on the property for the taxable year immediately preceding the year of the violation; 
(2)  By personal service; 
(3)  By posting upon the property that is the site of the alleged violation(s); or 
(4)  By any other means permitted by law for service of civil summons. 
The notice shall state that the nuisance shall be abated within seven (7) days of the date of the notice. In the case of rental property, the city may also serve such notice on the occupant. 
(e)  Abatement . If the property owner does not abate the nuisance within seven (7) days, the city may abate such nuisance, keeping an account of the cost and date of the abatement, and such cost shall be charged to and paid by the owner. 
(f)  Privately contracted service . In the event that the city abates, or causes to be abated, a violation on any vacant property per subsection (e), or, has issued multiple notices of violation in the previous year on any vacant property, the city has the right, but not the obligation, to require the property owner to retain the services of a private contractor to maintain the height of all grass and weeds in compliance with this section. Proof of said retention shall consist of a copy of a valid, signed contract between the owner and contractor indicating that mowing services through the end of October of that year will be provided on a clearly defined schedule to prevent the height of any weeds or grass on the property from exceeding the maximum allowable height specified in subsection (a). 
(g)  Liens . The cost of removal of weeds or grass to abate a violation of this Section shall be a lien upon the real property upon which the violation occurred, in accordance with state statutes, including but not limited to 65 ILCS 5/11-20-7 and 65 ILCS 5/11-20-15. Whenever a bill for such charges remains unpaid for sixty days after it has been rendered, the City may file a notice of lien with the recorder of the county in which the property is located. The notice of lien shall be a sworn statement that includes: 
(1)  A description of the underlying parcel by legal description and PIN number; 
(2)  The amount of the removal cost; and 
(3)  The date or dates when the removal cost was incurred. 
Prior to filing the notice of lien with the county recorder, a notice shall be personally served on, or sent by certified mail to, the person to whom was sent the tax bill for the general taxes on the property for the taxable year immediately preceding the removal activities. This notice shall be provided in accordance with state statutes and shall include: 
(1)  A statement of the substance of 65 ILCS Section 5/11-20-15 and of this section 10-3; 
(2)  Identification of the underlying parcel, by common description; and 
(3)  A description of the removal activity. 
Prior to release of any lien implemented under this section, the property owner shall pay to the city an administrative fee for the direct and indirect costs of processing and recording said lien, and of preparing the documents associated with releasing said lien. The amount of the fee shall be as prescribed in Appendix G of this Code. 
The city may elect to utilize the procedures of article IX in chapter 10 of this Code in the case of an abandoned residential property (as defined therein), in lieu of the provisions of this subsection (g). 
(h)  Exceptions . Land maintained by the Dupage County Forest Preserve District and the West Chicago Park District shall be exempt from the provisions of this section 10-3. 
(Ord. No. 2638, § 1, 12-6-93; Ord. No. 02-O-0093, § 1, 8-5-2002; Ord. No. 03-O-0042, §§ 1, 2, 6-2-2003; Ord. No. 04-O-0064, § 2, 8-2-2004; Ord. No. 08-O-0061, § 1, 8-18-2008; Ord. No. 12-O-0011, § 2.1, 5-21-2012; Ord. No. 16-O-0012, § 1, 4-18-2016)  
Sec. 10-4. - Abatement procedure. 
(a)  Notice to abate. Any police officer, police cadet, inspector of the building department or health officer of the city, upon observing any violation of this chapter shall issue a notice directed to the owner of record of the property on which said nuisance occurs, as shown on the records of the recorder of deeds of DuPage County, or to the occupant of said property, or to both. Said notice shall describe the violation and shall establish a reasonable time for the abatement thereof, which time shall be not less than two (2) days nor more than ten (10) days after serving of such notice. 
(b)  Complaint by citizens. Any citizen of the city who observes a violation of this chapter may file his complaint setting forth in detail the violation, its location and the name of the owner of the property, as shown on the records of the recorder of deeds of DuPage County, or the occupant, on which such nuisance is alleged, with the chief of police or director of community development, who shall cause the appropriate police officer, police cadet, inspector of the building department or health officer of the city to investigate such charge, and if such nuisance exists, to issue a notice to the owner or occupant of the property as provided in subsection (a) above. 
(c)  Service of notice. Any police officer, police cadet or inspector of the building department or health officer of the city shall serve the notice herein provided for upon the owner or occupant of the property where such nuisance exists, or upon both of them, and shall make his return upon a copy of such notice, showing the time of service, the person upon whom it was served, or the manner in which it was served. 
(d)  Report on compliance or noncompliance by public officials. Immediately upon the termination of the time allowed in any such notice for the abatement of such nuisance, the police officer, police cadet or inspector of the building department, or health officer of the city who served such notice or any other employee who shall be assigned by the chief of police or the director of community development shall investigate to determine whether or not such nuisance has been abated. 
(e)  Abatement. If the person so served and notified does not abate the nuisance within the specified time, the corporate authorities may proceed to abate the nuisance in any and all manners allowable by law, including, without limiting the generality thereof, the following: 
(1)  In addition to any other relief granted by the courts, any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be subject to a fine per section 1-8, general penalty, of this Code. 
For purposes of this subsection, and in determining the appropriate amount due hereunder: 
a.  A separate offense shall be determined to have been committed each day during which or on which the violation occurs or continues. 
b.  All violations of any provision of this article that are committed by the same person, or any firm controlled by such person, shall be counted, regardless of whether or not the violations occur at the same location. 
c.  Any finding or plea of guilty or no contest upon a citation shall be deemed a violation. 
(2)  Seeking to enjoin the continuation of the nuisance by the filing of a lawsuit in a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(3)  In the case of garbage or debris on the property in violation of section 10-2(11), entering upon the property to abate said nuisance, in which case, the city shall keep an account of the expense of the abatement and such expense shall be charged and paid by such owner or occupant. Such expense shall be a lien upon the real property affected in accordance with 65 ILCS 5/11-20-13. 
(f)  Summary abatement. Whenever, in the opinion of one (1) of the city officers designated in subsection (a) of this section, the maintenance or continuation of a nuisance creates an imminent threat of serious injury to the persons or serious damage to personal or real property, and the continuation of the nuisance poses a substantial threat of injury to persons or property or a substantial threat of injury to persons or property, such officer shall proceed to abate such nuisance; provided, further, that whenever the owner or occupant or person in possession in charge or control of the real or personal property which has become a nuisance is unknown or cannot readily be found, such officer may proceed to abate such nuisance without notice. Where the abatement of a nuisance requires continuing acts by the corporate authorities beyond the initial summary abatement and any other additional emergency abatements, it shall seek abatement of such nuisance on a permanent basis through judicial process as soon as reasonably practicable. 
(Ord. No. 2638, § 1, 12-6-93; Ord. No. 4259, § 3, 12-6-99; Ord. No. 07-O-0017, § 3, 4-16-2007)  
Sec. 10-5. - Natural landscaping areas. 
(a)  Purpose. The use of wildflowers, native grasses and other native plants in a managed landscape design can be economical, low-maintenance and effective in soil and water conservation. The intent of this section is to allow property owners to install, cultivate, and maintain natural plantings, not to allow vegetated areas to be unmanaged or overgrown. The presence of any of the noxious or nuisance weeds listed in section 10-3, or of common turf grass species or common weeds growing above eight (8) inches in height, is an indicator of neglect and shall not be considered an allowable element of any natural landscaping area. 
(b)  Natural landscaping area defined. A natural landscaping area is any open area of a lot that is purposefully planted, cultivated and maintained with native herbaceous plants, wildflowers, or other plantings planted and/or designed to establish and maintain a natural appearance. 
(c)  Native herbaceous plants defined. A native herbaceous plant shall include any species of herbaceous plant designated as native or naturalized in commonly accepted scientific publications such as "Plants of the Chicago Region," by Floyd Swink and Gerould Wilhelm (1994), "Wildflowers of the Tallgrass Prairie, the Upper Midwest," by Sylvan T. Runkel and Dean M. Roosa (1989), and "Field Guide to North American Wildflowers, Eastern Region," by the Audubon Society (1979). 
(d)  Natural landscaping areas permitted. Natural landscaping areas shall be permitted on any lot, subject to the following restrictions and requirements: 
(1)  Annual cutting. Wildflower and native herbaceous forbs and grasses within natural landscaping areas shall be mowed or cut to eighteen (18) inches or less at least once prior to June 1 of each calendar year. 
(2)  Natural landscaping areas shall be at least one (1) foot from any corner side, interior side or rear lot lines. 
(3)  Natural landscaping areas shall not cover more than thirty (30) percent of a parcel. 
(4)  Natural landscaping areas shall not be located or maintained in the public right-of-way, unless installed or maintained by the appropriate government agency responsible for maintenance of the right-of-way. 
(5)  Natural landscaping areas shall not be located or maintained so that they obstruct the view of motorists at any intersection of public streets. 
(6)  A permit shall be required for any natural landscaping area that exceeds five thousand (5,000) square feet of the area of any lot. 
a.  Application for permit. Permit applications shall include a site plan drawn to scale on a plat of survey, the location of the plant materials, a list of plant materials by common name, north arrow, location of structures, fences and paved areas, and a maintenance schedule showing approximate dates and frequency of annual cutting, weed control, and monitoring for encroachment onto adjoining property or public sidewalks. 
b.  Review . The city shall issue the permit if the application complies with the provisions hereof. 
c.  Term . The term of natural landscaping permits shall be perpetual, unless terminated. The permit shall run with the land and be binding upon and inure to the benefit of the owner and its successors in title. Permits shall not be required annually after the first issuance unless a change is to be made. 
(e)  Enforcement . If an owner or one in control of a plot of ground used as a natural landscaping area violates any part of this section, the abatement procedure in section 10-3 shall be enforced. 
(Ord. No. 12-O-0011, § 2.2, 5-21-2012; Ord. No. 16-O-0012, § 2, 4-18-2016) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 12-O-0011, § 2.2, adopted May, 21, 2012, repealed the former § 10-5 and enacted a new § 10-5 as set out herein. The former section pertained to private naturally landscaped lots and derived from Ord. No. 02-O-0093, adopted Aug. 5, 2002.  
Secs. 10-6—10-15. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - VACANT AND INOPERATIVE SERVICE STATIONS 
 
Sec. 10-16. - Purpose. 
The council, having found and determined that the existence of closed, vacant and inoperative automobile service stations constitutes a danger to the public health, safety, comfort and welfare in that such conditions lead to unsightliness, blight, fire, hazards, infestation, decreasing values to surrounding properties, and vandalism, and that such abuses of property entitle this city to exercise its police powers to protect the health, safety, comfort and welfare of the community, intends the following regulations to provide for the orderly abatement and disposition of closed, vacant and inoperative automobile service stations which are determined, in accordance with the provisions contained herein, to constitute a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 2638, § 1, 12-6-93)  
Sec. 10-17. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article the following words shall have the meanings indicated unless their context clearly requires otherwise: 
Abandoned service station means an automobile service station where the owner or lessee has failed to operate such station for at least three (3) consecutive months. 
Automobile service station means any site where the buildings are designed, built and operated for the purpose of dispensing and selling fuels for internal-combustion engines. 
Condition of nonuse means a situation in which: 
(1)  When all of the subsurface tanks used for storage of flammable substances at an automobile service station site have been permanently filled or removed, the council may, upon making a finding that the site can no longer be reasonably used for an automobile service station, declare the site and all buildings thereon to be closed, vacant and inoperative and the conditions constitute nonuse; or 
(2)  After a voluntary discontinuance of an automobile service station as a nonconforming use, the council may find that such discontinuance constitutes nonuse. 
Service facilities means all signs, sign poles, canopies, poles, and supports, and all other buildings besides main building on site related to service station operations and its accessory uses and all above ground and below ground storage tanks, pipes, pumps or equipment which have previously contained any flammable substances. 
(Ord. No. 2638, § 1, 12-6-93)  
Sec. 10-18. - Nuisance declared. 
Any automobile service station which is an abandoned service station or in a condition of nonuse is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, unless: 
(1)  All service facilities have been removed in accordance with applicable federal, state and local statutes, ordinances, rules and regulations, and all excavations filled; 
(2)  Wheel blocks, firmly attached, have been installed across all driveway entrances so as to prohibit unauthorized vehicle parking, or abandonment of vehicles, upon the automobile service station; and, 
(3)  The main building has been secured so as to prevent unauthorized entrance and/or breakage of glass panels or windows. 
No automobile service station shall be converted to any other use unless and until all service facilities have been removed in accordance with all applicable federal, state and local statutes, ordinances, rules and regulations, and all excavations have been filled. 
(Ord. No. 2638, § 1, 12-6-93)  
Sec. 10-19. - Compliance with article prerequisite to issuance of permit for new station. 
No permit or other authorization for the construction or operation of any new service station shall be granted until the prospective owner of such station has abated any other service station in a condition of nonuse or abandonment which he may own in the city. 
(Ord. No. 2638, § 1, 12-6-93)  
ARTICLE III. - VEHICLES PARKED FOR THE PRIMARY PURPOSE OF SALE 
 
Sec. 10-20. - Purpose. 
The council, having found and determined that the parking of vehicles, for the primary purpose of sale, in public or quasi public parking lots within one hundred (100) feet of the right-of-way of any street or highway within the city, to be detrimental to the public health, safety, comfort and welfare in that such conditions lead to unsightliness, blight, fire hazards, decreasing values to the properties upon which such vehicles are parked and surrounding properties, and vandalism, and that such conditions entitle the city to exercise its police powers to protect the health, safety, comfort and welfare of the community, and intends the following regulations to provide for the abatement of such parking of vehicles, which are determined to constitute a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 2638, § 1, 12-6-93)  
Sec. 10-21. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following words shall have the meanings indicated unless their context clearly requires otherwise: 
Parked for the primary purpose of sale means the vehicle is parked with signs or markings clearly indicating that the vehicle is offered for sale and that said vehicle is not being used for any purpose other than offering the vehicle for sale. It is presumed, in the event a vehicle is parked in excess of four (4) hours at one (1) location with signs or markings indicating the vehicle is for sale, that it is parked for the primary purpose of sale. 
Quasipublic parking lots means any off-street parking area designated for the use of the general public who have business or some other type of function at the premises where the parking lot is located. 
(Ord. No. 2638, § 1, 12-6-93)  
Sec. 10-22. - Nuisance declared. 
Any vehicle parked for the primary purpose of sale in any public or quasipublic parking lot and located within one hundred (100) feet of the right-of-way of any street or highway within the city is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, except where such vehicle is parked in a quasipublic parking lot which is owned and operated by a person or entity which is lawfully engaged in the business of selling such vehicles and in compliance with all applicable federal, state and local statutes, ordinances, rules and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2638, § 1, 12-6-93)  
ARTICLE IV. - INOPERABLE, ABANDONED AND IMPROPERLY STORED MOTOR VEHICLES 
 
Sec. 10-23. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the following words shall have the meanings indicated unless their context clearly requires otherwise: 
Abandoned vehicle. Any motor vehicle in a state of disrepair rendering the vehicle incapable of being driven in its condition; or any motor vehicle that has not been moved or used for seven (7) consecutive days or more and is apparently deserted. 
Antique vehicle. Any motor vehicle twenty-five (25) years of age or older. 
Improperly stored motor vehicle. Any motor vehicle which is inoperable, abandoned, or improperly registered or licensed, which for a period of seven (7) days or greater, has been parked, stored, left, kept, or permitted to be parked, stored, left, or kept, within the corporate limits of the city. 
Inoperable motor vehicle. Any motor vehicle from which, for a period of seven (7) days or greater, the engine, wheels or other parts have been removed, altered or damaged or otherwise so treated such that it is incapable of being driven under its own motor power. "Inoperable motor vehicle" shall not include a motor vehicle, which has been rendered temporarily incapable of being driven under its own motor power in order to perform ordinary service or repair operations. 
Motor vehicle. Any vehicle, which is self, propelled and designed to travel along the ground and shall include, but not be limited to automobiles, buses, motorbikes, motorcycles, motorscooters, trucks, tractors, gocarts, golf carts, campers and trailers. 
Owner. The registered owner, lien holder or other person legally entitled to possession of the inoperable, abandoned, or improperly stored motor vehicle. 
Private property. Any real property within the city which is privately owned and which is not public property as defined in this section. 
Public property. Any street of highway which shall include the entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained for the purposes of vehicular travel, and shall also mean any other publicly owned property or facility. 
(Ord. No. 4259, § 4, 12-6-99; Ord. No. 03-O-0065, § 1, 9-2-2003)  
Sec. 10-24. - Inoperable motor vehicles prohibited. 
No person shall park, store, leave, or permit the parking, storing, or leaving of any inoperable motor vehicle, upon any public or private property within the city. The presence of an inoperable motor vehicle on public or private property is hereby declared a public nuisance which may be abated as such in accordance with the provisions herein. This section shall not apply to (a) any vehicle enclosed within a building on private property, (b) to any vehicle held in connection with a business enterprise, lawfully licensed by the state and properly operated in the appropriate business zone, pursuant to the zoning laws of the city, (c) any antique vehicle, or (d) to any vehicle stored in an appropriate storage place or depository maintained in a lawful place and manner by the city or any other public agency or entity. 
(Ord. No. 4259, § 4, 12-6-99)  
Sec. 10-25. - Abandoned motor vehicles prohibited. 
(a)  Abandonment on public ways: The abandonment of a motor vehicle or other vehicle or any part thereof on any highway in the city is unlawful and subject to penalties as set forth herein. 
(b)  Abandonment on public or private property: The abandonment of a motor vehicle or other vehicle or any part thereof on private or public property, other than a highway, in view of the general public anywhere in the city is unlawful except on property of the owner or bailee of such abandoned vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 4259, § 4, 12-6-99)  
Sec. 10-25.1. - Improperly stored motor vehicles prohibited. 
No person shall improperly store a motor vehicle on any property within the corporate limits of the city, unless the motor vehicle is stored within an enclosed structure. For purposes of this section, any motor vehicle which does not maintain current vehicle license plates, shall be presumed to be improperly registered. 
(Ord. No. 03-O-0065, § 1, 9-2-2003)  
Sec. 10-26. - Police to be notified of vehicle possession. 
When an abandoned or improperly stored motor vehicle or other vehicle comes into the temporary possession or custody of a person in the city and that person is not the owner of the vehicle, then that person shall immediately notify the city police department when the vehicle is within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 4259, § 4, 12-6-99; Ord. No. 03-O-0065, § 1, 9-2-2003)  
Sec. 10-27. - Removal of inoperable, abandoned, or improperly stored vehicles. 
An inoperable, abandoned, or improperly stored motor vehicle may be authorized for removal by or upon the order of the chief of police, after a waiting period of seven (7) days or more has expired. Notice and an opportunity for hearing to the owner or lien holder prior to such removal shall be given in accordance with sections 10-28 and 10-29 herein; provided, however, that if such inoperable, abandoned, or improperly stored motor vehicle is creating a traffic hazard because of its relation to the roadway or its physical appearance is causing the impeding traffic, or otherwise creates an imminent threat of serious injury to the persons or serious damage to personal or real property, its immediate removal from the roadway by a towing service may be authorized by order of the chief of police or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 4259, § 4, 12-6-99; Ord. No. 03-O-0065, § 1, 9-2-2003)  
Sec. 10-28. - Notice to remove. 
Notice shall be given to the owner of the inoperable, abandoned, or improperly stored motor vehicle if such owner can be ascertained, said notice to contain the following: 
(a)  The legal and factual basis for the presumption that the motor vehicle is an inoperable, abandoned, or improperly stored motor vehicle; 
(b)  A request for the removal of the vehicle; 
(c)  The date by which such removal must be accomplished (or vehicle otherwise brought into compliance with this article), such date to be seven (7) days from the date of the notice; 
(d)  A statement that upon the failure to comply with the notice to remove the vehicle, the city or its designee shall undertake such removal with the cost of such removal to be levied against the owner of the inoperable, abandoned, or improperly stored motor vehicle; 
(e)  A statement that the person(s) to whom the notice is served may file a written request for hearing before the city council of the city or its designee within the seven (7) day period of compliance for the purpose of defending the charges by the city. 
Such notice shall be posted on the inoperable, abandoned, or improperly stored motor vehicle and copies of such notice shall be either be personally served or sent via certified mail, return receipt requested, to the owner of the inoperable, abandoned, or improperly stored motor vehicle, if such owner can be ascertained. 
(Ord. No. 4259, § 4, 12-6-99; Ord. No. 03-O-0065, § 1, 9-2-2003)  
Sec. 10-29. - Hearing. 
If properly requested, the hearing shall be held as soon as practicable after the filing of the request and the persons to whom the notices are directed shall be advised of the time and place of said hearing at least two (2) days in advance thereof. At any such hearing, the city and the persons to whom the notices have been directed may introduce such witnesses and evidence as either party deems necessary. 
(Ord. No. 4259, § 4, 12-6-99)  
Sec. 10-30. - Notice of removal. 
Within ten (10) business days of the removal of such inoperable, abandoned, or improperly stored motor vehicle (or, if the identity of the owner is not ascertained within such time, then within two (2) days after such information is ascertained), the chief of police or his designee shall give notice via certified mail, return receipt requested, to the owner of the inoperable, abandoned, or improperly stored motor vehicle, that said vehicle has been impounded and stored for violation of this chapter. The notice shall: 
(a)  Give the location where the vehicle is stored; 
(b)  State the costs incurred by the city for removal; 
(c)  Request a disposition of the motor vehicle; and 
(d)  Set forth the public sale information, if applicable. 
If said vehicle displays dealer plates, notice shall be sent to both the dealer and the owner. When the city's police department does not know the identity of the owner of the inoperable, abandoned, or improperly stored motor vehicle, it shall cause the motor vehicle registration records of the state to be searched by the secretary of state for the purpose of obtaining the required ownership information. 
The police department will cause the stolen motor vehicle files of the state police to be searched by a directed communication to the state police for stolen or wanted information on the vehicle. When the state police files are searched with negative results, the information contained in the National Crime Information Center (NCIC) files will be searched by the state police. The information determined from these record searches will be used by the police department in sending the above described notice. 
(Ord. No. 4259, § 4, 12-6-99; Ord. No. 03-O-0065, § 1, 9-2-2003)  
Sec. 10-31. - Disposition of inoperable, abandoned, or improperly stored motor vehicle. 
(a)  Whenever an inoperable, abandoned, or improperly stored motor vehicle, seven (7) years of age or newer, remains unclaimed by the owner for a period of thirty (30) days after notice has been given as required by section 10-30, the police department shall cause it to be sold at public auction to a person licensed as an automotive parts recycler, rebuilder or scrap processor or the towing operator that towed the vehicle. 
Notice of the time and place of the sale shall be posted in a conspicuous place for at least ten (10) days prior to the sale on the premises where the vehicle has been impounded. At least ten (10) days prior to the sale, the police department shall cause a notice of the time and place of the sale to be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the owner. Such notice shall state the time and place of the sale and shall contain a complete description of the vehicle to be sold, and what steps must be taken by the owner to reclaim the vehicle. Said notice may be sent with the notice required by section 10-30. If said vehicle displays dealer plates, notice shall be sent to both the dealer and the owner. 
In those instances where the certified notification specified in section 10-30 has been returned by the postal authorities to the police department the sending of a notice under this subsection (a) will not be required. 
(b)  When an inoperable, abandoned, or improperly stored motor vehicle of more than seven (7) years of age remains unclaimed for a period of thirty (30) days after notice has been given pursuant to section 10-30, the chief of police will authorize the disposal of the vehicle as junk or salvage. A vehicle classified as an antique vehicle may however be sold to a person desiring to restore it. 
(c)  When the identity of the owner of an inoperable, abandoned, or improperly stored motor vehicle cannot be determined by any means provided for herein, the vehicle may be sold as provided herein or disposed of in the manner authorized by subsection (a) or (b) hereof without notice to the owner. 
(d)  When an inoperable, abandoned, or improperly stored motor vehicle in the custody of the police department is claimed by the owner, or when the vehicle is sold at public sale or otherwise disposed of as provided herein, a report of the transaction will be maintained by the police department for a period of one (1) year from the date of the sale or disposal. 
(Ord. No. 4259, § 4, 12-6-99; Ord. No. 03-O-0065, § 1, 9-2-2003)  
Sec. 10-32. - Redemption of impounded vehicles. 
The owner of any inoperable, abandoned, or improperly stored motor vehicle seized under the provisions of this chapter may redeem such vehicle at any time after its removal but prior to the disposition thereof upon proof of ownership and payment to the city of the reasonable expense of the removal, storage and any preliminary sale advertising expenses. 
(Ord. No. 4259, § 4, 12-6-99; Ord. No. 03-O-0065, § 1, 9-2-2003)  
Sec. 10-33. - Penalty. 
In addition to or in lieu of removal of such inoperable, abandoned, or improperly stored vehicle, the corporate authorities may proceed in any and all manners allowable by law, including, without limiting the generality thereof, the following: 
(1)  In addition to any other relief granted by the courts, any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be subject to a fine per section 1-8, general penalty, of this Code. 
For purposes of this subsection, and in determining the appropriate amount due hereunder: 
a.  A separate offense shall be determined to have been committed each day during which or on which the violation occurs or continues. 
b.  All violations of any provision of this article that are committed by the same person, or any firm controlled by such person, shall be counted, regardless of whether or not the violations occur at the same location. 
c.  Any finding or plea of guilty or no contest upon a citation shall be deemed a violation. 
(2)  Seeking to enjoin the continuation of the nuisance by the filing of a lawsuit in a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 4259, § 4, 12-6-99; Ord. No. 03-O-0065, § 1, 9-2-2003; Ord. No. 07-O-0017, § 4, 4-16-2007)  
Sec. 10-34. - Proceeds of sale. 
When a vehicle located within the corporate limits of the city is authorized to be towed away by the chief of police and disposed of as set forth in this chapter, the proceeds of the public sale or disposition after the deduction of towing, storage and processing charges shall be deposited in the general fund of the municipal treasury. 
(Ord. No. 4259, § 4, 12-6-99)  
Sec. 10-35. - Nonliability of the city and towing service. 
Any police officer, towing service owner, operator or employee shall not be held to answer or be liable for damages in any action brought by the owner of a motor vehicle or other vehicle when the vehicle was processed and sold or disposed of as provided by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 4259, § 4, 12-6-99)  
ARTICLE V. - NOISE CONTROL REGULATION 
 
Sec. 10-36. - Definitions. 
All terms used in this article not otherwise defined herein shall have the meanings set forth in applicable publications of the American National Standard Institute (ANSI) or its successor body. 
(Ord. No. 4375, § 1, 11-6-2000)  
Sec. 10-37. - Day hours. 
No person shall cause or allow the emission of sound during daytime hours (7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.) from any noise source to any receiving residential land which exceeds sixty (60) dBA when measured at any point within such receiving residential land; provided, however, that point of measurement shall be on the property line of the receiving land. 
(Ord. No. 4375, § 1, 11-6-2000)  
Sec. 10-38. - Night hours. 
No person shall cause or allow the emission of sound during night time hours (10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.) from any noise source to any receiving residential land which exceeds fifty-five (55) dBA when measured at any point within such receiving residential land; provided, however, that point of measurement shall be on the property line of the receiving land. 
(Ord. No. 4375, § 1, 11-6-2000)  
Sec. 10-39. - Variance permits. 
Variance permits may be issued, in writing, by the city administrator, or his designee, to exceed the noise standards set forth in this article as follows: 
(1)  A temporary variance permit may be issued upon request, provided that the work producing such noise is necessary to promote the public health and/or welfare and reasonable steps are taken to keep such noise at the lowest possible practical level. 
(2)  A permanent variance permit may be issued upon request, following an investigation into the source of the noise, including what, if any, measures can be taken to reduce or eliminate the noise, the cost of any such measure, and an overall evaluation of the request, including the severity of the problem weighed against the cost of remedial measures, the benefit of the public and the impact on the noise source. 
Any permanent variance may be revoked by the city administrator, or his designee, if there is a significant change in the facts from the time the original variance was granted and if, following the same procedures involved in issuing the original permit, the city administrator, or his designee, should conclude it is in the best interest of the public to revoke the permit. 
(Ord. No. 4375, § 1, 11-6-2000)  
Sec. 10-40. - Exemptions. 
The following uses, activities and/or noises are exempt from the provisions of this article: 
(1)  Emergency operations. Emergency short term operations which are necessary to protect the health and welfare of the citizens, such as emergency utility and street repair, fallen tree removal or emergency fuel oil delivery shall be exempt, provided that reasonable steps shall be taken by those in charge of such operations to minimize noise emanating from the same. 
(2)  Noises required by law. Any noise required specifically by law for the protection or safety of people or property, including, but not necessarily limited to, back-up alarms on trucks and police/fire/ambulance sirens. 
(3)  Lawn maintenance and snow removal equipment. Any powered or non-powered equipment which is deemed necessary for the purpose of snow removal or lawn maintenance by the property owner. However, lawn maintenance equipment, even when used to remove snow, may only be used after 7:00 a.m. or before 8:00 p.m. Monday through Friday and after 8:00 a.m. or before 8:00 p.m. Saturday and Sunday. The equipment must be kept in good repair and maintained. 
(4)  Community events. Community events such as parades, festivals, sports events, 4 th of July celebrations and other events sanctioned or sponsored in whole or in part by local governments, schools or charitable or service organizations. 
(5)  Emergency notification. Noise made to alert persons to the existence of an emergency, danger or attempted crime. 
(6)  Aircraft. Aircraft operated in conformity with, or pursuant to, federal law and regulations and any aircraft operating under technical difficulties or in any kind of distress. 
(7)  Trains. Noise resulting from normal operations of railroad trains. 
(8)  Church bells. Noise made by churches using bells as part of their religious observance. 
(Ord. No. 4375, § 1, 11-6-2000; Ord. No. 11-O-0028, § 1, 6-20-2011)  
Sec. 10-41. - Electronic sound systems. 
The use within a dwelling unit of a stationary or portable electronic sound reinforcement and/or sound reproduction system utilizing loudspeakers, such that loud or raucous sounds radiate from the dwelling unit and are clearly audible from a distance of fifty (50) feet from such dwelling unit, or, if said dwelling unit is part of a multi-family building, are clearly audible beyond the perimeter of the dwelling unit, shall be prohibited during the following hours: 
Sunday 	10:00 p.m. 	- 	Monday 	7:00 a.m. 
Monday 	10:00 p.m. 	- 	Tuesday 	7:00 a.m. 
Tuesday 	10:00 p.m. 	- 	Wednesday 	7:00 a.m. 
Wednesday 	10:00 p.m. 	- 	Thursday 	7:00 a.m. 
Thursday 	10:00 p.m. 	- 	Friday 	7:00 a.m. 
Friday 	12:00 midnight 	- 	Saturday 	7:00 a.m. 
Saturday 	12:00 midnight 	- 	Sunday 	7:00 a.m. 
 
(Ord. No. 4375, § 1, 11-6-2000)  
Sec. 10-42. - Nuisance declared. 
Violation of any of the provisions of this article is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 4375, § 1, 11-6-2000)  
Sec. 10-43. - Penalty. 
In addition to any other relief granted by the courts, any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be subject to a fine per section 1-8, general penalty, of this Code. 
For purposes of this subsection, and in determining the appropriate amount due hereunder: 
a.  A separate offense shall be determined to have been committed each day during which or on which the violation occurs or continues. 
b.  All violations of any provision of this article that are committed by the same person, or any firm controlled by such person, shall be counted, regardless of whether or not the violations occur at the same location. 
c.  Any finding or plea of guilty or no contest upon a citation shall be deemed a violation. 
(Ord. No. 4375, § 1, 11-6-2000; Ord. No. 07-O-0017, § 5, 4-16-2007)  
ARTICLE VI. - INFESTED, DISEASED, DEAD, AND/OR DYING TREES 
 
Sec. 10-44. - Purpose. 
The city council, having found and determined that the existence of infested, diseased, dead and/or dying trees constitutes a danger to the public health, safety, comfort and welfare in that such conditions lead to blight, fire, hazards, infestation, decreasing values to surrounding properties, and decreasing woodlands, and that such neglect of property entitles this city to exercise its police powers to protect the health, safety, comfort and welfare of the community, intends the following regulations, when the city learns, or becomes aware, of the existence of said trees, to provide for the orderly abatement, disposition, and/or treatment of said tree(s) which are determined, in accordance with the provisions contained herein, to constitute a public nuisance. It is understood that the city is the owner of certain public property, some of which is not in proximity to any private property, is not accessible or used by the general public and is not subject to regular inspections, as inspecting the entirety of all city property would be both costly and time consuming. As a result, the city may not become aware of the existence of infested, diseased, dead and/or dying trees which may constitute a danger to the public health, safety, comfort and welfare. This article does not impose an affirmative obligation on the city to undertake a comprehensive inspection of all city property to assess the existence of infested, diseased, dead and/or dying trees. 
(Ord. No. 04-O-0025, § 1, 4-5-2004; Ord. No. 19-O-0029, § 1, 9-3-2019)  
Sec. 10-45. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following words shall have the meanings indicated unless their context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning: 
Authorized representative means any city employee, contractor for the city, consultant for the city, and/or any individual acting as agent of the city at the request of the city. 
Director means the Director of the Public Works Department for the City of West Chicago, or his duly authorized representative. 
Person means any owner, tenant, agent, occupant, lessee, or corporation in control of any lot, parcel, or tract of land situated within the corporate limits of the City of West Chicago. 
Pest means an insect or pathogen that poses a threat to the vitality of trees located within the corporate limits of the City of West Chicago. 
Private property means any real property within the city that is privately owned and which is not public property as defined in this section. 
Public property means any street or highway which shall include the entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained for the purposes of vehicular travel, and shall also mean any other publicly owned property or facility. 
Tree means any tree, shrub, vine, hedge, plant, stump, log, or branch existing or growing upon any property within the corporate limits of the City of West Chicago. 
(Ord. No. 04-O-0025, § 1, 4-5-2004)  
Sec. 10-46. - Nuisance declared. 
Trees of all species and varieties infected with a fungus, including, but not limited to, Ophiostoma Ulmi (formerly Ceratocystis ulmi) (commonly known as Dutch Elm Disease), and Ceratocystis fagacearum (commonly known as Oak Wilt); or which are in a dead or dying condition that may serve as breeding places for, and/or are infested with, a pest, including, but not limited to, Lymantria dispar (commonly known as Gypsy Moth), Agrilus planipennis Fairmaire (Coleoptera: Buprestidae) (commonly known as Emerald Ash Borer), Hylurgopinus rufipes (commonly known as Native Elm Bark Beetle), and Scolytus multstriatus (commonly known as European Elm Bark Beetle); or which are in a dead or dying condition and presents a falling hazard to person or property, are hereby declared to be a public nuisance, and shall be removed and properly disposed, or properly treated for the purpose of eradication of such pest. 
(Ord. No. 04-O-0025, § 1, 4-5-2004)  
Sec. 10-47. - Enforcement of article. 
The director is charged with enforcement of this article. The director when he learns or becomes aware of the existence of infested, diseased, dead and/or dying trees shall exercise his discretion to determine whether such trees constitute a danger, as provided herein. To that end, the director is duly authorized and empowered to enter upon private property, after having made reasonable attempts to first obtain permission from the owner, tenant, agent or occupant of the premises where the same are situated, utilizing minimally intrusive means to enter upon private property, at all reasonable hours for purposes of inspecting trees thereon, which, in the discretion of the director he believes are a nuisance, as provided for herein. The director may remove such specimens which he reasonably believes are infested, diseased, dead and/or dying and are required for purposes of analysis to determine whether or not the same are infected, infested, diseased, dead and/or dying. It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent the director from entering on private property for purposes of carrying out his duties under this article, or to interfere with the director in the lawful performance of his duties under the provisions of this article. It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly permit or maintain therein any tree that is infested, diseased, dead and/or dying. 
(Ord. No. 04-O-0025, § 1, 4-5-2004; Ord. No. 19-O-0029, § 1, 9-3-2019)  
Sec. 10-48. - Notice for removal. 
If a tree on private property is declared to be a public nuisance pursuant to this article, the director shall give the owner, tenant, agent or occupant of the premises where the same are situated, written notice by certified mail, or personal service, of the existence of such condition of such tree or part(s) thereof and require the treatment or removal and proper disposal of same. Such notice shall clearly identify to the person that if said tree or part(s) thereof are not removed and properly disposed of, or treated for the purpose of eradication of such pest, within thirty (30) calendar days of notice, that such failure to remove shall subject the owner to the provisions detailed in section 10-49 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 04-O-0025, § 1, 4-5-2004)  
Sec. 10-49. - Removal from private lands. 
If the person upon whom due notice has been served, pursuant to the provisions of the proceeding sections, fails, neglects, or refuses to remove and properly dispose of such tree, or treat for the purpose of eradication of such pest, within thirty (30) calendar days of the date of the notice, as provided for herein, the director may cause such tree which the director reasonably believes to be infested, diseased, dead and/or dying trees to be removed and properly disposed, or treated for the purpose of eradication of such pest, and assess costs thereof against the owner of such parcel of land where the same were situated. Time extensions may be granted, by the director, only upon receipt of a written request for such time extensions by the person upon whom due notice has been served. All requests for time extensions must provide reason for said extension and must be received within the time provided for said removal. All reasonable requests for an extension of time will be considered and will be granted when, in the discretion of the director, or his duly authorized representative, it is determined that the extension will not result in an immediate danger to the public health, safety, comfort and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 04-O-0025, § 1, 4-5-2004; Ord. No. 19-O-0029, § 1, 9-3-2019)  
Sec. 10-50. - Action by city pending magnitude of problem 
If it can be documented, by two (2) independent certified arborists, that the scope of treatment required to regulate or eradicate a pest is of a significant magnitude so as to constitute a matter of public health interest to the city as a whole, necessary to preserve the health and welfare of the general public, then the city council may, through the adoption of a resolution, direct the director to cause such trees to be removed and properly disposed, or treated for the purpose of eradication of such pest, without assessing costs thereof against the owner(s) of such parcel(s) of land where the same were situated. 
(Ord. No. 04-O-0025, § 1, 4-5-2004)  
Sec. 10-51. - City obligation for public lands. 
The city owns various types of real property throughout the city. While the city is diligent in its efforts to maintain all public property, it can prove difficult, time consuming and costly to the taxpayers for the city to inventory the consolidation of all trees on city property. Some of the properties owned by the city consist of large tracts of land and are not easily accessible by the general public or city staff. 
It shall be the policy of the city that the director, with respect to tracts of land in excess of two and one-half (2.5) acres or one hundred eight thousand nine hundred (108,900) square feet, that cannot be reasonably inspected with any consistency or regularity to determine the existence of infested, diseased. dead and/or dying trees which constitute a danger to the public health, safety, comfort and welfare. When the city is on actual notice that infested, diseased, dead and/or dying trees are present within its jurisdiction, the director shall exercise his enforcement powers, as provided for herein. Any individual with questions as to the health of a tree, or portion thereof, shall immediately notify the city as to said conditions. 
(Ord. No. 19-O-0029, § 1, 9-3-2019)  
ARTICLE VII. - CHRONIC NUISANCE PROPERTY ABATEMENT 
 
Sec. 10-52. - Violation. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any property within the city to become or remain a chronic nuisance property in violation of this article. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person or person in charge to: 
(1)  Encourage or permit a property to become a chronic nuisance property; and 
(2)  Allow a property to continue as a chronic nuisance property. 
(c)  Each day that a violation of this article continues shall be considered a separate and distinct offense. 
(Ord. No. 08-O-0065, § 2, 9-2-2008)  
Sec. 10-53. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Chief of police means the chief of police of the City of West Chicago or his/her designee. 
Community development director means the director of the community development department of the City of West Chicago or his/ her designee. 
Chronic nuisance property means property upon which three or more nuisance activities within any 12-month period have occurred as a result of any three separate nuisance activities that have been investigated by the West Chicago Police Department or other law enforcement agency. "Code" means the Code of Ordinances of the City of West Chicago. 
Control means the authority to actually manage or administer Property or the authority or ability to regulate, restrain, dominate, counteract, or govern conduct that occurs on Property. 
Nuisance activity means any of the following activities, behaviors, or conduct, as defined by federal, state, or city ordinance as stated: 
(1)  Disorderly conduct as defined in 720 ILCS 5/26-1. 
(2)  Unlawful use of weapons as defined in 720 ILCS 5/24-1 et seq. 
(3)  Mob action as defined in 720 ILCS 5/25-1. 
(4)  Discharge of a firearm as defined in 720 ILCS 5/24-1.2 and 1.5. 
(5)  Gambling as defined by 720 ILCS 5/28-1. 
(6)  Possession, manufacture, or delivery of controlled substances as defined by 720 ILCS 570/401 et seq. 
(7)  Public indecency as defined by 720 ILCS 5/11-9. 
(8)  Assault or battery or any related offense as defined in 720 ILCS 5/12-1 et seq. 
(9)  Sexual abuse or related offense as defined in 720 ILCS 5/12-15 et seq. 
(10)  Prostitution as defined in 720 ILCS 5/11-14 et seq. 
(11)  Criminal damage to property as defined in 720 ILCS 5/21-1 et seq. 
(12)  Possession, cultivation, manufacture, or delivery of cannabis as defined in 720 ILCS 550/1 et seq. 
(13)  Illegal consumption or possession of alcohol as defined in 235 ILCS 5/1 et seq. 
(14)  Criminal housing management defined in 720 ILCS 5/12-5.1. 
(15)  Structure unfit for human occupancy as defined in the city's property maintenance code. 
(16)  Dangerous structure as defined in section 4-26 of this Code. 
(17)  Any unlawful structure as provided for in section 7-16 of this Code. 
(18)  Any violation of section 7-16 of the Code continuing after disposition of a housing court complaint therefore and the expiration of any court-ordered time to correct such violation. 
(19)  Activity that constitutes a violation of a felony pursuant to federal or Illinois statute or Class A misdemeanor pursuant to Illinois statute. 
Owner means any person, partnership, trust, corporation, limited liability company or other entity having any legal or equitable interest in and control of the property. "Owner" includes, but is not limited to: 
(1)  A mortgagee-in-possession in who is vested: 
a.  All or part of the legal title to the property; and 
b.  All or part of the beneficial ownership and the rights to the present use and enjoyment of the premises. 
(2)  Any person acting as a manager, administrator, or an agent of an owner for the property. 
Owner of record means any person shown on the records of the DuPage County Recorder as having legal title to property regardless of whether that person shall have control of the property. 
Permit means to suffer, allow, consent to, acquiesce by failure to prevent, or expressly assent or agree to the doing of an act. 
Person means any natural person, association, partnership, corporation, limited liability company, trust, or other entity. 
Person in control means any owner, lessee, occupant, or person in actual or constructive possession of a property or his or her agent. 
Property means any real property, including land and that which is affixed, incidental, or pertinent to land, including but not limited to, any premises, room, house, building, or structure, or any apartment, unit, or separate part or portion thereof, whether permitted or not. 
(Ord. No. 08-O-0065, § 2, 9-2-2008)  
Sec. 10-54. - Procedure. 
When the chief of police or the community development director receives two or more police reports, or two or more citizen complaints which have been investigated by staff of West Chicago Police Department, any law enforcement agency, or the community development department which indicate the occurrence of a nuisance activity on or within a property, the chief of police or the director of the community development department, shall independently review such reports and make a determination whether they describe nuisance activities. Upon a determination that such reports describe nuisance activities, if the chief of police or the community development director desires to initiate enforcement proceedings, he or she shall: 
(1)  Notify the person in control, owner, and the owner of record in writing that the property is in danger of becoming a chronic nuisance property. The notice shall contain the following information: 
a.  The street address or legal description sufficient for identification of the property. 
b.  A statement that the chief of police or community development director has determined that the property may be found to be a chronic nuisance property, with a concise description of the nuisance activities comprising such determination and the source of information upon which such determination is based, except that, if the determination is based upon citizen complaints, the notice shall not disclose the names, addresses, and any other personal identifying information about the complainants. 
c.  A list of the activities, behaviors, or conduct enumerated under the definition of "nuisance activities" in this article. 
d.  If the nuisance activity is continuing, a statement that it must immediately cease and, if it does not, a specific date after which further enforcement measures may be taken. If the nuisance activity is not continuing, a statement that there may be further enforcement measures if it reoccurs or if there is an occurrence of any other nuisance activity on the property. 
(2)  Service of the notice shall be made either personally or by certified mail, postage prepaid, return, receipt requested, sent to the person in control of the property or apartment or unit thereof on which the nuisance activity occurred, or, if such property has no address, such other address as is likely to give the person in control notice of the determination by the chief of police or community development director. 
(3)  If the owner and owner of record are different from the person in control, a copy of the notice shall be served on the owner and owner of record, either personally or by certified mail, postage prepaid, return, receipt requested, at an address for him or her which the chief of police or community development director shall determine to be most valid based upon a review of the records of the DuPage County Recorder, the DuPage County tax rolls, telephone directory or other source. 
(4)  If the chief of police or community development director has given notice that the property is in danger of becoming a chronic nuisance property as provided for in this section, the failure of any person to actually receive the notice shall not invalidate or otherwise affect the proceedings under this article. 
(Ord. No. 08-O-0065, § 2, 9-2-2008)  
Sec. 10-55. - Abatement. 
(a)  If nuisance activity continues to occur on any property after notice thereof has been sent to the person in control and, if required, to the owner of record thereof, in accordance with section 10-53 (c) of this article, and, as a consequence of such continued nuisance activity, the chief of police or the community development director determines that the property constitutes chronic nuisance property, they may proceed to enforce the abatement thereof by bringing proceedings under the city's administrative adjudication system, as provided for in chapter 8, article I, sections 8-1 et seq., of this Code, or by action filed in the appropriate court of law. 
(1)  Proceedings under the city's administrative adjudication system. The provisions of chapter 8, article I, sections 8-1 through 8-12 and section 8-14, of this Code shall be applicable to all proceedings brought under the city's administrative adjudication system to enforce abatement of chronic nuisance property. In addition to naming the person in control as an offender, the administrative adjudication charging document shall name the owner and the owner of record, if persons different from the person in control. 
(2)  Judicial enforcement proceedings. 
a.  A complaint in the name of the city may be filed in the court of appropriate jurisdiction to enforce abatement of a chronic nuisance property. In addition to naming the person in control and any other appropriate person as a defendant, the complaint shall also name the owner and owner of record as a defendant, if a person different from the person in control. 
b.  Upon being satisfied by affidavits or other sworn evidence that an alleged chronic nuisance property exists, the court may, without notice or bond, enter a temporary restraining order or a preliminary injunction to enjoin any defendant from maintaining such nuisance, and may enter an order restraining any defendant from removing or interfering with all property used in connection with the chronic nuisance property. 
c.  The city shall have the initial burden of showing by a preponderance of the evidence that the property is a chronic nuisance property. 
(Ord. No. 08-O-0065, § 2, 9-2-2008)  
Sec. 10-56. - Remedies. 
(a)  In the event a court determines a property to be a chronic nuisance property, the court may order that the property be closed and secured against all use and occupancy relative to the nuisance activity for a period of not less than thirty (30) days, but not more than one hundred eighty (180) days, or the court may employ any other remedy deemed by it appropriate to abate the nuisance. In an action seeking closure of a chronic nuisance property, it is a defense that the owner, at the time in question, could not, in the exercise of reasonable care of diligence, determine that the property had become a chronic nuisance property, or could not, in spite of the exercise of reasonable care and diligence, control the conduct leading to the findings that the property is a chronic nuisance property. 
(b)  In addition to the remedy provided in subsection (a) above, the court may impose upon the person in control and/or the owner a civil penalty in the amount of not less than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) per day, payable to the City of West Chicago, for each day the person in control and/or the owner had actual knowledge that the property was a chronic nuisance property and permitted the property to remain a chronic nuisance property. In establishing the amount of any civil penalty requested, the court may consider any of the following factors if they are found appropriate, and shall cite those found applicable: 
(1)  The actions or lack of action taken by the person in control to mitigate or correct the problem at the property. 
(2)  Whether the problem at the Property was repeated or continuous. 
(3)  The magnitude or gravity of the problem. 
(4)  The cooperation of the Person in Control with the city. 
(5)  The cost of the city investigating and correcting or attempting to correct the condition. 
(c)  In determining what remedy or remedies to employ, the court may consider evidence of other conduct which has occurred on the Property, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  The disturbance of neighbors. 
(2)  The occurrence of other nuisances on or from the property. 
(3)  The property's general reputation and/or the reputation of persons in or frequenting the property. 
(d)  The court may authorize the city to physically secure the property against use or occupancy in the event the person in control or owner fails to do so within the time specified by the court. In the event that the city is authorized to secure the property, all costs reasonably incurred by the city to affect the closure shall be determined and paid or become a lien against the property as provided herein. As used herein, "costs" mean those costs actually incurred by the city for the physical securing of the property. The director of community development or chief of police shall prepare a statement of costs, and the city shall thereafter submit said statement to the court, which shall hear and rule upon any objections to the costs as presented. The court shall then enter an order against any or all of the defendants for the costs, approving them as presented by the city or as adjusted pursuant the hearing. A copy of the said order shall be served upon any person in control, owner, or owner of record who is named as a party but has not appeared in the proceedings, along with a notice state that all costs not paid within thirty (30) days may become a lien upon the property. The costs as approved by the court shall be paid within thirty (30) days of said approval or, in the case any person in control, owner, or owner of record named as a party but who has not appeared in the proceedings, within thirty (30) days of having been served with notice thereof. Any costs not so paid shall become a lien against the property by the filing thereafter with the county recorder a copy of the order approving the costs and a statement of the amount remaining due. Such lien shall be accorded priority in accordance with state statutes governing liens. 
(Ord. No. 08-O-0065, § 2, 9-2-2008)  
ARTICLE VIII. - UNSUBSCRIBED-TO PERIODICALS 
 
Sec. 10-57. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to secure to residents of the city their right to privacy within their homes and residences by authorizing them to determine and prohibit the delivery to their personal residences of unsubscribed to newspapers, magazines, journals, or other periodic publications which are not unwanted. 
(Ord. No. 10-O-0070, § 2, 9-7-2010)  
Sec. 10-58. - Definitions. 
Unsubscribed-to periodical shall mean any newspaper, magazine, journal, or other periodic publication left or placed on any part of any residential premises, including the parkway between the street and the sidewalk, where a notice has been posted on such premises in accordance with section 10-59 of this article prohibiting the leaving of such. Excluded from the definition of unsubscribed-to periodical and from the applicability of this article shall be any newspaper, magazine, journal, or other periodic publication delivered by U.S. Mail or common carrier, regardless of whether subscribed to; any newspaper, magazine, journal, or other periodic publication for which there is a current subscription deliverable to the address of the premises; and all telephone directories. 
(Ord. No. 10-O-0070, § 2, 9-7-2010)  
Sec. 10-59. - Notice. 
Every person wanting to secure the protection provided by the regulations regarding unsubscribed-to periodicals contained in this article shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  A person who desires that no unsubscribed to periodicals be left on his or her residential premises shall post a notice substantially in conformity with that in Exhibit "A" attached to this article. 
(2)  The notice shall be weather-proof. For a single-family residence or apartment, condominium or other residential unit within a multi-family residential building which has an outside entry on the front side of the structure that provides direct access to the unit, the notice shall be posted in the front of the property within thirty (30) feet of the street curb, or if no curb, within thirty (30) feet of the edge of the street pavement, on the side nearest the structure, of if there is no street in the front of the unit, within twenty (20) feet of the nearest edge of any sidewalk that is parallel to front side of the unit. The notice shall be placed so that it faces the said street or sidewalk, if there is no street in front of the unit, and shall be completely visible and unobscured by any vegetation. Where the residence is an apartment or other type of residential unit that has no outside entry on the front side of the structure which provides direct access to the unit, a notice substantially identical to that in Exhibit "A" but not less than one-quarter (1/4) of the dimensions stated there shall be posted adjacent to the U.S. Mail box or slot for said apartment or unit so that it is immediately visible at said mail box or slot. A notice placed in conformance with this paragraph shall constitute sufficient notice to every person delivering periodicals of the occupant's desire not to receive unsubscribed-to periodicals. 
(3)  Notices as authorized by this section may be provided by the chief of police or his/her designee to persons requesting them, at the cost thereof. However, no notice that otherwise conforms to this section shall be deemed defective or invalid because it was not provided by the chief of police or his/her designee. 
(4)  Every person who shall post a notice pursuant to this section shall also submit to the city, on such forms as the city may provide, his or her name, the address of the residence to be protected, and the notice, as provided in paragraph (1), that will be made available by the city to persons delivering periodicals. From such information submitted to the city, the city shall compile a list of addresses of all protected residences and the kind of restriction on periodical delivery for each such residence, and shall make such list available to all persons interested in acquiring such. 
(5)  Only persons actually occupying the premises as their personal residence are authorized to give the notice provided for herein. No person having an interest in any premises, including any landlord or absentee owner, who does not occupy the premises as his or her residence shall be authorized to give such notice. Where a residence is part of a multiple unit structure, such as an apartment building or townhouse, the notice shall only apply to the unit for which it is given. 
(Ord. No. 10-O-0070, § 2, 9-7-2010) 
Editor's note— It should be noted that Exhibit "A" referenced above is not set out at length herein, but is on file and available for inspection in the office of the city clerk.  
Sec. 10-60. - Reserved.  
Sec. 10-61. - Leaving, placing, or distributions of unsubscribed-to periodicals prohibited. 
Where notice has been placed on any residential property in accordance with section 10-59 of this article, no unsubscribed-to periodical shall be distributed to or left or placed upon any portion of such property, including any parkway between the sidewalk and street. 
(Ord. No. 10-O-0070, § 2, 9-7-2010)  
Sec. 10-62. - Violation and penalty. 
Violation of any provision of this article shall result in a fine of not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) and not more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). Each act of leaving or placing an unsubscribed-to periodical on residential premises shall constitute a separate offense. All persons who leave an unsubscribed-to periodical on any residential premises for the purpose of in violation of this article, or who publish or distribute any unsubscribed-to periodical left or placed on any residential premises in violation of this article shall be jointly and severally liable for such offense, whether they knew of or intended such offense. 
(Ord. No. 10-O-0070, § 2, 9-7-2010)  
ARTICLE IX. - PRIORITY LIEN FOR COST OF REMOVAL, SECURING, AND ENCLOSING ON ABANDONED RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY 
 
Sec. 10-63. - Purpose. 
Generally, in order to abate or prevent nuisances, the city is authorized to perform or provide for property maintenance activities on an abandoned residential property. An "abandoned property" is a residential dwelling unit that has been unoccupied by any lawful occupant or occupants for at least ninety (90) days, and for which after such 90-day period the city has made good faith efforts to contact the legal owner or owners of the property or, if known, the agent of the owner, and no contact has been made. The cost of the maintenance provided shall be a lien on the underlying parcel of that abandoned property if the maintenance by the city involved one or more of the following: 
(1)  The cutting and removal of neglected weeds, grass, trees, and bushes as authorized by the Illinois Municipal Code, 65 ILCS 5/11-20-7; and 
(2)  The providing of pest-control activities as authorized by the Illinois Municipal Code, 65 ILCS 5/11-20-8; and 
(3)  The removal of garbage, debris, and graffiti and related activities as authorized by the Illinois Municipal Code, 65 ILCS 5/11-20-13; and 
(4)  The removal, securing, and enclosing of abandoned residential properties as authorized by the Illinois Municipal Code, 65 ILCS 5/11-31-1.01. 
(Ord. No. 12-O-0011, § 2.3, 5-21-2012)  
Sec. 10-64. - Superiority of lien. 
This lien is superior to all other liens and encumbrances, except tax liens and as otherwise provided in this section. 
(Ord. No. 12-O-0011, § 2.3, 5-21-2012)  
Sec. 10-65. - Perfection of lien. 
To perfect a lien under this section, the city must, within one year after the cost is incurred for the activity, file notice of the lien in the office of the DuPage Recorder and a sworn statement setting out: 
(1)  A description of the abandoned residential property that sufficiently identifies the parcel; 
(2)  The amount of the cost of the activity; 
(3)  The date or dates when the cost for the activity was incurred by the municipality; 
(4)  A statement that the lien has been filed pursuant to the Illinois Municipal Code subsection (d) of section 11-20-7, subsection (d) of section 11-20-8, subsection (d) of section 11-20-12, subsection (e) of section 11-20-13, or section 11-31-1.01 as referenced in section 10-63 of this Code. 
If, for any abandoned residential property, the city engaged in any activity on more than one (1) occasion during the course of one (1) year, then the city may combine any or all of the costs of each of those activities into a single notice of lien. 
(Ord. No. 12-O-0011, § 2.3, 5-21-2012)  
Sec. 10-66. - Record keeping. 
To enforce a lien pursuant to this section, the city must maintain contemporaneous records that include, at a minimum: 
(1)  A dated statement of a finding by the city that the property has become abandoned residential property; 
(2)  The date when the property was first observed to be unoccupied by any lawful occupant; 
(3)  A description of the actions taken by the city to contact the legal owner of the property, or if known, any agent of the owner; 
(4)  A statement that no contacts were made with the legal owner or, if known, any agent of the owner; 
(5)  A dated certification by a city official of the necessity and specific nature of the work performed; 
(6)  A copy of the agreement with the person or company performing the work and the rates and estimated cost of the work, if applicable; 
(7)  Detailed invoices and payment vouchers for the work; and 
(8)  A statement whether the work was competitively bid, and if so, a copy of all proposals submitted by the bidders. 
(Ord. No. 12-O-0011, § 2.3, 5-21-2012)  
Sec. 10-67. - Release of lien. 
Upon payment of the amount of a lien as well as administrative charges incurred for the filing and release of lien filed under this section by the mortgagee, servicer, owner, or any other person, the city shall release the lien, and the release may be filed of record by the person making such payment at the person's sole expense as in the case of filing notice of lien. 
(Ord. No. 12-O-0011, § 2.3, 5-21-2012)  
Sec. 10-68. - Enforcement of lien. 
A lien under this section shall be enforceable exclusively at the hearing for confirmation of sale of the abandoned residential property that is held pursuant to subsection (b) of section 15-1508 of the Illinois Code of Civil Procedure, 735 ILCS 5/15-1508, and shall be limited to a claim of interest in the proceeds of the sale and subject to the requirements of this section, provided that: 
(1)  Any mortgagee who holds a mortgage on the property, or any beneficiary or trustee, who holds a deed of trust on the property, may contest the lien or the amount of the lien at any time during the foreclosure proceeding upon motion and notice in accordance with court rules applicable to motions generally. 
(2)  Grounds for forfeiture of the lien or the superior status of the lien granted by this section shall include, but not be limited to, a finding by the court that: 
a.  The City has not complied with section 10-65 or 10-66 of this Code; 
b.  The scope of the work was not reasonable under the circumstances; 
c.  The work exceeded the authorization for the work to be performed under the Illinois Municipal Code subsection (a) of section 11-20-7, subsection (a) of section 11-20-8, subsection (a) of section 11-20-12, subsection (a) of section 11-20-13, or subsection (a) of section 11-31-1.01, as referenced in section 10-63 of this Code; 
d.  The cost of the services rendered or materials provided was not commercially reasonable. 
Forfeiture of the superior status of the lien otherwise granted by this section shall not constitute a forfeiture of the lien as a subordinate lien. 
(Ord. No. 12-O-0011, § 2.3, 5-21-2012)  
Sec. 10-69. - Lien restriction. 
The city may not file a priority lien pursuant to this section and the Illinois Municipal Code if: 
(1)  The mortgagee or servicer of the abandoned residential property has provided notice to the city that the mortgagee or servicer has performed or will perform the remedial actions specified in the notice that the city might otherwise perform, provided that the remedial actions specified in the notice have been performed or are performed or initiated in good faith by the mortgagee or servicer within thirty (30) days of such notice; or 
(2)  The city has provided notice, pursuant to sections 10-63, 10-65 and 10-66 of this Code, to the mortgagee or servicer of a problem with the property, and the mortgagee or servicer has performed or performs or initiates in good faith the remedial actions specified in the notice within thirty (30) days of such notice. 
(Ord. No. 12-O-0011, § 2.3, 5-21-2012)  
Sec. 10-70. - Third party enforcement of lien. 
Any entity or person who performs a removal, securing, or enclosing activity pursuant to the authority of the city as granted under the Illinois Municipal Code, subsection (d) of section 11-20-7, subsection (d) of section 11-20-8, subsection (d) of section 11-20-12, subsection (e) of section 11-20-13, or section 11-31-1.01, as referenced in section 10-63 of this Code, may, in its, his, or her own name, file a lien pursuant to section 10-65 of this Code appear in a foreclosure action on that lien pursuant to section 10-68 of this Code in the place of the city, provided that the city shall remain subject to section 10-65 of this Code, and such party shall be subject to all of the provisions in this section of this Code as if such party were the city. 
(Ord. No. 12-O-0011, § 2.3, 5-21-2012)  
Chapter 11 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 11-1—11-15. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - OFFENSES  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 11-16. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter the words and phrases described in this section have the meanings designated in this section except when a particular context requires otherwise. 
Acquittal means a verdict or finding of not guilty, rendered by a legally constituted jury or by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
Act means to take action and includes a failure or omission to take action. 
Alcohol without liquid machine (AWOL) means: 
(1)  A device designed, manufactured, marketed or used for the purpose of mixing alcoholic liquor, any liquid containing more than one (1) percent of alcohol, or alcohol powder with oxygen, air or another gas to produce a mist or vapor for inhalation or snorting for non-medicinal purpose. 
(2)  A device designed, manufactured, marketed or used for the purpose of mixing a product with oxygen, air or another gas to produce a mist or vapor for inhalations or snorting which has a stimulant, depressant or hallucinogenic effect on the central nervous system for non-medicinal purposes. 
(3)  It shall not include such medical devices as inhalers, nebulizers, atomizers or other devices properly prescribed by a physician and being used to dispense a prescribed medication to the holder of such prescription. 
Another means a person as defined in this Code other than the offender. 
Conduct means an act or series of acts and the accompanying mental state. 
Conviction means a judgment of conviction or sentence entered upon a plea of guilty or upon a verdict or finding of guilty of an offense, rendered by a legally constituted jury or by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
Dwelling means a building or portion thereof, a tent, a vehicle, or other enclosed space which is used or intended for use as a human habitation, home or residence. 
Includes or including means comprehending among other particulars, without limiting the generality of the foregoing word or phrase. 
Misdemeanor means any offense other than a felony, and includes conduct prohibited by ordinance which provides no penalty for its violation. 
Offense means a violation of any provision of this Code or other ordinance of the city. 
Palcohol means any powder or crystalline substance containing "alcohol" produced for human consumption. 
Peace officer means any person who by virtue of his office or public employment is vested by law with a duty to maintain public order or to make arrests for offenses whether that duty extends to all offenses or is limited to specific offenses. 
Reasonable belief or reasonably believes means that the person concerned acting as a reasonable man, believes that the described facts exist. 
Solicit or solicitation means to command, authorize, urge, incite, request, or advise another to commit an offense. 
(Ord. No. 879, Art. I, § 12, 5-17-65; Ord. No. 17-O-0018, § 1, 7-3-2017)  
Sec. 11-17. - Commission of offenses prohibited. 
No person shall commit any of the offenses enumerated in this chapter.  
Sec. 11-18. - Administrative fee for bail and/or bond administration. 
The police department shall charge a fee of thirty dollars ($30.00) for posting bail or bond in any legal process, civil or criminal, or on any bookable arrest, including a warrant. This fee does not pertain to individuals arrested under section 17-1205 of the City Code, Seizure and impoundment of motor vehicles used in connection with illegal activities. 
(Ord. No. 06-O-0017, § 2, 3-6-2006)  
Sec. 11-19. - Minimum and maximum fines. 
That the violation of or failure to pay the fee in section 11-18 shall constitute an offense against the city and shall subject the offender to a fine as provided by section 1-8, general penalty, of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 06-O-0017, § 2, 3-6-2006)  
Secs. 11-20—11-25. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - INCHOATE 
 
Sec. 11-26. - Solicitation. 
A person commits solicitation when, with intent that an offense be committed he commands, encourages or requests another to commit that offense. 
(Ord. No. 879, Art. II, § 1, 5-17-65)  
Sec. 11-27. - Conspiracy. 
(a)  A person commits conspiracy when, with intent that an offense be committed, he agrees with another to the commission of that offense. No person may be convicted of conspiracy to commit an offense unless an act in furtherance of such agreement is alleged and proved to have been committed by him or by a co-conspirator. 
(b)  It shall not be a defense to conspiracy that the person or person with whom the accused is alleged to have conspired: 
(1)  Has not been prosecuted or convicted, or 
(2)  Has been convicted of a different offense, or 
(3)  Is not amenable to justice, or 
(4)  Has been acquitted, or 
(5)  Lacked the capacity to commit an offense. 
(Ord. No. 879, Art. II, § 2, 5-17-65)  
Sec. 11-28. - Defenses. 
It is defense to a charge of solicitation or conspiracy that if the criminal object were achieved the accused would not be guilty of an offense. 
(Ord. No. 879, Art. II, § 3, 5-17-65)  
Sec. 11-29. - Attempted offenses. 
A person commits an attempt when, with intent to commit a specific offense, he does any act which constitutes a substantial step toward the commission of that offense. 
It shall not be a defense to a charge of attempt that because of a misapprehension of the circumstances it would have been impossible for the accused to commit the offense attempted. 
(Ord. No. 879, Art. II, § 4, 5-17-65)  
Secs. 11-30—11-35. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - AFFECTING MINORS 
 
Sec. 11-36. - Curfew. 
(a)  It is unlawful for a person less than seventeen (17) years of age to be present at or upon any public assembly, building, place, street or highway at the following times unless accompanied and supervised by a parent, legal guardian or other responsible companion at least eighteen (18) years of age approved by a parent or legal guardian or unless engaged in a business or occupation which the laws of this state authorize a person less than seventeen (17) years of age to perform: 
(1)  Between 12:01 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. Saturday; 
(2)  Between 12:01 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. Sunday; and 
(3)  Between 11:00 p.m. on Sunday to Thursday, inclusive, and 6:00 a.m. on the following day. 
(b)  It is unlawful for a parent, legal guardian or other person to knowingly permit a person in his custody or control to violate subparagraph (a) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 879, Art. III, § 1, 5-17-65; Ord. No. 1611, § 1, 10-4-82)  
Sec. 11-37. - Alcoholic beverages. 
No person shall sell, buy for, give or deliver to any minor any alcoholic liquor within the city. 
(Ord. No. 879, Art. III, § 2, 5-17-65)  
Sec. 11-38. - Tobacco. 
No person in this city shall sell, buy for, deliver to or furnish any tobacco products, electronic cigarettes, and alternative nicotine products to any persons under the age of twenty-one (21). 
(Ord. No. 879, Art. III, § 3, 5-17-65; Ord. No. 2095, § 2, 10-3-88; Ord. No. 19-O-0023, § 1, 7-1-2019)  
Sec. 11-39. - Reserved. 
Note— See the editor's notes following, § 11-39.1 and 11-39.2.  
Sec. 11-39.1. - Contributing to delinquency of a minor. 
Any person who shall knowingly or willfully cause, aid or encourage any minor under the age of eighteen (18) years to be or to become a delinquent child as defined herein, or who shall knowingly or willfully do acts which directly tend to render such minor so delinquent and who when able to do so, shall willfully neglect to do that which will directly tend to prevent such state of delinquency shall be deemed guilty of the contributing to the delinquency of a juvenile. 
(Ord. No. 2095, § 3, 10-3-88) 
Editor's note— Section 3 of Ord. No. 2095, adopted Oct. 3, 1988, renumbered § 11-39(a) as 11-39.1 with a new catchline. Formerly, § 11-39 derived from Ord. No. 879, Art. III, § 4, adopted May 17, 1965 and was titled "Juvenile delinquency." See also the editor's note following § 11-39.2.  
Sec. 11-39.2. - Delinquent minor. 
For the purposes of this Chapter 11, a delinquent minor is any minor who, under the age of eighteen (18) years, has violated or attempted to violate, regardless of where the act occurred, any federal or state law or any terms of this Chapter 11 or who has habitually and repeatedly violated or attempted to violate the provisions of the traffic code of the City of West Chicago, Illinois. 
(Ord. No. 2095, § 3, 10-3-88) 
Editor's note— Section 3 of Ord. No. 2095, adopted Oct. 3, 1988, deleted § 11-39(b) as written and enacted a new § 11-39.2 to read as set out herein. Formerly § 11-39 was entitled "Juvenile delinquency," and derived from Ord. No. 879, Art. III, § 4, adopted May 17, 1965. See also the editor's note following § 11-39.1.  
Sec. 11-40. - Permission of improper associations or unlawful acts. 
Any parent, legal guardian or other person commits improper supervision of a child when he knowingly permits a child in his custody or control under the age of eighteen (18) years to associate with known thieves, burglars, felons, narcotic addicts or other persons of ill repute, visit a place of prostitution, commit a lewd act, commit an act tending to break the peace or violate a municipal curfew ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1304, 6-7-76; Ord. No. 2919, § 1, 7-5-95)  
Sec. 11-41. - Penalty for violation of division. 
Any person violating any provisions of this division shall be fined in accordance with section 1-8 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1304, 6-7-76; Ord. No. 2095, § 4, 10-3-88)  
Sec. 11-42. - Reserved.  
Sec. 11-43. - Displaying material harmful to minors. 
(a)  Definitions: 
Minors means any unmarried person under the age of eighteen (18) years. 
Harmful to minors means that quality of any description, exhibition, presentation or representation, in whatever form, of nudity, sexual conduct, sexual excitement, or sadomasochistic abuse when the material, taken as a whole, has the following characteristics. 
(1)  The average adult person applying contemporary community standards would find that the material has a predominant tendency to appeal to a prurient interest in sex to minors; and 
(2)  The average adult person applying contemporary community standards would find that the material depicts or describes nudity, sexual conduct, sexual excitement or sado-masochistic abuse in a manner that is patently offensive to prevailing standards in the adult community with respect to what is suitable for minors; and 
(3)  The material lacks serious literacy, scientific, educational, artistic, or political value for minors. 
Nudity means the showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, or buttocks with less than a full opaque covering; the showing of the female breast with less than a full opaque covering of any portion thereof below the top of the nipple; or the depiction of covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state. 
Sexual conduct means acts of masturbation, homosexuality, sexual intercourse, or physical contact with a person's clothed or unclothed genitals, pubic area, buttocks, or, if such person to be a female, breast. 
Sexual excitement means the condition of human male or female genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal. 
Sadomasochistic abuse means flagellation or torture by or upon a person clad in undergarments, mask or bizarre costume, or the condition of being fettered, bound or otherwise physically restrained on the part of one so clothed. 
Material means any book, magazine, newspaper, pamphlet, poster, print, picture, figure, image, description, motion picture film, record, or recording tape, video tape. 
Knowingly means having a general knowledge of, or reason to know or a belief or ground for belief which warrants further inspection or inquiry or both: 
(1)  The character or content of any material which is reasonably susceptible of examination by the defendant; and 
(2)  The age of the minor; however, an honest mistake shall constitute an excuse from liability hereunder if the defendant made a reasonable bona fide attempt to ascertain the true age of such minor. 
Person means any individual, partnership, association or corporation, or other legal entity of any kind. 
A reasonable bona fide attempt means an attempt to ascertain the true age of the minor by requiring production of a driver's license, marriage license, birth certificate or other governmental or educational identification card or paper and not relying solely on the oral allegations or apparent age of the minor. 
(b)  Offenses. No person having custody, control or supervision of any commercial establishment shall knowingly: 
(1)  Display material which is harmful to minors in such a way that minors, as a part of the invited general public, will be exposed to view such material; provided, however, a person shall be deemed not to have "displayed" material harmful to minors if the material is kept behind devices commonly known as "blinder racks" so that the lower two-thirds of the material is not exposed to view; 
(2)  Sell, furnish, present, distribute, allow to view, or otherwise disseminate to a minor, with or without consideration, any material which is harmful to minors. 
(c)  Defenses. It shall be an affirmative defense to any prosecution under this ordinance that: The material involved was displayed, presented or disseminated to a minor at a recognized and established school, church, museum, medical clinic, hospital, public library, government agency, quasi-governmental agency and persons acting in their capacity as employees or agents of such persons or organizations, and which institution displays, presents or disseminates such material for a bona fide governmental, educational or scientific purpose. 
(d)  Penalties. Any person who shall be convicted of violating any provision of this section shall be subject to a fine per section 1-8, general penalty, of this Code. Each day that any violation of this section occurs or continues shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as a separate violation. Every act, thing, or transaction prohibited by this section shall constitute a separate offense as to each item, issue or title involved and shall be punishable as such. For the purpose of this section, multiple copies of the same identical title, monthly issue, volume and number issue or other such identical material shall constitute a single offense. 
(Ord. No. 1747, § 1, 6-18-84; Ord. No. 03-O-0085, § 7, 10-6-2003)  
Secs. 11-44, 11-45. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - AS TO PROPERTY GENERALLY[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Shoplifting; retail theft, § 11-69. 
 
Sec. 11-46. - Refuse containers; time allowed on public ways. 
No refuse container shall be allowed on any property owned by the City of West Chicago, or any property dedicated as a public street, including parkways, for a period longer than the day of collection. 
(Ord. No. 780, 1-2-62)  
Sec. 11-47. - Trespass. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to commit a trespass within the city upon either public or private property. 
(b)  Without constituting any limitation upon the provisions of subsection (a) any of the following acts by any person shall be deemed included among those that constitute trespasses in violation of the provisions of said subsection (a) and appropriate action may be taken hereunder at any time, or from time to time, to prevent or suppress any violation or violations of this section, the aforesaid enumerated acts so included, being as follows: 
(1)  Any entry upon the premises, or any part thereof, of another, including any public property in violation of a notice posted or exhibited at the main entrance to said premises or at any point of approach or entry or in violation of any notice, warning or protest given orally or in writing, by any owner or occupant thereof, or 
(2)  The pursuit of a course of conduct or action incidental to the making of an entry upon the land of another in violation of a notice posted or exhibited at the main entrance to said premises or at any point of approach or entry, or in violation of any notice, warning or protest given orally or in writing by any owner or occupant thereof, or 
(3)  A failure or refusal to depart from the premises of another in case of being requested, either orally or in writing, to leave by any owner or occupant thereof, or 
(4)  An entry into or upon any vehicle, aircraft or watercraft made without the consent of the person having the right to the possession or control thereof, or a failure or refusal to leave any such vehicle, aircraft, or watercraft after being requested to leave by the person having such right. 
(Ord. No. 1200, § 2, 2-4-74)  
Sec. 11-48. - Damage. 
(a)  Public property; parks and cemeteries: It shall be unlawful in any park or cemetery to: 
(1)  Injure or deface any of the trees, fences, bridges, walks, fireplaces, buildings, shrubs, plants, turfs, grass lanes, posts or attach any matter or printed matter or placards thereon. 
(2)  Pick, injure or destroy any of the flowers or shrubs or to remove the same. 
(3)  Park any automobile or automotive vehicle, except in the regular parking place provided and designated as such. 
(4)  Drive any automotive vehicle or ride any horse or operate any other vehicle, including bicycles and snowmobiles, except upon the ways provided for their use. 
(5)  Bathe, swim or wade in any body of water contained therein (excepting only the swimming pool according to regulations) nor shall any boat or raft be floated therein, or fishing allowed, except according to regulations adopted by the council. 
(6)  Have, serve, sell, give away or drink any alcoholic beverage. 
(b)  Private property: It shall be unlawful: 
(1)  To park any motor vehicle upon any property of another without first obtaining the permission of the owner of said property so to do. 
(2)  For any person to damage or destroy any private property without the permission of the owner thereof. 
(c)  City property: It shall be unlawful: 
(1)  For any person to willfully or negligently damage any property belonging to or in the custody of the City of West Chicago or to in any manner deface the same. 
(2)  To cut, mark, destroy, damage or injure any tree in the parkways of the city or upon any public property. 
(Ord. No. 879, Art. IV, § 3, 5-17-65)  
Sec. 11-49. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 11-49 has been deleted by the editor, inasmuch as it appears to have been superseded by Ord. No. 08-O-0072, adopted October 6, 2008, codified as §§ 11-170.6—11-170.8 of this chapter. The former section 11-49 pertained to graffiti prohibited and derived from Ord. No. 2417, § 1, adopted July 14, 1991; Ord. No. 2852, § 1, adopted January 3, 1995; Ord. No. 4133, § 1, adopted October 19,1998 and Ord. No. 03-O-0085, § 8, adopted October 16, 2003.  
Secs. 11-50—11-59. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - AFFECTING PUBLIC SAFETY AND PEACE 
 
Sec. 11-60. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1390, § 1, adopted Jan. 2, 1979, specifically amended the Code by repealing § 11-60, which pertained to railroad locomotives at public crossings. Said section had been derived from Ord. No. 1136, adopted Sept. 18, 1972.  
Sec. 11-61. - Mob action. 
Mob action consists of the following or any one of them: 
(1)  The use of force or violence disturbing the public peace by two (2) or more persons acting together and without authority of law; or 
(2)  The assembly of two (2) or more persons to do an unlawful act; or, 
(3)  The assembly of two (2) or more, persons, without authority of law for the purpose of doing violence to the person or property of anyone supposed to have been guilty of a violation of the law or for the purpose of exercising correctional powers or regulative power over any person by violence. 
It shall be unlawful for any participant in a mob action to fail to withdraw on being commanded to do so by any peace officer. 
(Ord. No. 879, Art. V, § 1, 5-17-65)  
Sec. 11-62. - Disorderly conduct. 
Elements of the offense: A person commits disorderly conduct when he knowingly: 
(1)  Does any act in such unreasonable manner as to alarm or disturb another and to provoke a breach of the peace; or 
(2)  With intent to annoy another, makes a telephone call, whether or not conversation there ensues; or 
(3)  Transmits in any manner to the fire department false alarm of fire, knowing at the time of such transmission that there is no reasonable ground for believing that such fire exists; or 
(4)  Transmits in any manner to another a false alarm to the effect that a bomb or other explosive of any nature is concealed in such place that its explosion would endanger human life, knowing at the time of such transmission that there is no reasonable ground for believing that such a bomb or explosive is concealed in such place; or 
(5)  Transmits in any manner to any peace officer, public officer, or public employee a report to the effect that an offense has been committed, knowing at the time of such transmission that there is no reasonable ground for believing that such an offense has been committed; or 
(6)  Disturbs the peace and quiet of any neighborhood or family by loud and unusual noises, or by tumultuous or offensive carriage, threatening, traducing, quarreling, challenging to fight or fighting; or 
(7)  Displays in a threatening manner any pistol, knife, slingshot, brass, steel or iron knuckles, or other deadly weapons; or 
(8)  Does or makes any unreasonable or offensive act, utterance, gesture or display which, under the circumstances, creates a clear and present danger of a breach of peace or imminent threat of violence; or 
(9)  Refuses or fails to cease and desist any peaceful conduct or activity likely to produce a breach of peace where there is an imminent threat of violence, and where the police have made all reasonable efforts to protect the otherwise peaceful conduct and activity, and have requested that said conduct and activity be stopped and explained the request if there be time; or 
(10)  Fails to obey a lawful order of dispersal by a person known by him to be a peace officer under circumstances where three (3) or more persons are committing acts of disorderly conduct in the immediate vicinity, which acts are likely to cause substantial harm or serious inconvenience, annoyance or alarm; or 
(11)  Assembles with three (3) or more persons for the purpose of using force or violence to disturb the public peace; or 
(12)  Disturbs any orderly public assembly of any kind. 
(Ord. No. 879, Art. V, § 2, 5-17-65; Ord. No. 1064, § 1, 10-5-70)  
Sec. 11-63. - Disturbing assemblies met for worship. 
No person shall disturb any congregation or assembly met for religious worship, by making noises or by rude or indecent behavior, or profane discourse within the place of worship, or so near the same as to disturb the order and solemnity of the same. 
(Ord. No. 879, Art. V, § 3, 5-17-65)  
Sec. 11-64. - Public drunkenness. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to be upon public streets, sidewalks, alleys, ways or property of the city, under the influence of intoxicating liquors, or to be disturbing the peace of his or any other family or of the public, while so intoxicated. 
(Ord. No. 879, Art. V, § 4, 5-17-65)  
Sec. 11-65. - Assault and battery. 
(a)  Assault: Any person commits an assault when without lawful authority he engages in conduct which places another in reasonable apprehension of receiving a battery. 
(b)  Battery: Any person commits battery if he intentionally or knowingly without legal justification and by any means: 
(1)  Causes bodily harm to any individual or 
(2)  Makes physical conduct of an insulting or provoking nature with an individual. 
(Ord. No. 879, Art. V, § 6, 5-17-65)  
Sec. 11-66. - Gambling and gambling devices. 
(a)  Any person shall be guilty of gambling if in any place, room, saloon, inn, tavern, shed, booth or building or enclosure, or in any part thereof, operates, keeps, owns, rents or uses, any clock, joker, tape or slot machine, or pinball machine or punchboard, or any other device upon which money is staked or hazarded, or into which money is paid, or played, upon chance, or upon the result of the action which money or other valuable thing is staked, bet, hazarded, won or lost. 
(b)  Every clock, tape machine, slot machine, pinball machine, punchboard or other machine or device for the risk of money, or in chance or upon the action of which money is staked, hazarded, paid, won or lost, is hereby declared a gambling device, and shall be subject to seizure, confiscation, and destruction by any municipal authority upon order of the mayor of the city. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person as owner, agent or otherwise, to manufacture, sell, lease or hold or offer for sale, or lease to another, any clock, joker, punchboard, tape or slot machine or pinball machine, or any other device upon which money is staked or hazarded, or into which money or valuable thing is staked, paid, hazarded or won or lost. 
(d)  Every owner, occupant, lessee, mortgagee or other person in possession of any premises upon which any gambling device may be located and each person in the use, operation, lease or other possession of the same shall be liable under the penalty herein provided. 
(Ord. No. 879, Art. V, § 7, 5-17-65)  
Sec. 11-67. - Criminal defamation. 
(a)  Elements. A person commits criminal defamation when, with intent to defame another, living or dead, he communicates by any means, to any person, matter which tends to provoke a breach of the peace. 
(b)  Justification. In all prosecutions for criminal defamation, the truth when communicated with good motives and for justifiable ends shall be an affirmative defense. 
(Ord. No. 879, Art. V, § 8, 5-17-65)  
Sec. 11-67.1. - Alcoholic beverages in public places. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to be in possession of an alcoholic beverage on a public street or any other public place unless such beverage is in its original container with the seal unbroken, or unless such possession is on the premises of an establishment licensed by the City of West Chicago to sell such alcoholic beverage. For purposes of this section, a public place shall include, but not be limited to all city owned parking facilities and lots, and all parking lots serving commercial establishments and serving multiple-family residential developments containing four (4) or more dwelling units. Further, it shall be unlawful for any person to be in possession of an alcoholic beverage in a common area of: a property owners' association serving a multiple family residential development containing four (4) or more dwelling units, an apartment complex or a common element, as defined by the Illinois Condominium Property Act, 765 ILCS 605/2 (e), except for patios and balconies. Said common area includes all the portions of the property except the interior unit, including but not limited to the parking lots, sidewalks, grass areas, open space areas, driveways, hallways, and storage rooms. Provided that upon on the application of the owner, manager or property owners' association (collectively, "owner") for a modification of this prohibition the city council may, subject to conditions and restrictions, satisfactory to the city council, permit consumption of alcoholic beverages in certain defined areas agreed by the city and the owner. 
Not withstanding the foregoing, consumption of alcoholic beverages shall be permitted in Reed Keeper Park during special events for which a temporary liquor license has been issued by the liquor control commissioner. 
(Ord. No. 1325, § 2, 10-4-76; Ord. No. 4307, § 2, 5-1-2000; Ord. No. 05-O-0002, § 1, 2-7-2005)  
Sec. 11-68. - Loitering. 
Any person or persons who at any time stand, stroll or walk on any public street, sidewalk or in and at any public place in such a manner to impede, hinder or interfere with the normal flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic on such public sidewalk, street or property and who refuse to disburse and move from the area from which such a person or persons is impeding or interfering with pedestrian or vehicular traffic when directed to do so by any member of the police department shall be guilty of the misdemeanor of loitering. 
(Ord. No. 1020, 11-3-69; Ord. No. 2919, § 2, 7-5-95)  
Sec. 11-69. - Shoplifting; retail theft. 
(a)  Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the words and phrases defined herein have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection unless a contrary meaning is clear from the context. 
(1)  Conceal: To "conceal" merchandise means that, although there may be some notice of its presence, that merchandise is not visible through ordinary observation. 
(2)  Full retail value: The merchant's stated or advertised price of the merchandise. 
(3)  Merchandise: Any items of tangible personal property. 
(4)  Merchant: An owner or operator of any retail mercantile establishment or any agent, employee, lessee, consignee, officer, director, franchisee or independent contractor of such owner or operator. 
(5)  Minor: A person who is less than nineteen (19) years of age, is unemancipated and resides with his parents or legal guardian. 
(6)  Person: Any natural person or individual. 
(7)  Peace officer: Any person who by virtue of his office or public employment is vested by law with a duty to maintain public order or to make arrests for offenses, whether that duty extends to all offenses or is limited to specific offenses. 
(8)  Premises of a retail mercantile establishment: Includes, but is not limited to, the retail mercantile establishment, any common use areas in shopping centers and all parking areas set aside by a merchant or on behalf of a merchant for the parking of vehicles for the convenience of the patrons of such retail mercantile establishment. 
(9)  Shopping cart: Those push carts of the type or types which are commonly provided by grocery stores, drugstores, or other retail mercantile establishments for the use of the public in transporting commodities in stores and markets and, incidentally, from the stores to a place outside the store. 
(10)  Under-ring: To cause the cash register or other sales recording device to reflect less than the full retail value of the merchandise. 
(b)  Offense of retail theft. A person commits the offense of retail theft when he or she knowingly: 
(1)  Takes possession of, carries away, transfers or causes to be carried away or transferred, any merchandise displayed, held, stored or offered for sale in a retail mercantile establishment with the intention of retaining such merchandise or with the intention of depriving the merchant permanently of the possession, use or benefit of such merchandise without paying the full retail value of such merchandise; or 
(2)  Alters, transfers or removes any label, price tag, marking, indicia of value or any other markings which aid in determining value affixed to any merchandise displayed, held, stored, or offered for sale, in a retail mercantile establishment and attempts to purchase such merchandise personally or in consort with another at less than the full retail value with the intention of depriving the merchant of the full retail value of such merchandise; or 
(3)  Transfers any merchandise displayed, held, stored or offered for sale, in a retail mercantile establishment, from the container in or on which such merchandise is displayed to any other container with the intention of depriving the merchant of the full retail value of such merchandise; or 
(4)  Under-rings with the intention of depriving the merchant of the full retail value of the merchandise; or 
(5)  Removes a shopping cart from the premises of a retail mercantile establishment without the consent of the merchant given at the time of such removal with the intention of depriving the merchant permanently of the possession, use or benefit of such cart. 
(c)  Presumptions. If any person: 
(1)  Conceals upon his or her person or among his or her belongings, unpurchased merchandise displayed, held, stored or offered for sale in a retail mercantile establishment; and 
(2)  Removes that merchandise beyond the last known station for receiving payments for that merchandise in that retail mercantile establishment, 
such person shall be presumed to have possessed, carried away or transferred such merchandise with the intention of retaining it or with the intention of depriving the merchant permanently of the possession, use or benefit of such merchandise without paying the full retail value of such merchandise. 
(d)  Detention. Detention means any merchant who has reasonable grounds to believe that a person has committed retail theft may detain such person, on or off the premises of a retail mercantile establishment, in a reasonable manner and for a reasonable length of time for all or any of the following purposes: 
(1)  To request identification; 
(2)  To verify such identification; 
(3)  To make reasonable inquiry as to whether such person has in his possession unpurchased merchandise and, to make reasonable investigation of the ownership of such merchandise; 
(4)  To inform a peace officer of the detention of the person and surrender that person to the custody of a peace officer; 
(5)  In the case of a minor, to inform a peace officer, the parents, guardian or other private person interested in the welfare of that minor of this detention and to surrender custody of such minor to such person. 
A merchant may make a detention as permitted herein off the premises of a retail mercantile establishment only if such detention is pursuant to an immediate pursuit of such person. 
(e)  Severability. If any subsection, clause, sentence, paragraph or part of this section is for any reason adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment will not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof, but shall be confined in its operation to the subsection, clause, sentence, paragraph or part thereof directly involved in the controversy in which such judgment shall have been rendered. 
(Ord. No. 1573, § 1, 5-17-82)  
Sec. 11-70. - Theft. 
A person commits theft when he knowingly: 
(1)  Obtains or exerts unauthorized control over property of the owner, or 
(2)  Obtains by deception control over property of the owner, or 
(3)  Obtains by threat control over property of the owner, or 
(4)  Obtains control over stolen property knowing the property to have been stolen or under such circumstances as would reasonably induce him to believe that the property was stolen, and: 
(a)  Intends to deprive the owner permanently of the use or benefit of the property, or 
(b)  Knowingly uses, conceals or abandons the property in such manner as to deprive the owner permanently of such use or benefit, or 
(c)  Uses, conceals, or abandons the property knowing such use, concealment or abandonment probably will deprive the owner permanently of such use or benefit. 
(Ord. No. 1845, § 1, 12-2-85)  
Sec. 11-71. - Theft of lost or mislead property. 
A person who obtains control over lost or mislaid property commits theft when he: 
(1)  Knows or learns the identity of the owner or knows, or is aware of, or learns of a reasonable method of identifying the owner, and 
(2)  Fails to take reasonable measures to restore the property to the owner, and 
(3)  Intends to deprive the owner permanently of the use or benefit of the property. 
(Ord. No. 1845, § 1, 12-2-85)  
Sec. 11-72. - Alcohol without liquid (AWOL) machines prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to possess, sell, transfer or use an alcohol without liquid (AWOL) machine or device within the city. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to use a medical device such as an inhaler, nebulizer, atomizer or other device properly prescribed by a physician for the purpose of mixing alcoholic liquor or powder with oxygen, air or another gas to produce a mist or vapor for inhalation or snorting for non-medicinal purposes within the city. 
(c)  The AWOL machine or device is subject to immediate seizure by the police department. The machine may be ordered destroyed, after an opportunity for a hearing and an order of the circuit court. 
(Ord. No. 17-O-0018, § 2, 7-3-2017)  
Sec. 11-73. - Possession of powdered or smoking alcohol prohibited. 
No person shall advertise, use, sell, offer for sale, deliver, receive, or possess any product consisting of or containing powdered alcohol (Palcohol) or smoking alcohol. 
(Ord. No. 17-O-0018, § 2, 7-3-2017)  
Secs. 11-74—11-75. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - ANIMAL CONTROL AND CARE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 19-O-0006, § 1, adopted April 1, 2019, amended Div. 6 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Div. 6, §§ 11-76—11-89, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 17-O-0041, 3-5-2018. 
 
Sec. 11-76. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to provide harmonious relationships in the interaction between man and animal by: 
(1)  Protecting the citizens of West Chicago from rabies by specifying such preventive and control measures as may be necessary; 
(2)  Protecting animals from improper use, abuse, neglect, inhumane treatment and health hazards, particularly rabies; 
(3)  Providing security to residents from annoyance, intimidation and injury from dogs and other animals; 
(4)  Encouraging responsible pet ownership; and 
(5)  Providing for the assessment of penalties for violators and for the enforcement and administration of this article. 
(Ord. No. 19-O-0006, § 1, 4-1-2019)  
Sec. 11-77. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following words are defined. 
Administrator: The licensed veterinarian appointed by the DuPage County Board pursuant to the Illinois animal control act or his authorized representative. 
Animal: Any live vertebrate creature except man. 
Animal capable of transmitting rabies: All animals classified as mammals. 
Animal care facility means an animal control center or animal shelter, maintained by or under contract with any state, county, or municipality, whose mission and practice is, in whole, or significant part, the rescue and placement of animals in permanent homes or rescue organizations. 
Animal control warden: A DuPage County employee appointed by the administrator. 
Animal rescue organization means any not-for-profit organization which has tax-exempt status under Section 501(c)(3) of the United States Internal Revenue Code, whose mission and practice is, in whole or in significant part, the rescue and placement of animals in permanent homes. This term does not include any entity, which is, or is housed on the premises of, a breeder or broker, obtains dogs from a breeder or broker in exchange for payment or compensation, or resells dogs obtained from a breeder or broker and provides payment or compensation to such breeder or broker. 
Animal Shelter: A facility operated, owned, or maintained by a duly incorporated humane society, animal welfare society, or other non-profit organization for the purpose of providing for and promoting the welfare, protection, and humane treatment of animals. "Animal shelter" also means any veterinary hospital or clinic operated by a veterinarian or veterinarians licensed under the Veterinary Medicine and Surgery Practice Act of 2004 which operates for the above mentioned purpose in addition to its customary purposes. 
Bird: Any flying vertebrate that is covered with feathers. 
Bite: Seizure of a person or animal with the jaws or teeth of any cat, dog or other animal capable of transmitting rabies so that the person so seized has been wounded or pierced and further includes contact of the saliva of such cat, dog or other animal with any break or abrasion of the skin. 
Cat: All members of the classification, Felis catus. 
Companion animal: An animal that is commonly considered to be, or is considered by the owner to be, a pet. "Companion animal" includes, but is not limited to, canines, felines, and equines. 
Confined: Restriction of an animal at all times by the owner, or his agent, to an escape-proof building, house, or other enclosure away from other animals and the public. 
Control: Any owned animal that is either secured by a leash or lead, under voice control, contained by invisible fence or within the premises of its owner or another person with the consent of the person and prevented from leaving said premises by some suitable barrier or restriction, or confined within a crate or cage, or confined within a vehicle. 
Dangerous animal: Includes any of the following types of animals regardless of past behavior: lion, tiger, leopard, ocelot, jaguar, cheetah, margay, mountain lion, lynx, bobcat, jaguarundi, any hybrid thereof, or any other similar feline animal; bear, hyena, wolf, coyote, wolf-dog or coyote-dog hybrid; any member of the crocodilian family; poisonous reptiles, or any other life threatening reptile; or any other animal which is wild by nature and not usually tamed ("ferae naturae") in the eyes of the law. 
Dangerous dog: Any individual dog, as defined by DuPage Animal Control and Care, anywhere other than upon the property of the owner or custodian of the dog and unmuzzled, unleashed, or unattended by its owner or custodian that behaves in a manner that a reasonable person would believe poses a serious and unjustified imminent threat of serious physical injury or death to a person or a companion animal or a dog that, without justification, bites a person and does not cause serious physical injury. 
Department: The Department of Agriculture of the State of Illinois. 
Dog: All members of the classification Canis familiaris. 
Domestic animal: Any animal which has been domesticated by man so as to live and breed in a tame condition. 
Enclosure: A fence or structure of at least six (6) feet in height, forming or causing an enclosure suitable to prevent the entry of young children, and suitable to confine a vicious dog in conjunction with other measures that may be taken by the owner or keeper, such as tethering of the vicious dog within the enclosure. The enclosure shall be securely enclosed and locked and designed with secure sides, top, and bottom and shall be designed to prevent the animal from escaping from the enclosure. If the enclosure is a room within a residence, it cannot have direct ingress from or egress to the outdoors unless it leads directly to an enclosed pen and the door must be locked. A vicious dog may be allowed to move about freely within the entire residence if it is muzzled at all times. 
Feral cat: Any cat that is undomesticated or untamed or has returned to an undomesticated or untamed state and is living uncontrolled in the wild. 
Guard dog: A dog used in a commercial business or by a municipal or police department for the purposes of patrol and protection. 
Guide dog: A dog trained by a recognized organization to lead the legally blind. 
Impounded: Taken into the custody of the public animal control facility in the city, town, or county where the animal is found. 
Inoculation against rabies: The injection of a rabies vaccine approved by the Illinois Department of Agriculture and administered by a licensed veterinarian in accordance with the company's recommendations for the vaccine used. 
Intact animal: An animal that has not been spayed or neutered. 
Leash: A cord, rope, strap, or chain which shall be securely fastened to the collar or harness of a dog or other animal and shall be of sufficient strength to keep such dog or other animal under control. 
Licensed veterinarian: A veterinarian licensed by the state in which he engages in the practice of veterinary medicine. 
Offer for sale means to sell, offer for sale or adoption, advertise for the sale of, barter, auction, give away or otherwise dispose of a dog or cat. 
Owner: Any person having a right of property in an animal, or who keeps or harbors an animal, or who has it in his care, or acts as its custodian, or who knowingly permits a dog to remain on any premises occupied by him or her. "Owner" does not include a feral cat caretaker participating in a trap, spay/neuter, return or release program. 
Person: Any individual, firm, corporation, partnership, society, association or other legal entity, any public or private institution, the State of Illinois, municipal corporation or political subdivision of the state, or any other business unit. 
Pet shop : Means a retail establishment which sells any or all of the following to the general public: pets, pet accessories, and pet supplies. Pet shops can house an accessory veterinary clinic and/or an accessory indoor grooming facility. No pet shop shall sell, deliver, offer for sale, barter, auction, give away, or otherwise transfer or dispose of cats or dogs. Pet shops shall not include an animal care facility or animal rescue organization, as defined. Nothing in this section shall prohibit pet stores from collaborating with animal care facilities or animal rescue organizations to offer space for such entities to showcase adoptable dogs and cats. 
Police animal: An animal owned or used by a law enforcement department or agency in the course of the department or agency's work. 
Pound or animal control facility: Any facility licensed by the Illinois Department of Agriculture and approved by the administrator for the purpose of enforcing this article and used as a shelter for seized, stray, homeless, abandoned or unwanted animals. 
Service animal : Means an animal trained in obedience and task skills to meet the needs of a person with a disability. 
Stray animal: Any owned animal that is not controlled. 
Vicious dog: A dog that, without justification, attacks a person and causes serious physical injury or death or any individual dog that has been found to be a "dangerous dog" upon three (3) separate occasions. 
Voice control: The immediate recall of an animal at the sound of the voice of the owner. 
Wolf-dog or coyote-dog hybrid: Any animal that results from the cross breeding of a wolf or coyote with a dog. 
(Ord. No. 19-O-0006, § 1, 4-1-2019)  
Sec. 11-78. - Animal care. 
(a)  No owner shall fail to provide his animals with sufficient wholesome food and water, proper shelter and protection from the weather, veterinary care when needed to prevent suffering and with humane care and treatment. Proper shelter and protection from the weather shall be defined as for a dog to be a building, moisture proof, with a dry floor and adequate and clean bedding material. A horse shall need a building of a least three (3) walls and a roof. It shall have a dry floor with clean and adequate bedding of straw, chips or other suitable material. The inside dimensions of the building shall have a measured area (length times width) of at least three (3) times the length of the animal. For a horse the dimensions shall be five (5) times the length of the animal. The length of the animal is the distance from the nose to base of tail. 
(b)  No person shall beat, torment, overload, overwork or otherwise abuse an animal. 
(c)  No person shall own, keep, harbor, or otherwise maintain within the city, any breeds of fowl that are or will be used in the pursuit of and staging of cockfighting on any premises. 
(d)  No person shall promote, conduct or carry on, advertise, collect money or in any other manner assist in the presentation for purposes of sport, wagering, or entertainment, any show, exhibition, program, or other activity involving a fight between two (2) or more animals or any animal or human, or the intentional killing or injuring of any animal nor any simulated version of the same that involves baiting or inciting an animal toward intent to fight. 
(e)  No person shall hold a greased pig contest. 
(f)  No person shall be permitted to keep animals in violation of the "Illinois Humane Care for Animals Act" or the "Illinois Animal Welfare Act". 
(g)  No owner may abandon any animal where it may become a public charge or may suffer injury, hunger or exposure. 
(h)  No person shall keep any animal within a building or upon any premises without food, water or proper care and attention for a period of time sufficient to cause undue discomfort or suffering. If the owner cannot be located after reasonable search, or if the owner shall be known to be absent due to injury, illness, incarceration or other involuntary circumstances, it shall be the duty of the officer/community service officer to act upon the complaint as directed by the "Illinois Humane Care for Animals Act". 
(i)  No person shall give away or use any live animal as a prize for or as an inducement to enter any contest, game or other competition or as an inducement to enter a place of amusement or offer such animal as an incentive to enter any business agreement whereby the offer was for the purpose of attracting trade. 
(j)  No person shall bring or cause to have brought into the city, sell, offer for sale, barter or display living baby chicks, ducklings or other fowl or rabbits which have been dyed, colored or otherwise treated so as to impart to them an artificial color, or give away as pets or sell, offer for sale, barter or give away at no cost or as novelties or prizes. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to prohibit legitimate commerce in poultry for agricultural or food purposes. 
(k)  No person may knowingly poison or cause to be poisoned any domesticated animal. The only exception will be written permit from the Illinois Department of Agriculture for the purpose of controlling diseases transmissible to humans or other animals and only when all other methods and means have been exhausted. Such a permit shall name a person or persons conducting the poisoning, specify the products to be used, give the boundaries of the area involved and specify the precautionary measures to be employed to ensure the safety of humans and other animals. Any drugs for euthanasia shall be administered by a licensed vet or a certified euthanasia technician. 
(l)  No person shall kill or wound, attempt to kill or wound or take the nest or eggs or young of any bird that is protected by federal or state law. Birds that are not regulated by the Illinois Department of Conservation are excluded from this restriction during the period of regulation. 
(m)  No person shall kill or wound, or attempt to kill or wound, or take or attempt to take any fish or wildlife in violation of any federal or state law or regulation. 
(n)  No person shall keep or permit to be kept or display for exhibition purposes any wild animal contrary to federal, state and local laws or regulations. 
(o)  No person shall permit at any time his animal to: 
(1)  Run uncontrolled; 
(2)  Make disturbing noises, including but not limited to, continued and repeated howling, barking, whining, or other utterances causing unreasonable annoyance, disturbance, or discomfort to neighbors or others in close proximity to the premises where the animal is being kept or harbored; 
(3)  Molest persons or vehicles by chasing, barking or biting; 
(4)  Attack other animals; 
(5)  Damage property other than the owner's. 
(p)  No person shall allow cat or dog feces to accumulate in any yard, pen or premises in or upon which a cat or dog shall be confined or kept so that it becomes offensive to those residing in the vicinity or a health hazard to the residing cat or dog. 
(q)  No person shall fail to remove feces deposited by his cat or dog, except guide dogs, upon the public ways or within the public places of the city or upon the premises of any person other than the owner without that person's consent. 
(r)  No person shall leave any animal unattended in a motor vehicle or enclosed trailer when the outside temperature shall exceed thirty (30) degrees Celsius (86° F) or contain any animal in such manner that said animal does not have proper air circulation while confined in a motor vehicle, trailer, kennel, dog house, or any type of container or structure in which an animal may be confined. 
(s)  No person shall own any animal which is known to be infected with, or an animal which an owner should know is infected with, any disease transmissible to other animals or man, including severe parasitism, unless such animal shall be confined in such a manner as not to expose other animals or man. 
(t)  Any animal which is on any public way or public place and which appears to be injured or severely diseased and for which care is not being provided on the scene by the owner or any injured or severely diseased animal that has strayed onto private premises shall be removed, if possible, to the care of the DuPage County Department of Animal Care and Control, or to the nearest veterinarian or veterinary hospital willing to accept same without guarantee of payment. If immediate removal shall not appear practical or possible or if the removed animal is in critical condition such animal may be deprived of life by the most humane method available on the scene unless the owner shall come forward beforehand and assume responsibility for immediate removal and care. 
(u)  Any person who, as the operator of a motor vehicle, strikes an animal shall stop at once and render such assistance as may be possible; or shall immediately report such injury to the animal owner, if known; or to the appropriate law enforcement agency. 
(v)  Any person having a dead animal within his possession or control or upon any premises owned or occupied by such person without the proper permit shall dispose of the dead animal in compliance with the Illinois Dead Animal Disposal Act. 
(w)  Every person in possession or control of any stable or place open for public use where any animals are kept, shall maintain the stable or place at all times in a clean, sanitary condition and conform to Illinois Fire Prevention Regulations. 
(x)  No person shall chain or leash a dog unattended outside unless the chain is at least twelve (12) feet long so as to allow for adequate exercise and freedom of movement and the period of confinement is less than thirty (30) minutes. The use of the term "unattended" shall for the purposes of this subsection be defined as the absence of an owner or other care taker of a dog from the premises where the dog is located. 
(y)  No person driving a motor vehicle shall transport any animal in the back of the vehicle in a space intended for any load on the vehicle unless the space is enclosed or has side and tail racks to a height of at least forty-six (46) inches extending vertically from the floor, the vehicle has installed means of preventing the animal from being discharged, or the animal is cross tethered to the vehicle, or is protected by secured container or cage in a manner which will prevent the animal from being thrown, falling or jumping from the vehicle. 
(z)  Nothing in this article shall prohibit the use of traps designed to kill pests or vermin such as mice, rats, gophers or moles when used for their intended purpose. 
(Ord. No. 19-O-0006, § 1, 4-1-2019)  
Sec. 11-79. - Rabies vaccination. 
(a)  Every owner, except animal shelters, animal impounding facilities and laboratory animal facilities, of a cat or dog four (4) months or more of age shall cause such cat or dog to be inoculated with rabies vaccine by a licensed veterinarian at such intervals as approved by the Illinois Department of Agriculture. The rabies vaccine shall be licensed by the United States Department of Agriculture and approved by the Illinois Department of Agriculture. 
(b)  Evidence of such rabies inoculation shall be entered on a certificate approved by the DuPage County Board. Veterinarians who inoculate a cat or dog shall procure from the DuPage County Animal Care and Control serially numbered tags, one (1) to be issued with each inoculation certificate. Only one (1) cat or dog shall be included on each certificate. Upon change of ownership application shall be made for a new inoculation certificate. Such tags shall be attached to the collar or harness worn by the cat or dog which the tag was issued when the cat or dog is off the property of the owner. 
(Ord. No. 19-O-0006, § 1, 4-1-2019)  
Sec. 11-80. - Biting animal capable of transmitting rabies. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person knowing that an individual has been bitten by an animal to refuse to notify, within twenty-four (24) hours, the police or other officer with the delegated authority who are responsible for the area in which the bite occurred. 
(b)  When the administrator receives information that any person has been bitten by an animal the administrator shall have the owner confine the biting animal under observation of a licensed veterinarian for a period of ten (10) days beginning within twenty-four (24) hours of the biting incident. All dogs and cats under observation, owned by a resident of the city, shall be implanted with a microchip approved by the administrator at the time of the first examination unless the animal is to be euthanized. The microchip number shall be reported to DuPage Animal Care and Control with the DuPage County Rabies Observation Notice. The biting animal may be confined in the house of its owner in a manner which will prohibit it from biting any person or animal if the administrator or other licensed veterinarian adjudges such confinement satisfactory. 
(1)  When the biting animal is currently inoculated with rabies vaccine the animal's health shall be reported by the veterinarian to the DuPage County Animal Care and Control on the first and tenth days of the observation period for rabies. 
(2)  When the biting animal is not currently inoculated with rabies vaccine the animal's health shall be reported by the veterinarian to the DuPage County Animal Care and Control on the first, fifth and tenth days of the observation period for rabies. 
(3)  When the biting animal is not currently inoculated with rabies vaccine and the owner refuses to have the animal examined by a veterinarian, DuPage County Animal Care and Control shall impound the animal for a period of ten (10) days. If the animal is not reclaimed by the owner within five (5) days of the end of the observation period, the animal will be euthanized. 
(c)  Confirmation of the health of the biting animal shall be sent by the veterinarian to the DuPage County Animal Care and Control within twenty-four (24) hours of the first and final examinations. Official forms shall be provided by DuPage County Animal Care and Control. 
(d)  When an animal confined for biting shows signs of rabies or acts in a manner which would lead a person to believe that an animal may have rabies, the owner or veterinarian shall notify the administrator immediately by telephone or in person of these signs. The administrator shall immediately notify the physician attending the bitten person or responsible health agency as soon as he receives notice of such signs. 
(e)  If the animal confined is determined not to be infected with rabies at the end of the period of confinement it shall be released from quarantine. The animal owner shall show proof of rabies inoculation for cats and dogs and shall pay any fee, charge or penalty including any fee for veterinary services attributed to the bite. A confined animal, when not redeemed by the owner may be disposed of in accordance with the Illinois state law. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for the owner of a biting animal to euthanize, sell, give away or otherwise dispose of or have inoculated against rabies the animal known to have bitten a person until it has been released from confinement for observation for rabies by the administrator. It shall be unlawful for the owner of such animal to refuse or fail to comply with the written or printed instructions made by the administrator. If such instructions cannot be delivered in person they shall be mailed to the owner of such animal by regular mail, postage prepaid. The affidavit or testimony of the administrator delivering or mailing such instructions is prima facie evidence that the owner of such animal was notified of his responsibilities. 
(Ord. No. 19-O-0006, § 1, 4-1-2019)  
Sec. 11-81. - Rabies case procedure. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the owner of an animal which shows signs of rabies or which acts in a manner which would lead a person to believe that such animal may have rabies to fail to notify the local police immediately by telephone or in person. 
(b)  The administrator shall investigate each report of an animal which shows signs of rabies or acts in a manner which would lead a person to believe that the animal may have rabies. Upon determination by the administrator or a licensed veterinarian that an animal may be infected with rabies, the owner of such animal shall be required by the administrator to surrender the animal to the administrator or a licensed veterinarian for confinement for a period of time as determined by the Illinois Department of Agriculture. 
(c)  When the animal confined is determined to be infected with rabies by the examining veterinarian the administrator shall order the animal humanely destroyed. A copy of this order shall be given to the owner of the animal or mailed to the last known address of the owner. Any animal capable of transmitting rabies in direct contact with the rabid animal whether or not the exposed animal has been inoculated with rabies shall be confined as recommended by the administrator. The administrator may order the exposed animal euthanized. 
(d)  If the animal confined is determined not to be infected with rabies at the end of the period of confinement it shall be released to the owner of such animal upon presenting proof of a current rabies inoculation certificate for cats and dogs and payment of any fee, charge or penalty including any fee for veterinary services. If the animal is not redeemed by the owner, the animal may be disposed of in accordance with Illinois state law. 
(e)  Whenever a case of rabies has occurred in a locality, or whenever the proper officials of a government unit are apprehensive of the spread of rabies, the administrator shall act as directed by the rules and regulations of the Illinois Department of Agriculture. 
(Ord. No. 19-O-0006, § 1, 4-1-2019)  
Sec. 11-82. - Stray animals. 
(a)  Whenever an officer or community service officer observes or is informed that an animal is roaming freely and not under the control of the owner, the animal shall be immediately apprehended and impounded. Any person may apprehend a stray animal and inform the local police or the administrator so that the stray animal can be impounded. 
(1)  All stray animals impounded shall have a record. The record shall include the owner's name, address and telephone number, if known; species or breed, color, sex and physical condition of the animal; license or tag number, if known; and the time and date impounded. 
(2)  The stray animal owner is responsible for all costs relating to the apprehension and impoundment of the animal found not under control. 
(3)  Owners of any dog or cat adopted from DuPage County Animal Care and Control shall have the animal examined by a veterinarian within seven (7) days of adoption and receive any necessary vaccinations and medications. The adopting owner shall not sell the animal nor use it in any way as a source of revenue. The adopting owner shall not give away or dispose of in any manner the animal within one (1) year of the date of adoption without the approval of the administrator. 
(Ord. No. 19-O-0006, § 1, 4-1-2019)  
Sec. 11-83. - Restrictions on controlled cats and dogs. 
(a)  Cats and dogs shall not be permitted to enter any place where food is processed for human consumption. Guide dogs and guard dogs used in food establishments are exempt from this restriction. 
(b)  Cats and dogs, except guide dogs, shall not be present at or upon any school premises, public playground or public swimming pool unless official written permission has been granted by the public agency or its agent owning the property. At no time shall cats and dogs be permitted in any sand box or sand piles in which children play. 
(Ord. No. 19-O-0006, § 1, 4-1-2019)  
Sec. 11-84. - Female cats and dogs in heat. 
All cats and dogs in heat (estrus) shall be confined in a building or secure enclosure and attended in such a manner that such female cat or dog cannot come into contact with a male of the same species except for planned breeding. 
(Ord. No. 19-O-0006, § 1, 4-1-2019)  
Sec. 11-85. - Certain animals prohibited. 
Possession of a lion, tiger, leopard, ocelot, jaguar, cheetah, margay, mountain lion, lynx, bobcat, jaguarundi, any hybrid thereof, or any other similar feline animal, bear hyena, wolf coyote, wolf-dog or coyote-dog hybrid, any member of the crocodilian family, poisonous reptile, or any other life threatening reptile or any other animal which is ferae naturae in the eyes of the law shall be prohibited except by any person or institution possessing state and/or federal permits enabling them to keep such animals. 
Possession of any roosters, chickens or any similar fowl, or hybrid thereof is also prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 19-O-0006, § 1, 4-1-2019)  
Sec. 11-86. - Vicious dogs. 
The applicable sections of the Illinois Animal Control Act, including, but not limited to, 510 Illinois Compiled Statutes Sections 5/15 and 5/26 are hereby incorporated as if set forth fully herein relative to the regulations of vicious dogs within the city. 
(Ord. No. 19-O-0006, § 1, 4-1-2019)  
Sec. 11-87. - Limit on number of animals. 
There shall be a maximum limitation per household of three (3) domestic animals; provided however, that any newborn animals shall be allowed to remain in the household despite the limitation of this section for up to four (4) months from the date of birth. Every animal exceeding the limit per household is subject to impoundment. 
(Ord. No. 19-O-0006, § 1, 4-1-2019)  
Sec. 11-88. - Restrictions on the sale of animals. 
No pet shop shall sell, deliver, offer for sale, barter, auction, give away, or otherwise transfer or dispose of cats or dogs. Nothing in this section shall prohibit pet stores from collaborating with animal care facilities or animal rescue organizations to offer space for such entities to showcase adoptable dogs and cats. 
(Ord. No. 19-O-0006, § 1, 4-1-2019)  
Sec. 11-89. - Invisible fencing. 
Persons who utilize "invisible fencing" to contain any animal must display prominently on their property immediately adjacent to the public right-of-way a sign, no more than one (1) square foot in area, which indicates that any animal located thereon is contained by way of "invisible fencing." Invisible fencing installed after July 3, 2017, must be set back from the public right-of-way a minimum of four (4) feet. 
(Ord. No. 19-O-0006, § 1, 4-1-2019)  
Sec. 11-90. - Violations; punishments. 
Violations of this section may be abated pursuant to the procedures set forth in section 10-4 of this Code. In addition, anyone violating this section shall be subject to the penalty set forth in section 1-8 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 19-O-0006, § 1, 4-1-2019)  
DIVISION 7. - AFFECTING SEX, MORALS AND PUBLIC DECENCY[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 18-O-0016, § 1, adopted May 7, 2018, amended division 7 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former division 7, §§ 11-91—11-94, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from ; Ord. No. 879, Art. VII, 5-17-65; Ord. No. 1442, 10-15-79; Ord. No. 05-O-0097, 12-5-2005; Ord. No. 11-O-0064, 12-5-2011) 
 
Sec. 11-91. - Public indecency. 
(a)  Any person of the age of seventeen (17) years and upwards who performs any of the following acts in a public place in the city commits a public indecency: 
(1)  Any act of sexual intercourse, or 
(2)  Any act of deviate sexual conduct, or 
(3)  Any lewd exposure of the body done with intent to arouse or to satisfy the sexual desire of the person, or 
(4)  A lewd fondling or caress of the body of another person of either sex. 
(b)  For purposes of this section "public place" means any place where the conduct may reasonably be expected to be viewed by others. 
(Ord. No. 18-O-0016, § 1, 5-7-2018)  
Sec. 11-92. - Prostitution, solicitation, pandering, patronizing a prostitute, keeping place of prostitution, or pimping. 
(a)  Prostitution. Any person who performs, offers or agrees to perform any of the following acts for money within the city commits an act of prostitution: 
(1)  Any act of sexual intercourse. 
(2)  Any act of deviate sexual conduct. 
(b)  Soliciting . Any person who performs any of the following acts within the city commits soliciting for prostitution: 
(1)  Solicits another for the purposes of prostitution, or 
(2)  Arranges or offers to arrange a meeting of persons for the purpose of prostitution, or 
(3)  Directs another to a place knowing the direction is for the purpose of prostitution. 
(c)  Pandering. A person who performs any of the following acts within the city for money commits pandering: 
(1)  Compels a female to become a prostitute. 
(2)  Arranges for, or offers to arrange, a situation in which a female may practice prostitution. 
(d)  Keeping place of prostitution: Any person who has or exercises control over the use of any place which could offer seclusion or shelter for the practice of prostitution within the city, who performs any of the following acts, keeps a place of prostitution: 
(1)  Knowingly grants or permits the use of such place for the purpose of prostitution, or 
(2)  Grants or permits the use of such place under circumstances from which he could reasonably know that the place is used or is to be used for purposes of prostitution, or 
(3)  Permits the continued use of a place after becoming aware of facts or circumstances from which he should reasonably know that the place is being used for purposes of prostitution. 
(e)  Patronizing a prostitute. Any person who performs any of the following acts within the city with a person not his spouse commits the offense of patronizing a prostitute: 
(1)  Engages in an act of sexual intercourse or deviate sexual conduct with a prostitute, or 
(2)  Enters or remains in a place of prostitution with intent to engage in an act of sexual intercourse or deviate sexual conduct. 
(f)  Pimping. Any person who receives money or other property from a prostitute not for a lawful consideration, knowing it was earned in whole, or in part, from practice of prostitution within the city commits pimping. 
(g)  Lewdness. Any person doing any of the following within the city shall be guilty of lewdness: 
(1)  Staging, contracting for or taking part in a lewd or indecent show or exhibit. 
(2)  Lewdly or indecently exposing himself or any portion of the human anatomy. 
(Ord. No. 18-O-0016, § 1, 5-7-2018)  
Sec. 11-93. - Possession of cannabis. 
(a)  Cannabis defined. Cannabis includes marijuana, hashish and other substances which are identified as including any parts of the plant Cannabis sativa whether growing or not, the seeds thereof, the resin extracted from any part of such plant, and any compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or preparation of such plant, its seed or resin, including tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) and all other cannabinol derivatives, including its naturally occurring or synthetically produced ingredients, whether produced directly or indirectly by extraction or independently by means of chemical synthesis or by a combination of extraction and chemical synthesis; but shall not include the mature stalks of such plant, fiber produced from such stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of such plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or preparation of such mature stalks (except the resin extracted therefrom), fiber, oil cake or the sterilized seed of such plant which is incapable of germination. 
(b)  Possession unlawful. It shall be a violation of this section for any person knowingly to possess any quantity of any substance containing Cannabis, except that the effect of this section shall be limited to persons knowingly possessing less than thirty (30) grams of any substance containing cannabis. 
(c)  Penalty. In addition to any other relief granted by the courts or the Administrative Law Judge, any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be subject to a fine per section 1-8, general penalty, of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 18-O-0016, § 1, 5-7-2018)  
Sec. 11-94. - Synthetic alternative drugs. 
(a)  Definitions. For purposes of this article, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires different meaning: 
A product containing a synthetic alternative drug means any product containing a synthetic cannabinoid, stimulant or psychedelic/hallucinogen, as those terms are defined herein. 
Synthetic cannabinoid means any laboratory-created compound that functions similar to the active ingredient in marijuana, tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), including, but not limited to, any quantity of a natural or synthetic material, compound, mixture, preparation, substance and their analog (including isomers, esters, ethers, salts, and salts of isomers) containing a cannabinoid receptor agonist, such as: 
(1)  JWH-007 (1-penty1-2-methyl-3-(1-naphthoyl)indole); 
(2)  JWH-015 ((2-Methyl-1-propyl-1H-indo1-3-y1)-1-naphthalenylmethanone); 
(3)  JWH-018 (1-penty1-3-(1-naphthoyl)indole); 
(4)  JWH-019 (1-hexy1-3-(naphthalen-l-oyl)indole); 
(5)  JWH-073 (naphthalen-l-y1-(1-butylindol-3-yl)methanone); 
(6)  JWH-081 (4-methoxynaphthalen-l-y1-(1-pentylindol-3-yl)methanone); 
(7)  JWH-098 (4-methoxynaphthalen-l-y1-(1-penty1-2-methylindo1-3- yl)methanone); 
(8)  JWH-122 (1-Penty1-3-(4-methyl-l-naphthoyl)indole); 
(9)  JWH-164 (7-methoxynaphthalen-l-y1-(1-pentylindol-3-yl)methanone; 
(10)  JWH-200 (1-(2-morpholin-4-ylethypindo1-3-y1)-naphthalen-l-ylmethanone); 
(11)  JWH-203 (2-(2-chloropheny1)-1-(1-pentylindol-3-y)thanone; 
(12)  JWH-210 (4-ethylnaphthalen-l-y1-(1-pentylindol-3-yl)methanone; 
(13)  JWH-250 (1-penty1-3-(2-methoxyphenylacetypindole); 
(14)  JWH-251 (1-penty1-3-(2-methylphenylacetypindole); 
(15)  JWH-398 (1-penty1-3-(4-chloro-l-naphthoypindole); 
(16)  HU-210 ((6aR,10aR)-9-(Hydroxymethyl)-6,6-dimethy1-3-(2-methyloctan-2-y1)- 6a,7,10,10a- tetrahydrobenzo [c]chromen-l-ol); 
(17)  HU-211 ((6aS,10aS)-9-(Hydroxymethyl)-6,6-dimethy1-3-(2-methyloctan-2-y1)- 6a,7,10,10a- tetrahydrobenzo [c]chromen-l-ol); 
(18)  HU-308 ([(1R,2R,5R)-242,6-dimethoxy-4-(2-methyloctan-2-yl)pheny1]-7,7-dimethy1-4- bicyclo[3.1.1]hept-3-enyl] methanol); 
(19)  HU-331 ((3-hydroxy-2-[(1R,6R)-3-methy1-6-(1-methyletheny1)-2-cyclohexen-1-y1]- 5- penty1- 2,5-cyclohexadiene-1,4-dione); 
(20)  CP 55,940 (2-[(1R,2R,5R)-5-hydroxy-2-(3-hydroxypropyl) cyclohexyl]- 5-(2- methyloctan-2-yl)phenol); 
(21)  CP 47,497 (2-[(1R,3S)-3-hydroxycyclohexyl]- 5- (2-methyloctan-2-yl)phenol) and its homologues; 
(22)  WIN 55,212-2 ((R)-(+)-[2,3-Dihydro-5-methyl-3-(4-morpholinylmethyl)pyrrolo [1,2,3-de)- 1,4- benzoxazin-6-y1]-1- nepthalenylmethanone); 
(23)  RCS-4 ((4-methoxyphenyl)(1-penty1-1H-indo1-3-y1)methanone); 
(24)  RCS-8 (1-(1-(2-cyclohexylethyl)-1H-indo1-3-y1)-2-(2-methoxyphenypethanone). 
Synthetic stimulant means any compound that mimics the effects of any federally controlled Schedule I substance such as cathinone, methcathinone, MDMA and MDEA, including, but not limited to, any quantity of a natural or synthetic material, compound, mixture, preparation, substance and their analog (including salts, isomers, and salts of isomers) containing substances which have a stimulant effect on the central nervous system, such as: 
(1)  3-Fluoromethcathinone; 
(2)  4-Fluoromethcathinone (other name: flephedrone); 
(3)  3,4-Methylenedioxymethcathinone (other name: methylone, MDMC); 
(4)  3,4-Methylenedioxypyrovalerone (other name: MDPV); 
(5)  4-Methylmethcathinon (other names: mephedrone, 4-MMC); 
(6)  4-Methoxymethcathinone (other names: methedrone, bk-PMMA, PMMC); 
(7)  4-Ethylmethcathinone (other name: 4-EMC); 
(8)  Ethcathinone; 
(9)  Beta-keto-N-methylbenzodioxyolylpropylamine (other names: butylone, bk-MBDB); 
(10)  Napthylpyrovalerone (other names: naphyrone, NRG-1); 
(11)  N,N-dimethylcathinone (other name: metamfepramone); 
(12)  Alpha-pyrrolidinopropiophenone (other name: alpha-PPP); 
(13)  4-methoxy-alpha-pyrrolidinopropiophenone (other name: MOPPP); 
(14)  3,4-methylenedioxy-alpha-pyrrolidinopropiophenone (other name: MDPPP); 
(15)  Alpha-pyrrolidinovalerophenone (other name: alpha-PVP); 
(16)  6,7-kihydro-5H-indeno(5,6-d)-1,3-dioxa1-6-amine) (other name: MDAI); 
(17)  Any compound that is structurally derived from 2-amino- 1-phenyl-l-propanone by modification or substitution in any of the following ways: 
a.  In the phenyl ring to any extent with alkyl, alkoxy, alkylenedioxy, haloalkyl, or halide substituents, whether or not further substituted in the phenyl ring by one (1) or more other univalent substituents; 
b.  At the 3-position with an alkyl substituent; 
c.  At the nitrogen atom with alkyl, dialkyl, benzyl, or methoxybenzyl groups; or 
d.  By inclusion of the nitrogen atom in a cyclic structure. 
Synthetic psychedelic/hallucinogen means any compound that mimics the effects of any federally controlled Schedule I substance, including but not limited to, any quantity of a natural or synthetic material, compound, mixture, preparation, substance and their analog (including salts, isomers, esters, ethers and salts of isomers) containing substances which have a psychedelic/hallucinogenic effect on the central nervous system and/or brain, such as: 
(1)  2-(2,5-Dimethoxy-4-ethylphenyl)ethanamine (2C-E); 
(2)  2-(2,5-dimethoxy-4-methylphenyl)ethanamine (2C-D); 
(3)  2-(4-Chloro-2,5-dimethoxyphenyl)ethanamine (2C-C); 
(4)  2-(4-Iodo-2,5-dimethoxyphenyl)ethanamine (2C-I); 
(5)  2-(4-(Ethylthio)-2,5-dimethoxyphenyl)ethanamine (2C-T-2); 
(6)  2-(4-(Isopropylthio)-2,5-dimethoxyphenyl)ethanamine (2C-T-4); 
(7)  2-(2,5-Dimethoxyphenyl)ethanamine (2C-H); 
(8)  2-(2,5-Dimethoxy-4-nitro-phenyl)ethanamine (2C-N); 
(9)  2-(2,5-Dimethoxy-4-(n)-propylphenyl)ethanamine (2C-P). 
(b)  Sale or delivery unlawful. It shall be a violation of this section for any person to sell, offer for sale or deliver any product containing a synthetic cannabinoid, stimulant or psychedelic/hallucinogen including, but not limited to, the following: 
POW 	Wicked X 	XTREME Spice 
Spice Gold 	K2 Summit 	Stinger 
Swagger Grape 	Love Strawberry 	Pulse 
Spice Gold 	Shanti Spice Blueberry 	Mystery 
Pulse 	Aztec Midnight Wind 	Bad 2 the Bone 
Black Mamba 	Tezcatlipoca 	Dragon Spice 
Naughty Nights 	Sativah 	Samurai Spirit 
K2 Watermelon 	Mid-Atlantic Exemplar 	Buzz 
Black Mamba 	(K2 Summit) 	Midnight Chill 
Green Monkey Chronic Salvia 	Aztec Gold 	K Royal 
Voodoo Remix 	K2 Summit 	Spicylicious 
G Greenies Caramel Crunch 	Ultra Cloud 10 	Shanti Spice 
Black Diamond 	Colorado Chronic 	K3 Grape 
Blueberry Hayze 	K3 Kryptonite 	K3 Strawberry 
Eruption Spice 	Funky Monkey XXXX 	K3 Blueberry 
Love Strawberry 	K2 Blue 	Earthquake 
Voodoo Child 	K2 Blonde 	Ocean Blue 
Mid-Atlantic Exemplar 	K2 Pink 	G Four 
K2 Summit 	K2 Citron K2 	Wood Stock 
Magic Dragon Platinum 	Mellon K2 	K3 Legal 
Fire Bird Ultimate 	Pineapple 	Who Dat 
Strength Cinnamon 	K2 Standard 	Dark Night II 
Nitro 	K2 Summit 	Spike 99 Ultra 
Black Magic Salvia 	Si. S Werve 	2010 
Black Mamba 	Chronic Spice 	Zombie World 
K2 Strawberry 	K3 Mango 	SYN Swagg 
K2 Blueberry 	K3 Original 	SYN Smooth 
SYN Spearmint 	Magic Spice 	SYN Incense Smooth 
SYN Spearmint #2 	Voodoo Magic 	SYN Incense Spearmint 
SYN Chill 	Texas Gold 	SYN Incense LemonLime 
SYN Suave 	Demon 	Super Summit 
Heavenscent Suave 	K3 	D-Rail 
SYN Vanilla 	K2 Pink Panties 	K2 Peach 
SYN Vanilla #2 	Heaven Improved 	Funky Monkey 
SYN Lemon Lime 	K3 Sun 	K2 Summit Coffee Work 
SYN Lemon Lime #2 	K3 Dusk 	K3 Legal Original (Black) 
New K3 Improved 	K3 Original Improved 	K3 Legal Sun (Black) 
C4 Herbal Incense 	K2 Summit 	K3 Legal Sea (silver) 
New Improved K3 Cosmic Blend 	New K3 Heaven 	K3 Legal Earth (silver) 
New Improved K3 Dynamite 	New K3 Earth 	K2 Cloud 9 
New Improved K3 Kryptonite 	New K3 Sea Improved 	Greenies Strawberry 
Utopia 	New-Kron Bomb 	K2 Blonde 
Utopia-Blue Berry 	Cherry Bomb 	K2 Standard 
Euphoria 	Rebel Spice 	K2 Citron 
Who Dat Herbal Incense 	Mega Bomb 	K2 (unknown variety) 
Love Potion 69 	Mr. Smiley's 	K2 Summit Space 
Legal Eagle 	Summer Skyy 	K2 Blue 
K2 Standard 	Moe Joe Fire 	K2 Pink 
Super Kush 	Fully Loaded 	K2 Latte 
Bayou Blaster 	Da Block 	K2 Mint 
Paradise 	Back Draft 	K2 Silver 
Red Bird 	K1 Orbit 	K2 Peach 
K1 Gravity 	C3 	Spike Gold 
Spike Maxx 	Banana Cream Nuke 	Humboldt Gold 
Spike Diamond 	K4 Silver 	K2 Orisha Regular 
Spike Silver 	K4 Gold 	K2 Orisha Max 
K2 Strawberry 	K3 Heaven Improved 	K2 Orisha Super 
K2 Pineapple Express 	K3 Heaven Legal 	K2 Amazonian Shelter 
K2 Blueberry 	K3 Sun Legal 	K2 Solid Sex on the Mountain 
K2 Pink 	K3 Sun Improved 	Midnight Chill 
K2 Blonde 	K3 Kryptonite 	Unknown cigarette 
K2 Summit 	K3 XXX 	Freedom 
K2 Citron 	K3 Cosmic Blend 	K2 Sex 
K2 Ultra 	K3 Original 	K2 Orisha White Magic Super 
K2 Blue 	C4 	K2 Orisha Black Magic Max 
MNGB Tropical Thunder 	K1 Gravity 	K2 Thai Dream 
MNGB Pinata Colada 	K1 Orbit 	K4 Bubble 
MNGB Almond/Vanilla 	K2 Pina Colada 	MTN-787 
MNGB Peppermint 	K3 Kryptonite 	K2 Kryptonite 
MNGB Spear Mint 	K3 XXX 	Legal Eagle Apple 
p.e.p. pourri Twisted Vanilla 	K3 Cosmic Blend 	Pie K4 Purple Haze 
p.e.p. pourri Original Spearmint 	K3 Original 	K4 Summit Remix 
p.e.p. pourri Love Strawberry 	Rasta Citrus Spice 	8-Ball 
p.e.p. pourri X Blueberry 	Kind Spice 	C4 
K2 Summit 	Time Warp 	K2 
Voo Doo Remix (oranage package) 	Rasta Citrus Spice 	Tribal Warrior 
Voo Doo Remix (black package) 	Pink Tiger 	Spike99 
exSES 	Spice Gold 	Spice Gold 
Yucatan Fire Smoke 	Cill Out 	Spice Diamond 
Skunk 	Smoke 	Spice Silver 
Sence 	Forest Humus 	Genie 
EX-SES Platinum Blueberry 	Scope Vanilla 	Spike 99 
EX-SES Platinum Cherry 	Scope Wildberry 	Jamaican Gold 
EX-SES Platinum Strawberry 	Chill X 	Potpourri 
EX-SES Platinum Vanilla 	Space 	Winter Boost 
Magic Silver 	Silent Black 	Citrus 
Spice Artic Synergy 	Sence 	Spice Gold 
Spice Diamond 	Smoke 	Spicey XXX 
Spice Gold 	Caneff 	Spike 99 
Spice Tropical Synergy 	Spice Gold 	Ex-SES Platinum 
Spicey Regular XXX Blueberry 	Gold Spirit Spice 	Magic Gold 
Spicey Regular XXX Strawberry 	Yucatan Fire 	Bombay Blue 
Spicey Ultra Strong XXX Vanilla 	Spice Diamond 	Dream 
Spicey Ultra Strong XXX Strawberry 	Smoke Plus 	Spice Tropical Synergy 
Spike 99 Ultra Blueberry 	Magic Silver 	Diamond Spirit 
Spike 99 Ultra Cherry 	Mojo 	Platinum Strawberry 
Spike 99 Ultra Strawberry 	EX-SES 	Spicey Ultra Strong XXX Vanilla 
Spike 99 Ultra Strawberry 		
 
(c)  Possession unlawful. It shall be a violation of this section for any person to knowingly possess a product containing a synthetic cannabinoid, stimulant or psychedelic/hallucinogen. 
(d)  Use unlawful. It shall be a violation of this section for any person to be under the influence of a synthetic cannabinoid, stimulant or psychedelic/hallucinogen. 
(e)  Penalty. In addition to any other relief granted by the courts or the administrative law judge, any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be subject to a fine per section 1-8, general penalty, of this Code 
(Ord. No. 18-O-0016, § 1, 5-7-2018)  
Secs. 11-95—11-100. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 8. - CONCERNING FIRE, SANITATION AND HEALTH 
 
Sec. 11-101. - Open burning. 
Open burning is restricted as specified per the fire prevention code as adopted and amended in section 4-11. 
(Ord. No. 879, Art. IX, 5-17-65; Ord. No. 2340, § 2, 10-15-90; Ord. No. 2488, § 2, 10-7-91; Ord. No. 05-O-0001, § 1(Exh. A), 4-4-2005; Ord. No. 15-O-0017, § 7, 7-6-2015) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 15-O-0017, § 7, adopted July 6, 2015, shall be in full force and effect on Aug. 1, 2015.  
Sec. 11-102. - Fireworks. 
(a)  The term "fireworks" shall mean and include any explosive composition, or any substance or combination of substances, or article prepared for the purpose of producing a visible or audible effect of a temporary exhibitional nature by explosion, combustion, deflagration or detonation and shall include blank cartridges, toy cannons in which explosives are used, the type of balloons which require fire underneath to propel the same, firecrackers, torpedoes, skyrockets, Roman candles, bombs or other fireworks of like construction and any fireworks containing any explosive compound; or any tablets or other device containing any explosive substance, or containing combustible substances producing visual effects. The term "fireworks" shall not include snake or glow worm pellets; smoke devices; sparklers; trick noisemakers known as "party poppers," "snappers," "trick matches," "cigarette loads," "booby traps" and "auto burglar alarms"; toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns, or other devices in which paper or plastic caps containing twenty-five hundredths grains or less of explosive compound are used, provided they are so constructed that the hand cannot come in contact with the cap when in place for the explosion; and any toy pistol paper or plastic caps which contain less than twenty-five hundredths grains of explosive mixture; the same and use of which shall be permitted at all times. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to possess, offer for sale, expose for sale, sale at retail or use or explode any fireworks within the city unless permission has been granted by the city council or its designee. 
(Ord. No. 879, Art. IX, § 2, 5-17-65; Ord. No. 1777, § 1, 12-17-84; Ord. No. 06-O-0042, § 2, 5-1-2006)  
Sec. 11-103. - Ashes, rubbish, offal or garbage. 
(a)  No person shall allow to accumulate on property owned by him or under his control, any ashes, rubbish, offal or garbage, whereby the same would be a hazard to public health or safety. 
(b)  No person shall deposit any ashes, rubbish, offal or garbage upon any property of another without first obtaining the consent so to do from the owner or the person in whose control said property has been placed by the owner. 
(c)  No person shall deposit any ashes, rubbish or offal or garbage upon any public street, alley or way. 
(d)  No person shall burn any offal or garbage within the city limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 879, Art. IX, § 3, 5-17-65)  
Sec. 11-104. - Buildings, factories and businesses. 
(a)  No person shall erect, continue or use any building or other place for living in, or the exercise of, any trade, hobby, employment or manufacture which by producing noxious exhalation is offensive or dangerous to the health of individuals or the public. 
(b)  No person shall erect, continue or use any building or other place for living in, or the exercise of any trade, hobby, employment or manufacture which by its physical condition is offensive or dangerous to any individual or to the public. 
(c)  No person shall operate any business, the operation of which is so unwholesome as to endanger any individual or the public. 
(Ord. No. 879, Art. IX, § 4, 5-17-65)  
Sec. 11-105. - Water and wells. 
No person shall render unwholesome or make or injure any stream, lake, pond, well, river, spring, public or private water supply contaminating or placing therein any of the following: 
(1)  Animal carcass. 
(2)  Offal, filth or garbage. 
(3)  Any substance tending to render the same impure or unwholesome. 
(Ord. No. 879, Art. IX, § 5, 5-17-65)  
Sec. 11-106. - Transportation of radioactive materials. 
Movement of any radioactive material under any condition shall not be allowed on the streets or alleys of the City of West Chicago except when, and as authorized by the applicable federal or state authority having jurisdiction over the subject material. 
(Ord. No. 2202, § 1, 9-20-89; Ord. No. 2405, §§ 1, 2, 4-1-91)  
Secs. 11-107—11-115. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 9. - AFFECTING STREETS, ALLEYS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC WAYS 
 
Sec. 11-116. - Prohibited acts. 
No person shall do any of the following to any road, street, alley, sidewalk, public easement or public way of the city: 
(1)  Place or cause to be placed any obstruction thereon. 
(2)  Deposit or allow to be deposited thereon, any dirt, mud, garbage, offal, refuse or other material of any kind or nature. 
(3)  Allow any tree or shrub to overhang. 
(4)  Place or cause to be placed, any flag, banner, sign, rope, string, cable, wire, bunting or display of any kind or nature or description over, upon or along. 
(5)  Perform an act, display or amusement thereon without first obtaining the consent of the council. 
(6)  Place, allow or cause to be placed any awning that overhangs unless said overhang is at least seven and one-half (7½) feet above said public way. 
(7)  Sell, attempt to sell or cause to be sold, any item without first having obtained the consent of the council to hold said street sale. 
(8)  Damage. 
(9)  Cut into or through, without first having obtained the consent of the council. 
(10)  Spit upon. 
(11)  To annoy or cause injury to any person on any street or sidewalk or other public place by placing any obstruction upon or across the same or by jeering at or deriding, with intent to annoy and cause discomfort or inconvenience to any person in the lawful and orderly pursuit of his business or pleasure in a street or public place. 
(12)  To crowd, jostle, scold, insult, threaten, assault, beat, strike, kick, injure or annoy or disturb any person in any street or public place or to injure, tear, destroy, spit on or soil the wearing apparel of any person in any such place. 
(13)  Loiter or to lounge about any door or entrance of any church, hall or other room or building used for public assemblies after being ordered away by any person in charge of such hall, room or building. 
(14)  Willfully and unnecessarily hinder, obstruct or delay or willfully and unnecessarily attempt to delay, hinder or obstruct any other person in lawfully walking upon or traveling along or upon any public sidewalk, street or other public way in this municipality. 
(15)  Sell, attempt to sell, or cause to be sold any food and/or beverage from a cart, nonmotorized trailer or motor vehicle, except in compliance with section 9-82 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 879, Art. X, § 1, 5-17-65; Ord. No. 1064, § 2, 10-5-70; Ord. No. 2969, § 10, 5-6-96)  
Secs. 11-117—11-130. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 10. - CONCERNING GUNS AND WEAPONS 
 
Sec. 11-131. - Discharge—Guns. 
(a)  No person shall discharge any gun of any kind or nature or description within the city. 
(b)  The above shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  Peace officers in their official duties. 
(2)  Persons using, in accordance with all rules and regulations, the range in the city park. 
(Ord. No. 879, Art. XI, § 2, 5-17-65)  
Sec. 11-132. - Same—Air guns, air pistols, etc. 
(a)  No person shall be permitted to fire or discharge upon the public streets, walks and ways or upon the property of another without his, its or their express permission so to do, within the city any air gun, air pistol, spring gun or spring pistol or device which is intended to propel or project a bullet, pellet, arrow or similar projectile. 
(b)  Every air gun, air pistol, spring gun or spring pistol or other device described in subsection (a), when used or operated contrary to the provisions of this section by any person is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and is subject to seizure and confiscation by any police officer and shall be disposed of as the police department shall direct. 
Upon the seizure of any device because of its use contrary to the provisions of this section, the police officer making such seizure shall forthwith cause a complaint to be filed, before a court of competent jurisdiction and a summons to be issued requiring the owner or person in possession of said property to appear in court and show cause why the device seized should not be forfeited to the city. In case of any failure to serve such summons upon the owner of such seized property or person in possession of the same at the time of seizure thereof, notice of the proceedings before the court, shall be given as required by the statutes of the state, in cases of attachment. Upon the return of the summons, duly served or upon posting or publication of notice made as hereinbefore provided, the court shall proceed to determine the question of the illegality of the use of the seized property and upon judgment being entered to the effect that the property was illegally used, an order shall be entered providing for the forfeiture of said seized property to the city. Such confiscation or forfeiture shall not preclude or mitigate prosecution and assessment of penalties. 
All costs of publication or posting of notice as required herein shall be paid by the city. 
(Ord. No. 879, Art. XI, § 3, 5-17-65)  
Sec. 11-133. - Unlawful use. 
(a)  A person commits the offense of unlawful use of weapons when he knowingly: 
(1)  Sells, manufactures, purchases, possesses or carries any bludgeon, blackjack, slingshot, sandclub, sandbag, shotgun with a barrel less than eighteen (18) inches in length, metal knuckles or any knife; commonly referred to as a switchblade knife, which has a blade that opens automatically by hand pressure applied to a button, spring or other device in the handle of the knife; or 
(2)  Carries or possesses with intent to use the same unlawfully against another, a dagger, dirk, billy, dangerous knife, razor, stiletto or any other dangerous or deadly weapon or instrument of like character; or 
(3)  Carries on or about his person or in any vehicle a tear gas gun, projector or bomb or any object containing noxious liquid gas or substance; or 
(4)  Carries concealed in any vehicle or concealed on or about his person except when on his land or in his own abode or fixed places of business any pistol, revolver or other firearm; or 
(5)  Sets a spring gun; or 
(6)  Possesses any device or attachment of any kind designed, used or intended for use in silencing the report of any firearm; or 
(7)  Sells, manufactures, purchases, possesses or carries any weapon from which more than eight (8) shots or bullets may be discharged by a single function of the firing device. 
(b)  Subsection (a) shall not apply to: 
(1)  Peace officers or any person summoned by any such officers to assist in making arrests or preserving the peace while he is actually engaged in assisting such officer. 
(2)  Watchmen while actually engaged in the performance of their duties of their employment. 
(3)  Members of any club or organization organized for the purpose of practicing shooting at targets upon established target ranges, whether public or private, while such members are using their firearms on such target ranges. 
(Ord. No. 879, Art. XI, § 4, 5-17-65)  
Secs. 11-134—11-145. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 11. - AFFECTING THE ADMINISTRATION OF CITY GOVERNMENT 
 
Sec. 11-146. - Resisting or obstructing a peace officer. 
No person shall knowingly resist or obstruct the performance of a police officer, knowing that he is a police officer, from any authorized act within his official capacity. 
(Ord. No. 879, Art. XII, § 1, 5-17-65)  
Sec. 11-147. - Resisting or obstructing service of process. 
No person shall resist or obstruct the authorized service of process by any police officer. 
(Ord. No. 879, Art. XII, § 2, 5-17-65)  
Sec. 11-148. - Obstructing justice. 
A person obstructs justice when, with the intent to prevent the apprehension or obstruct the prosection for a violation of any provision of this Code or other city ordinance, commits any of the following acts: 
(1)  Destroys, alters, conceals or disguises physical evidence, plants false evidence, furnishes false information; or 
(2)  Induces a witness having knowledge material to the subject at issue to leave the city or to conceal himself so that he will not be available to testify; or 
(3)  Possessing knowledge material to the subject issue he attempts to avoid testifying by concealing himself or leaving the city. 
(Ord. No. 879, Art. XII, § 3, 5-17-65)  
Sec. 11-149. - Escape. 
No person shall help any prisoner of the city to escape from any confinement imposed by any ordinance of the city or statute of the state. 
(Ord. No. 879, Art. XII, § 4, 5-17-65)  
Sec. 11-150. - Aiding an officer. 
No person upon command shall refuse or knowingly fail reasonably to aid a person known by him to be a peace officer of the city to do the following: 
(1)  Apprehend a person whom the officer is authorized to apprehend. 
(2)  Prevent the commission by another of any offense. 
(Ord. No. 879, Art. XII, § 5, 5-17-65)  
Sec. 11-151. - Compounding a crime. 
No person shall receive or offer to another any consideration for a promise not to prosecute or aid in the prosecution of any violator of any provision of this Code or other city ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 879, Art. XII, § 6, 5-17-65)  
Sec. 11-152. - False statements. 
(a)  No person shall, under oath or affirmation in any city proceeding or in a trial involving a provision of this Code or other city ordinance where such oath or affirmation is required, make a false statement, material to the issue or point in question which he does not believe to be true. 
(b)  No person shall procure or induce another to violate subsection (a). 
(Ord. No. 879, Art. XII, § 7, 5-17-65)  
Sec. 11-153. - Impersonation of city official. 
No person shall falsely represent himself to be an officer, including police officer, fireman nor an attorney for this city. 
(Ord. No. 879, Art. XII, § 8, 5-17-65)  
Sec. 11-154. - False documents. 
No person shall issue or deliver any document which he knows falsely purports to be or simulates any civil or criminal process of the city. 
(Ord. No. 879, Art. XII, § 9, 5-17-65)  
Sec. 11-155. - Destruction of public notice. 
No person shall knowingly and without lawful authority, alter, destroy, deface, remove or conceal any public notice of the city according to the law during the time for which the notice was to remain posted. 
(Ord. No. 879, Art. XII, § 10, 5-17-65)  
Sec. 11-156. - Bribery. 
A person commits bribery when: 
(1)  With intent to influence the performance of any act related to the employment or function of any public officer or public employee of the city he promises or tenders to that person any property or personal advantage which he is not authorized by law to accept; or 
(2)  He receives, retains or agrees to accept any property or personal advantage which he is not authorized by law to accept knowing that such property or personal advantage was promised or tendered with intent to cause him to influence the performance of any act related to the employment or function of any public officer or public employee of the city. 
(Ord. No. 879, Art. XII, § 11, 5-17-65)  
Sec. 11-157. - Failure to report a bribe. 
No public officer or public employee shall fail to report forthwith to the city attorney any bribe offer. 
(Ord. No. 879, Art. XII, § 12, 5-17-65)  
Sec. 11-158. - Misconduct. 
A public officer or employee of the city commits misconduct when in his official capacity, he commits any of the following acts: 
(1)  Intentionally or recklessly fails to perform a mandatory duty as required by law; or 
(2)  Knowingly performs an act which he knows he is forbidden by law to perform; or 
(3)  With intent to obtain a personal advantage for himself or another be performs an act in excess of his lawful authority; or 
(4)  Solicits or knowingly accepts for the performance of any act a fee or reward which he knows is not authorized by law. 
(Ord. No. 879, Art. XII, § 13, 5-17-65)  
Sec. 11-159. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 12. - LITTER IN PUBLIC AND PRIVATE PLACES 
 
Sec. 11-160. - Purposes. 
The purposes of this division is to: 
(1)  Define, prevent and abate littering within the city as a nuisance; 
(2)  Promote the public health by preventing and abating the accumulation of litter, garbage, refuse, rubbish, and debris on the public streets, alleys, sidewalks and upon other public and private property; and 
(3)  Prevent and abate the unwanted and possibly destructive placement of litter, including commercial and noncommercial handbills, upon vehicles, the public streets and other public property and upon private property when and where it is not desired by the owner of such private property. 
(Ord. No. 2404, § 1, 4-1-91)  
Sec. 11-161. - Definitions. 
Unless otherwise expressly stated or the context clearly indicates a different sense the following terms shall, for the purpose of this division, have the meanings indicated in this section: 
Aircraft is any contrivance now known or hereafter invented, used or designated for navigation or for flight in the air. The word "aircraft" shall include helicopters, and lighter-than-air dirigibles and balloons. 
Commercial handbill is any printed or written matter, any sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet, or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any manner of literature which: 
(1)  Advertises for sale any merchandise; 
(2)  Directs attention to any business or mercantile or commercial establishment, or other activity, for the purpose of either directly or indirectly promoting the interests thereof by sales; or 
(3)  Directs attention or advertises any meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition, or event of any kind. 
(4)  While containing reading matter other than advertising matter is predominately and essentially an advertisement, and is distributed or circulated for advertising purposes, or for the private benefit and gain of any person so engaged as advertiser or distributor. 
Container: 
(1)  A reusable container is a receptacle made of plastic, metal, or fiberglass with a capacity not to exceed thirty-two (32) gallons, a loaded weight of no more than thirty-five (35) pounds, a tight-fitting lid, and handles of adequate strength for lifting; 
(2)  A nonreusable container is a bag made of plastic with sufficient wall strength to maintain physical integrity when lifted by the top. 
Garbage is a putrescible animal or vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking, serving or consumption of food and including food containers. 
Litter is "garbage," "refuse," "rubbish," "commercial handbills," "noncommercial handbills" and "newspapers," as defined herein and all other waste material of any kind which if thrown or deposited as herein prohibited tends to create a danger to public health, safety, and welfare. 
Newspaper is any newspaper of general circulation as defined by general law, any newspaper duly entered with the Post Office Department of the United States, in accordance with federal statute or regulation, and any newspaper filed and recorded with any recording officer as provided by general law; and in addition thereto, shall mean and include any periodical or current magazine regularly published with not less than four (4) issues per year, and sold to the public. 
Noncommercial handbill is any printed or written matter, any sample, or any device, dodger, circular leaflet, pamphlet, newspaper, magazine, paper, booklet, or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter of literature not included in the aforesaid definition of a "commercial handbill" or "newspaper." 
Park is a park, reservation, playground, beach, recreation center or any other public area in the city, owned or used by the city and devoted to active or passive recreation. 
Private premises is any parcel of land, dwelling, house, building, other structure or residential unit designed or used either wholly or in part for private residential, commercial or other purposes whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant, and shall include any vacant lot, yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, step(s), vestibule or mailbox belonging or pertinent to such dwelling, house, building, or other structure. 
Public place is any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys, or other public ways and any and all public parks, squares, spaces, grounds and buildings. 
Refuse is all putrescible and nonputrescible solid waste, except body waste, including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleaning debris, dead animals, abandoned automobiles, solid market, and industrial wastes, in a solid or semiliquid state, and in any combination. 
Rubbish is a nonputrescible solid waste consisting of both combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, wrappings, cigarettes, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass bedding, crockery and similar materials including yard and garden waste. 
Vehicle is every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, including devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
(Ord. No. 2404, § 1, 4-1-91)  
Sec. 11-162. - Litter prohibited. 
(a)  Litter in public and private places prohibited. No person shall throw or deposit litter or newspapers in any public place within the city except in public trash receptacles and in such a manner that the litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any part of any park or upon any street or other public place. Where public trash receptacles are not provided, all such litter shall be carried away from the park, street or public place by the person responsible for its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere, as provided herein. 
(b)  Placement of litter in receptacles so as to prevent scattering. Persons placing litter in public trash receptacles or in authorized private receptacles shall do so in such a manner as to prevent such litter from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon any private premises. 
(c)  Sweeping litter into gutters prohibited. No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other public place within the city, the accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. 
(d)  Duty to keep sidewalks free of litter. Owners, occupants and/or operators of private premises within the city shall keep the sidewalk in front of those private premises free of litter. 
(e)  Litter thrown by persons in vehicles. No person while a driver or a passenger in a vehicle shall throw or deposit litter upon any street or other public place within the city, or upon private premises. 
(f)  Truck loads causing litter. No person shall drive or move any truck or other vehicle within the city unless such vehicle is so constructed and/or loaded as to prevent any load, contents or litter from being blown or deposited upon any street, alley, or other public place. 
(g)  Dropping litter from aircraft. No person in an aircraft shall throw out, drop or deposit within the city any litter, handbill or any other object, nor shall any person knowingly authorize another person to throw out, drop or deposit from an aircraft any litter, handbill or other object. 
(h)  Litter in lakes and fountains. No person shall throw or deposit litter in any fountain, pond, lake, stream, river or any other body of water within the city. 
(i)  Litter on private premises. No person shall throw or deposit litter on any private premises within the city, whether owned by such person or not, except that the owner or person in control of private premises may maintain private receptacles for collection in such a manner that litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk, other public place or upon any other private premises. 
(j)  Owner to maintain premises free of litter. The owner or person in control of any private premises shall at all times maintain the premises free of accumulated litter provided, however, that this section shall not prohibit the storage of litter in private receptacles for collection nor prevent the maintenance of a compost pile for personal use and in an offensive manner, with the compost only consistent of yard clippings and leaves. 
(k)  Litter and vacant lots. No person shall throw or deposit litter on any open or vacant private premises within the city whether owned by such person or not. 
(Ord. No. 2404, § 1, 4-1-91)  
Sec. 11-163. - Handbills. 
(a)  Throwing or distributing in public places. No person shall place, throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon any sidewalk, street or other public place within the city, nor shall any person hand out, distribute, or sell any commercial or noncommercial handbill in any public place, provided, however, that it shall not be unlawful on any sidewalk, street or other public place within the city for any person to hand out or distribute, without charge to the receiver thereof, any noncommercial handbill to any person willing to voluntarily accept it. 
(b)  Placing on vehicles. No person shall place, throw, or deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon any vehicle within the city provided, however, it shall not be unlawful in any public place for a person to hand out or distribute without charge to the receiver thereof, any noncommercial handbill to any occupant of a vehicle who is willing to voluntarily accept it. 
(c)  Prohibiting distribution where properly posted. No person shall place, throw, deposit, or distribute any commercial or noncommercial handbill upon any private premises, after being requested by anyone thereon not to do so, or if there is placed on the premises in a conspicuous position near the entrance thereof, a sign bearing the words: "No Trespassing," "No Peddlers Invited," "No Advertisement," or any similar notice, indicating any manner that the occupants of said premises do not desire to be molested or have their right of privacy disturbed, or to have any handbills left upon the premises. 
(d)  Distributing at private premises. No person shall place, throw, deposit, or distribute any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon private premises which are inhabited, except by handing or transmitting any such handbill directly to the owner, occupant, or other person then present in or upon such private premises provided, however, that in the case of private premises which are not posted, as provided in subsection (c), such person, unless requested by anyone upon such premises no to do so, may place or deposit any such handbill in or upon such private premises, if such handbill is so placed or so deposited as to secure or prevent such handbill from being blown or drifted about such private premises or onto sidewalks, streets, other public places or to the private premises and except that mailboxes may not be so used to secure any handbill when so prohibited by federal postal laws or regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2404, § 1, 4-1-91)  
Sec. 11-164. - Delivery of mail and newspapers. 
(a)  Delivery of mail. The provisions of this division shall not apply to the distribution of mail by the United States. 
(b)  Delivery of newspapers. The provisions of this division shall not prohibit the delivery of a newspaper, as outlined in section 11-165 private premises or public buildings; provided, however, that the newspaper shall be placed on the private premises or public building to which it is intended to be delivered or on that portion of the public street adjacent thereto and which is not occupied by sidewalk, curb, gutter, drainage facility, ditch or street pavement and shall be placed in such a manner as to prevent it from being carried or posted by the elements onto any private premises or public buildings other than where it was placed, or onto the sidewalk, curb, gutter, drainage facility, ditch or street pavement. All newspapers, as defined in section 11-161, placed for delivery on a public place and not removed within twelve (12) hours of their placement shall be removed from the public place by the distributor or publisher of the newspaper, or the agent of either. 
(Ord. No. 2404, § 1, 4-1-91)  
Sec. 11-165. - Responsibility for handbill and newspaper distribution. 
(a)  Any person for whose benefit a commercial or noncommercial handbill, all as defined in section 11-161, is distributed, including any advertiser named in a handbill, or the publisher or the distribution agent of any handbill or newspaper shall be responsible for the proper distribution of the handbill or newspaper. 
(b)  No person shall knowingly authorize or allow another person to distribute a commercial or noncommercial handbill or newspaper, all as defined in section 11-161, in violation of the provisions of this division. 
(c)  Any handbill or newspaper, both as defined in section 11-161, distributed within the city shall be presumed to be distributed in a manner authorized or allowed by the advertisers or publishers named in the handbill or by the publisher named in the newspaper. 
(Ord. No. 2404, § 1, 4-1-91)  
Sec. 11-166. - Posting notices prohibited. 
No person shall post, affix or fasten in any way any notice, poster, or paper or other device, calculated to attract the attention of the public to any lamppost, public utility pole or shade tree in the public right-of-way or upon any public structure or public building, except as may be authorized or required by law. 
(Ord. No. 2404, § 1, 4-1-91)  
Sec. 11-167. - Public notices of city. 
(a)  The provisions of this division shall not prohibit the city's placing of public notices on public places. 
(b)  The provisions of this division shall not prohibit the city's distribution, by itself or by its agents, or posting of public notices, including handbills, concerning public emergencies, public works projects, maintenance of public facilities or the matters concerning public devices, to or on private premises. 
(Ord. No. 2404, § 1, 4-1-91)  
Secs. 11-168—11-170. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 13. - DRUG PARAPHERNALIA CONTROL[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 17-O-0041, § 1, adopted March 5, 2018, amended division 13 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former division 13, §§ 11-170.1—11-170.5, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 07-O-0029, § 1, 4-2-2007. 
 
Sec. 11-170.1. - Definitions. 
As used in this division, unless the context otherwise requires: 
(a)  The term "cannabis" shall have the meaning ascribed to it in Section 3 of the "Cannabis Control Act", 720 ILCS 550/3, as if that definition were incorporated herein. 
(b)  The term "controlled substance" shall have the meaning ascribed to it in Section 102 of the "Illinois Controlled Substances Act", 720 ILCS 570/102, as if that definition were incorporated herein. 
(c)  "Deliver" or "delivery" means the actual, constructive or attempted transfer of possession, with or without consideration, whether or not there is an agency relationship. 
(d)  "Drug paraphernalia" means all equipment, products and materials of any kind which are intended to be used unlawfully in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing into the human body cannabis or a controlled substance in violation of the "Cannabis Control Act" 720 ILCS 550/1 et seq., or the "Illinois Controlled Substances Act" 720 570/100 et seq. It includes, but is not limited to: 
(1)  Kits intended to be used unlawfully in manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing or preparing cannabis or a controlled substance; 
(2)  Isomerization devices intended to be used unlawfully in increasing the potency of any species of plant which is cannabis or a controlled substance; 
(3)  Testing equipment intended to be used unlawfully in a private home for identifying or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of cannabis or controlled substances; 
(4)  Diluents and adulterants intended to be used unlawfully for cutting cannabis or a controlled substance by private persons; 
(5)  Objects intended to be used unlawfully in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing cannabis, cocaine, hashish, hashish oil, methamphetamine or other controlled substances, as defined by law, into the human body including, where applicable, the following items: 
a.  Water pipes; 
b.  Carburetion tubes and devices; 
c.  Smoking and carburetion masks; 
d.  Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials; 
e.  Carburetor pipes; 
f.  Electric pipes; 
g.  Air-driven pipes; 
h.  Chillums; 
i.  Bongs; 
j.  Ice pipes or chillers; 
k.  Glass pipes. 
(6)  Any item whose purpose, as announced or described by the seller, is for use in violation of this Act. 
(Ord. No. 18-O-0016, § 1, 5-7-2018)  
Sec. 11-170.2. - Sale or delivery; penalty; public nuisance. 
(a)  No person shall keep for sale, offer for sale, sell, or deliver for any commercial consideration any item of drug paraphernalia. No person eighteen (18) years of age or older shall sell or deliver for any commercial consideration any item of drug paraphernalia to a person under eighteen (18) years of age. 
(b)  No person shall sell or deliver for commercial consideration any item of drug paraphernalia to a woman he knows to be pregnant. 
(c)  Any store, place, or premises from which or in which any item of drug paraphernalia is kept for sale, offered for sale, sold, or delivered for any commercial consideration is declared to be a public nuisance. 
(d)  In addition to any other penalties already provided for by law and this division, a person or store owner convicted of selling drug paraphernalia will automatically have their license to sell tobacco revoked, as required under chapter 9, article XXIV, section 9-686 of the Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 18-O-0016, § 1, 5-7-2018)  
Sec. 11-170.3. - Possession of drug paraphernalia. 
(a)  A person who knowingly possesses an item of drug paraphernalia with the intent to use it in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing cannabis or a controlled substance into the human body, or in preparing cannabis or a controlled substance for that use, shall be subject to a fine per section 1-8, general penalty, of this Code. This subsection (a) does not apply to a person who is legally authorized to possess hypodermic syringes or needles under the Hypodermic Syringes and Needles Act. 
(b)  In determining intent under subsection (a), the trier of fact may take into consideration the proximity of the cannabis or controlled substances to drug paraphernalia or the presence of cannabis or a controlled substance on the drug paraphernalia. 
(Ord. No. 18-O-0016, § 1, 5-7-2018)  
Sec. 11-170.4. - Exemptions. 
This division shall not apply to the following: 
(a)  Items used in the preparation, compounding, packaging, labeling, or other use of cannabis or a controlled substance as an incident to lawful research, teaching, chemical analysis, use in law enforcement activities and which is not offered for sale. 
(b)  Items historically and customarily used in connection with, the planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, or inhaling of tobacco or any other lawful substance. 
Items exempt under this subsection include, but are not limited to, garden hoes, rakes, sickles, baggies, tobacco pipes, and cigarette-rolling papers. 
(c)  Items which are used for decorative purposes, when such items have been rendered completely inoperable or incapable of being used for any illicit purpose prohibited by this Act. 
(d)  A person who is legally authorized to possess hypodermic syringes or needles under the Hypodermic Syringes and Needles Act. 
In determining whether or not a particular item is exempt under this subsection, the trier of fact should consider, in addition to all other logically relevant factors, the following: 
(1)  The general, usual, customary, and historical use to which the item involved has been put; 
(2)  Expert evidence concerning the ordinary or customary use of the item and the effect of any peculiarity in the design or engineering of the device upon its functioning; 
(3)  Any written instructions accompanying the delivery of the item concerning the purposes or uses to which the item can or may be put; 
(4)  Any oral instructions provided by the seller of the item at the time and place of sale or commercial delivery; 
(5)  Any national or local advertising concerning the design, purpose or use of the item involved, and the entire context in which such advertising occurs; 
(6)  The manner, place and circumstances in which the item was displayed for sale, as well as any item or items displayed for sale or otherwise exhibited upon the premises where the sale was made; 
(7)  Whether the owner or anyone in control of the object is a legitimate supplier of like or related items to the community, such as a licensed distributor or dealer of tobacco products; 
(8)  The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object in the community. 
(Ord. No. 18-O-0016, § 1, 5-7-2018)  
Sec. 11-170.5. - Legislative intent; inference of legitimacy. 
This Act is intended to be used solely for the suppression of the commercial traffic in and possession of items that, within the context of the sale or offering for sale, or possession, are clearly and beyond a reasonable doubt intended for the illegal and unlawful use of cannabis or controlled substances. To this end all reasonable and common-sense inferences shall be drawn in favor of the legitimacy of any transaction or item. 
(Ord. No. 18-O-0016, § 1, 5-7-2018)  
DIVISION 14. - ANTI-GRAFFITI RESTRICTIONS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 08-O-0072, § 1, adopted October 6, 2008, enacted provisions intended for use as article II, division 14, sections 11-176, 11-177, 11-177. Inasmuch as article III begins with section 11-171, at the discretion of the editor, said provisions have been redesignated as sections 11-170.6—11-170.8. 
 
Sec. 11-170.6. - Definitions. 
The following words shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Aerosol paint container means any aerosol container that is adapted or made for the purpose of applying spray paint or other substances capable of defacing property. 
Broad-tipped marker means any felt-tip indelible marker or similar implement with a flat or angled writing surface that, at its broadest width, is greater than one-fourth (¼) inch, containing ink or other pigmented liquid that is not water soluble. 
Etching equipment means any tool, device or substance that can be used to make permanent marks on any natural or manmade surface. 
Graffiti means any unauthorized inscription, word, figure, painting or other defacement that is written, marked, etched, scratched, sprayed, drawn, painted, or engraved on or otherwise affixed to any surface of public or private property by any graffiti implement, to the extent that the graffiti was not authorized by the owner or occupant of the property, or, despite such authorization, is otherwise deemed a public nuisance by the city. 
Graffiti implement means an aerosol paint container, a broad-tipped marker, gum label, paint stick or graffiti stick, etching equipment, brush or any other device capable of scarring or leaving a visible mark on any natural or manmade surface. 
Paint stick or graffiti stick means any pen, pencil, chalk stick, crayon, brush, marker or other device containing a solid form of ink, paint, chalk, wax, epoxy, or other similar substance capable of being applied to a surface by pressure and leaving a mark of at least one-eighth inch in width. 
(Ord. No. 08-O-0072, § 1, 10-6-2008)  
Sec. 11-170.7. - Prohibited acts. 
(a)  Defacement. It shall be unlawful for any person to apply graffiti to any natural or man made surface on any city-owned property or, without the permission of the owner or occupant, on any non-city-owned property. 
(b)  Possession of graffiti implements. 
(1)  By minors at or near school facilities. It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to possess any graffiti implement while on any school property, grounds, facilities, buildings, or structures; upon public property immediately adjacent thereto; or upon private property immediately adjacent to any school property, grounds, facilities, buildings, or structures, without the prior written consent of the owner or occupant of such private property. It shall be a defense to the violation of this section if, at the time the graffiti implements were in the possession of the minor, he or she was attending or traveling to or from classes at a school at which he or she is enrolled and was participating in a class at such school for which possessions of graffiti implements were necessary to meet the formal course requirements for such class. Before arresting and taking into custody any minor for violation of this section on school days during school hours, a police officer shall contact the school for the purpose of ascertaining whether or not he or she was attending classes at a school at which he or she is enrolled and was participating in a class at such school for which possession of the graffiti implements were necessary to meet the formal course requirements for such class. Verification by the school to the police officer that the graffiti implements were necessary to meet the formal course requirements for a class in which the minor is enrolled and attended that day shall preclude charging the minor with a violation of this section. 
(2)  In designated public places. It shall be unlawful for any person to possess any graffiti implement while in or upon any public building, park, playground, swimming pool, recreational facility, or other public facility or structure owned or operated by the city, park district, or other governmental entity or while within fifty (50) feet of an underpass, bridge abutment, storm drain, or similar types of infrastructure unless otherwise authorized by the city or park district. However, it shall not be a violation of this section if the graffiti implements are in the possession of a person eighteen (18) years or older in a motor vehicle on a public roadway or are in the possession of person eighteen (18) years or older traveling on any sidewalk, street, or other public right-of-way and just have been purchased and are in their original packaging unopened. 
(3)  Accessibility to graffiti implements; furnishing to minors prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person, other than a parent or legal guardian, to sell, exchange, give, loan, or otherwise furnish, or cause or permit to be exchanged, given, loaned, or otherwise furnished, any aerosol paint container, broad-tipped marker, or paint stick or graffiti stick to any person under the age of eighteen (18) years without the written consent of the parents or guardian of the person. 
(Ord. No. 08-O-0072, § 1, 10-6-2008)  
Sec. 11-170.8. - Penalties. 
Any person violating this section shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for the first offense or one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each subsequent offense. 
(Ord. No. 08-O-0072, § 1, 10-6-2008)  
ARTICLE III. - JAIL 
 
Sec. 11-171. - To be established by council. 
The place in the city established and used as the jail, or any other place which may hereafter be established by the council, for that purpose, is hereby declared to be the city jail. 
(Code 1954, Ch. XXVI, § 1)  
Sec. 11-172. - Chief of police to be keeper. 
The chief of police shall be the keeper of the jail and shall have custody of all persons confined therein and of all property pertaining thereto. 
(Code 1954, Ch. XXVI, § 2)  
Sec. 11-173. - Use. 
The city jail shall be used for the incarceration of all persons arrested for violating any of the laws of the state, the United States or for violating any provision of this Code or other city ordinance, until such person shall be brought before a judicial officer for a hearing or until such person shall be lawfully transferred to some other place of incarceration. 
(Code 1954, Ch. XXVI, § 3)  
Sec. 11-174. - Escape; attempts. 
It shall be unlawful for any prisoner to escape, attempt to escape or for any person to assist a prisoner to escape or attempt to escape, from the city jail. 
(Code 1954, Ch. XXVI, § 5)  
Sec. 11-175. - Communication with prisoners. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to communicate with any prisoner held in the jail, without the permission of the keeper of the jail. 
(Code 1954, Ch. XXVI, § 6)  
ARTICLE IV. - RESERVED 
 
Secs. 11-176—11-200. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 4216, § 2, adopted Aug. 16, 1999, deleted former Art. IV, Dogs, §§ 11-191—11-200 derived from various sections of the 1954 Code, Ch. XXII, and subsequently amended. The user's attention is directed to the Code Comparative Table at the back of this volume for further derivation of such article.  
ARTICLE V. - VEHICLE STORAGE CHARGES 
 
Sec. 11-201. - Vehicle storage charges. 
No vehicle that has been towed, impounded or otherwise lawfully taken into custody by the police department of the city shall be released to the owner, lienholder, or other person entitled to possession until all towing and storage charges have been paid. Storage charges shall accrue at the rate of ten dollars ($10.00)/day, beginning on the fifteenth day following the date upon which the police department sends written notification to the owner, lienholder or other person entitled to possession that the vehicle is available to be released. Said notice shall also inform the owner, lienholder or other person entitled to possession that failure to claim said vehicle will result in the above stated storage charges. 
(Ord. No. 4259, § 5, 12-6-99)  
ARTICLE VI. - TRUANCY 
 
Sec. 11-202. - Purpose. 
The public purpose of this article is to provide for the protection of juveniles from each other and from other persons, for the enforcement of parental control and responsibility for their children, for the protection of the general public, and for the reduction of the incidences of juvenile criminal activities pursuant to the city's power to promote the health, safety and general welfare of its citizens. 
(Ord. No. 02-O-0106, 9-16-2002)  
Sec. 11-203. - Title. 
This article may be cited as the "Truancy Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 02-O-0106, 9-16-2002)  
Sec. 11-204. - Findings. 
The city council makes the following findings: 
(1)  City residents find problems associated with the assembly of youth as a major problem facing the city; and 
(2)  It has been found that truancy is a high indicator of criminal involvement; and 
(3)  The city is confronted by rising juvenile violence, juvenile criminal activity, and an increasing number of high school dropouts; and 
(4)  Juveniles are particularly susceptible by their lack of maturity and experience to participate in unlawful and criminal related activities and to be victims of older perpetrators of crime. 
(Ord. No. 02-O-0106, 9-16-2002)  
Sec. 11-205. - Definitions. 
Guardian means (1) a person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a qualified student; or (2) a public or private agency with whom a qualified student has been placed by a court. 
Parent means a person who is: (1) a natural parent, adoptive parent, or step-parent of a qualified student or (2) at least eighteen (18) years of age and authorized by a parent or guardian to have care and custody of a qualified student. 
Qualified student means a person at the time of the offense who is between the ages of seven (7) and sixteen (16) or is enrolled in any of grades one (1) through twelve (12) and is subject to compulsory attendance pursuant to 105 ILCS 5/26-1 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 02-O-0106, 9-16-2002)  
Sec. 11-206. - Offenses. 
(a)  A qualified student who is subject to compulsory education or to compulsory continuing/ alternative education is guilty of an offense if he or she is in or upon public streets, public places, places of amusement and eating places, vacant lots or any unsupervised place, including a private residence during the hours when the qualified student's school is in session. A qualified student shall be excused from the compulsory education requirement if said absence is in conjunction with a field trip or program conducted by the student's school, or if the student has been excused with parental or school permission pursuant to their school's policies or regulations, provided said regulations are not more restrictive than state statute. 
(b)  A parent or guardian of a qualified student is guilty of an offense if he or she knowingly permits a qualified student to be in violation of [subsection] (a). 
(Ord. No. 02-O-0106, 9-16-2002)  
Sec. 11-207. - Exemptions. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed to apply to home schools established as specified by Illinois home school requirements. 
(Ord. No. 02-O-0106, 9-16-2002)  
Sec. 11-208. - Penalty. 
In addition to any other relief granted by the courts, any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be subject to a fine per section 1-8, general penalty, of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 02-O-0106, 9-16-2002; Ord. No. 07-O-0017, § 7, 4-16-2007)  
Secs. 11-209, 11-210. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - VEHICLE IMMOBILIZATION PROGRAM 
 
Sec. 11-211. - Vehicle immobilization program established. 
The chief of police, or his designee, is authorized to direct and supervise a program of vehicle immobilization as provided for in this article. The program of vehicle immobilization shall provide for immobilizing any eligible vehicle upon the public way, in a public place, or on private property with the consent of the property owner, by placement of a restraint in such a manner as to prevent its operation when there are seven (7) or more outstanding or otherwise unsettled parking violation notices and/or warrants issued for such violations pending against the owner of such motor vehicle. 
For purposes of this article, "public way" means any sidewalk, roadway, alley or other public thoroughfare and any city owned parking lot or other city property. 
(Ord. No. 07-O-0044, § 2, 6-4-2007)  
Sec. 11-212. - Vehicles eligible for immobilization. 
A vehicle shall be eligible for immobilization, as provided herein, any time after inclusion of its state registration number or other vehicle identification number on any immobilization list, regardless of whether or not the listed vehicle itself has received a parking violation complaint. A vehicle's state registration number or other vehicle identification number shall be included on an immobilization list only if: 
(1)  The registered owner of the vehicle has accumulated seven (7) or more outstanding or otherwise unsettled parking violation notices from the city or a warrant issued for such violations is pending against the owner of such motor vehicle. 
(2)  At least twenty-four (24) days prior to the city's placing the registration plate number of the vehicle on the vehicle immobilization eligibility list, notice of impending vehicle immobilization has been sent to all registered owners via certified, return receipt requested, at the address of the registered owner recorded with the Secretary of State or, in the case of a vehicle bearing the registration number of a state other than Illinois, at the address of the registered owner recorded in that state's registry of motor vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 07-O-0044, § 2, 6-4-2007)  
Sec. 11-213. - Notice of vehicle immobilization and pre-immobilization hearing. 
The notice required in subsection 11-212(2) shall state the name and address of all registered owners, the state registration number or vehicle identification number of the vehicle, the nature of the ordinance(s) violated and the numbers and issue dates of the outstanding complaints or citations. The notice shall also advise that a registered owner, or any person who establishes having an interest therein, may request a hearing to challenge the validity of the notice of impending vehicle immobilization by submitting a request for such to the city at the address stated in the notice. Such hearing shall be as provided in section 11-218, except that the request for a hearing shall be submitted within ten (10) days of mailing the notice. 
(Ord. No. 07-O-0044, § 2, 6-4-2007)  
Sec. 11-214. - Notice to be affixed to immobilized vehicle. 
Upon immobilization of an eligible vehicle, a notice shall be affixed to the vehicle in a conspicuous place. Such notice shall warn that the vehicle is immobilized and that any attempt to move the vehicle may result in its damage. The notice shall also state that the unauthorized removal of or damage to the immobilizing restraint is a violation of the Illinois Criminal Code. The notice shall also provide information specifying how release of the immobilizing restraint may be had and how a registered owner may obtain a post-immobilization hearing pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 07-O-0044, § 2, 6-4-2007)  
Sec. 11-215. - Towing of immobilized vehicle. 
Except where the vehicle is otherwise subject to towing, if the immobilizing restraint has not been released pursuant to section 11-216 within twenty-four (24) hours of its placement, the restraint shall be released and the vehicle towed and impounded. 
(Ord. No. 07-O-0044, § 2, 6-4-2007)  
Sec. 11-216. - Release of immobilized vehicle. 
Prior to a hearing on the validity of the immobilization as provided in section 11-218, the owner of an immobilized vehicle or other interested person shall be permitted to secure release of the vehicle by: 
(1)  Paying the immobilization and towing and storage fees, if applicable, specified in section 11-219; and 
(2)  Taking one (1) of the following actions: 
a.  Paying all the fines and penalties, if any, on the outstanding complaints for which notice had been sent prior to the date of the immobilization; or 
b.  Completing appearance forms on all outstanding parking violation complaints for which notice had been sent prior to the date of the immobilization and depositing collateral in the amount of fifty (50) percent of the total fines for these outstanding parking violation complaints, or five hundred dollars ($500.00), whichever is less. 
(Ord. No. 07-O-0044, § 2, 6-4-2007)  
Sec. 11-217. - Post vehicle immobilization/impoundment notice. 
Within ten (10) days after a vehicle has been impounded, notice of impoundment shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, to all registered owners of the vehicle at the address to which the notice specified in subsection 11-212 (2) was mailed. The notice shall state that an owner has the right to a post-immobilization and post-towing hearing as provided in section 11-218, and that if the vehicle is not claimed within thirty (30) days from the date of the notice, the vehicle may be disposed of in accordance with the Illinois Vehicle Code and/or city ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 07-O-0044, § 2, 6-4-2007)  
Sec. 11-218. - Immobilized vehicle hearing. 
An owner of an immobilized vehicle, or any person who establishes having an interest therein, shall have the right to a hearing before the chief of police or his designee to determine whether the immobilization or any subsequent towing was erroneous or whether the vehicle was properly included on an immobilization list, if an owner or such other person files a written demand for a hearing with the chief of police, or his designee, within fourteen (14) days after issuance of the notice specified in section 11-216 or within fourteen (14) days after the immobilization, whichever is later. A hearing shall be conducted within forty-eight (48) hours of receipt of a written demand for a hearing, unless otherwise mutually agreed by the parties. Failure to request or attend a scheduled hearing shall be deemed a waiver of the right to a hearing. In the event of such failure, any amount deposited pursuant to section 11-219 shall be forfeited. A hearing provided in accordance with this article shall not determine the validity of or otherwise adjudicate any citation or notice of parking violations issued relative to the immobilized vehicle but shall only relate to whether the vehicle was properly placed on the immobilization list, immobilized or towed. 
(Ord. No. 07-O-0044, § 2, 6-4-2007)  
Sec. 11-219. - Fees and costs. 
The fee for immobilization shall be as prescribed in Appendix G. Additionally, the owner of the vehicle shall be charged reasonable storage and towing fees, should the vehicle be removed to a private storage facility, and shall be charged the costs for the hearing, including but not limited to court reporter's fees, the cost of transcripts or records, attorneys' fees, the cost of preparing and mailing notices and orders, and all other miscellaneous expenses. No fees, costs, or charges shall be assessed in the case of any immobilization listing, immobilization, or tow and storage which has been determined to be erroneous. 
(Ord. No. 07-O-0044, § 2, 6-4-2007; Ord. No. 11-O-0007, § 37, 5-16-2011)  
Sec. 11-220. - Unlawful to relocate immobilized vehicles. 
It shall be unlawful to relocate or tow any vehicle restrained by an immobilizing device without the approval of the chief of police or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 07-O-0044, § 2, 6-4-2007)  
ARTICLE VIII. - SMOKE FREE ILLINOIS ACT 
 
Sec. 11-221. - Acknowledgment of applicability of the Smoke Free Illinois Act. 
Pursuant to 410 Illinois Compiled Statutes 82/65, the city hereby adopts and incorporates by reference into the Code of Ordinances of the City of West Chicago each and every provision of the Smoke Free Illinois Act as contained in 410 Illinois Compiled Statutes 82/1 et seq., as amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 17-O-0006, § 2, 4-17-2017)  
Sec. 11-222. - Smoking in public places, places of employment, and governmental buildings and vehicles prohibited. 
No person shall smoke or use an e-cigarette in a public place or in any place of employment or within fifteen (15) feet of any entrance to a public place or place of employment. No person may smoke or use an e-cigarette in any vehicle owned, leased, or operated by the state or city. Smoking or using an e-cigarette is prohibited in indoor public places and workplaces unless specifically exempted by Section 35 of the Smoke Free Illinois Act. 
(Ord. No. 17-O-0006, § 2, 4-17-2017)  
Sec. 11-223. - Penalty. 
Any person who violates any portion of this article shall be subject to a fine or fines as set forth in the general penalty section of the City Code. Each day that a violation shall continue shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. 
(Ord. No. 17-O-0006, § 2, 4-17-2017)  
Chapter 12 - PARKS AND PLAYGROUNDS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Parks and playgrounds under management and control of department of public works, § 2-209. 
 
Sec. 12-1. - Reed-Keppler Park named. 
The municipal park comprised of all of the property lying between National Street and Glen Oak Cemetery, along the west side of Arbor Avenue and extending westerly to the E. J. & E. right-of-way, henceforth shall be known as Reed-Keppler Park. 
(Ord. No. 600, 2-20-56; Ord. No. 1126, 5-1-72)  
Chapter 13 - CEMETERIES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Formerly, Section 1 of Ord. No. 2478, adopted Sept. 3, 1991, repealed former Ch. 13, "Police," which contained § 13-1 and derived from Ord. No. 1277, § 1, adopted Aug. 4, 1975. 
 
Sec. 13-1. - Cemetery sexton. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the cemetery sexton, under the general direction of the director of public works, to supervise and direct all activities in the Glen Oak and Oakwood Cemeteries, including, but not limited to sales of gravesites, performing grave openings and closings, grounds maintenance, and preparation and maintenance of records and reports for submittal to the city. 
(b)  The city shall enter into a contract for cemetery sexton services annually, at the beginning of each fiscal calendar year. 
(Ord. No. 06-O-0001, § 6, 2-6-2006)  
Sec. 13-2. - Cemetery fees and charges. 
The sale price of graves and the costs associated with grave excavation in all city-owned and -operated cemeteries shall be as prescribed in Appendix G. 
(Ord. No. 06-O-0001, § 6, 2-6-2006; Ord. No. 06-O-0035, § 1, 4-17-2006; Ord. No. 07-O-0021, § 1, 3-19-2007; Ord. No. 08-O-0032, § 1, 5-5-2008; Ord. No. 09-O-0026, § 1, 4-6-2009; Ord. No. 11-O-0007, § 38, 5-16-2011)  
Sec. 13-3. - Cemetery rules, regulations and ownership. 
(a)  Ownership of grave sites. The person(s) named in the original deed, or indicated in the city's records, as the owner(s) of any grave site shall be deemed to be the owner(s) of such grave site. In the event that any such owner of any grave site is deceased and interred elsewhere, the city will follow the rules of descent and distribution for the state duly enacted and effective on the date of such owner's death. Where the owner of a particular grave site cannot be determined through an original deed or through the city's records, the determination of ownership shall be made by the sexton, whose decision shall be final. The sexton shall require any claimant to such ownership to substantiate his or her claim, to provide notice to potential adverse claimants by publication and, where practicable, by mail, and to indemnify the city against any costs, claims, losses, demands, damages, expenses and/or liability arising out of such adverse claims, including, without limitation, reasonable attorney's fees and litigation costs. 
(b)  Rules and regulations. 
(1)  Hours of operation. The cemeteries shall be open to the public from dawn until dusk each day. 
(2)  Work within the cemeteries and memorials. All grading, landscape work, memorial installation, memorial repairs or improvement of any kind within the cemeteries shall be performed by the sexton, public works director, their designee, or an approved memorial contractor. No memorial shall be installed on any grave site unless and until full payment for such grave site has been received by the city. Memorials installed on or after April 25, 1996, shall be installed in accordance with the following: 
a.  Requests for memorial installations shall be made in writing to the public works director and shall include the name, address and telephone number of the owner of the grave site; the specific grave site involved; the name(s), address(es) and telephone number(s) of the company supplying the memorial and the memorial contractor, and a sketch plan for the memorial, including the location and all dimensions thereof, sufficient to show compliance with all of the requirements of this subsection (2). 
b.  Each approved memorial contractor shall provide to the sexton evidence of insurance or bonding with respect to its activities, and periodic renewals of same as necessary to demonstrate that such coverage is continuously maintained in full force and effect, in an amount not less than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00). 
c.  All memorial foundation work shall be performed by the sexton, the public works director, or their designee. 
d.  Markers and monuments. 
1.  All markers and monuments shall be made of granite, concrete, or other materials which the sexton or public works director determines to be of equal durability, and may feature plaques, vases or everlasting lights made of bronze, or other materials which the sexton or public works director determines to be of equal durability. Such determinations of durability shall be final and conclusive. 
2.  Single grave sites. One (1) marker shall be permitted at the head of a single grave site. Such marker shall not exceed fourteen (14) inches in width, thirty (30) inches in length, nor twenty-six (26) inches in height, and shall be mounted on a base not to exceed twenty (20) inches in width, forty-two (42) inches in length, or eight (8) inches in height. In the event of a veteran or double interment, one (1) flush mounted marker shall also be permitted at the foot of such grave site, not to exceed twelve (12) inches in width or twenty-four (24) inches in length, mounted on a base not to exceed twenty (20) inches in width or thirty-two (32) inches in length. 
3.  Double grave sites. One (1) marker or monument shall be permitted at the head of a double grave site. Such marker shall not exceed twelve (12) inches in width, forty-two (42) inches in length, or twenty (20) inches in height. Such monument shall not exceed eight (8) inches in width, forty-two (42) inches in length, or twenty-eight (28) inches in height. Such marker or monument shall be mounted on a base not to exceed fourteen (14) inches in width, fifty-four (54) inches in length, or eight (8) inches in height. In addition, one (1) flush mounted marker shall also be permitted at the foot of each individual grave, not to exceed twelve (12) inches in width or twenty-four (24) inches in length, mounted on a base not to exceed twenty (20) inches in width or thirty-two (32) inches in length. 
4.  Triple grave sites. One (1) marker or monument shall be permitted at the head of a triple grave site. Such marker shall not exceed twelve (12) inches in width, forty-two (42) inches in length, or twenty (20) inches in height, and shall be mounted on a base not to exceed eighteen (18) inches in width, fifty-four (54) inches in length or eight (8) inches in height. Such monument shall not exceed eight (8) inches in width, sixty (60) inches in length, or twenty-eight (28) inches, and shall be mounted on a base not to exceed fourteen (14) inches in width, seventy-two (72) inches in length, or eight (8) inches in height. In addition, one (1) flush mounted marker shall also be permitted at the foot of each individual grave, not to exceed twelve (12) inches in width or twenty-four (24) inches in length, mounted on a base not to exceed twenty (20) inches in width or thirty-two (32) inches in length. 
5.  Sites with more than three (3), but fewer than twelve (12), graves. One (1) marker or monument shall be permitted at the head or center of a site with more than three (3), but fewer than twelve (12), graves. Such marker or monument shall not exceed ten (10) inches in width, seventy-two (72) inches in length, or forty (40) inches in height, and shall be mounted on a base not to exceed fourteen (14) inches in width, eighty-four (84) inches in length, or eight (8) inches in height. In addition one (1) flush mounted marker shall also be permitted at the foot of each individual grave, not to exceed twelve (12) inches in width or twenty-four (24) inches in length, mounted on a base not to exceed twenty (20) inches in width or thirty-two (32) inches in length. 
6.  Sites with twelve (12) or more graves. One (1) marker or monument shall be permitted at the center of a site with twelve (12) or more graves. Such marker or monument shall not exceed thirty-six (36) inches in width, eighty-four (84) inches in length, or forty-eight (48) inches in height, and shall be mounted on a base not to exceed forty (40) inches in width, ninety-six (96) inches in length, or eight (8) inches in height. In addition, one (1) marker, not to exceed fourteen (14) inches in width, thirty (30) inches in length, or twenty-six (26) inches in height, mounted on a base not to exceed twenty (20) inches in width, forty-two (42) inches in length or eight (8) inches in height, shall also be permitted at the head of each individual grave. 
7.  Infant section. One (1) flush mounted marker not exceed ten (10) inches in width, or eighteen (18) inches in length, mounted on a base not to exceed eighteen (18) inches in width or twenty-six (26) inches in length, shall be permitted at the head of each grave in the infant section. 
e.  Mausoleums. Mausoleums shall be permitted, provided that: 
1.  All mausoleums shall be constructed of granite, concrete, or other materials which the sexton or public works director determines to be of equal durability, and may feature plaques, vases or everlasting lights made of bronze, or other materials which the sexton or public works director determines to be of equal durability. Such determinations of durability shall be final and conclusive. 
2.  No mausoleums shall exceed six (6) crypts in capacity or twelve (12) feet in height. 
3.  All mausoleums shall be located not less than four (4) feet from any point on the perimeter of the grave site. 
(3)  Prohibited acts. It shall be unlawful for any person to commit any of the following acts within any cemetery: 
a.  To injure or deface any of the trees, fences, bridges, walks, fireplaces, buildings, shrubs, plants, turfs, grass, lanes, or posts or attach any matter or printed matter or placards thereon. 
b.  To destroy, mutilate or damage in any manner any marker, flag or other grave decoration in the cemetery, or to enter the cemetery grounds with the intention of committing such act or of interfering with any grave. 
c.  To pick, injure or destroy any of the flowers or shrubs or to remove the same. 
d.  To drive any automotive vehicle or ride any horse or operate any other vehicle, including bicycles and snowmobiles, or park any vehicle, except upon the road. 
e.  To drive or operate any vehicle at a speed in excess of ten (10) miles per hour. 
f.  To permit a dog to run at large or to walk any such dog on a leash through or in any cemetery. 
g.  To have, serve, sell, give away or drink any alcoholic beverage. 
(c)  Decorations for gravesites; generally. 
(1)  Decoration regulations exist to protect each grave site owner. Decorations not in conformity with these regulations will be removed by the city and discarded. The city does not warrant or guaranty against the damage, loss or destruction of decorations and all risks associated with the placement of decorations shall remain with the person(s) placing the same. 
(2)  All grading, landscape work, improvement of any kind, care of burial space, planting, trimming, cutting or removal of trees, shrubs, or herbage of any kind, opening and closing of burial spaces, interment and disinterment or removal of bodies, construction of all foundations, and installation of all vases and memorials shall be done only by the sexton, public works director or their designate. 
(3)  Not more than one (1) decoration shall be placed on any grave site at any time. In the case of monument lots, not more than one (1) decoration shall be placed on the lot at any time regardless of the number of individual graves on the lot. 
(4)  Decorations shall remain on the graves only as long as their appearance is presentable, as determined in the sole discretion of the sexton, public works director or designate. Decorations which become unsightly, or withered, shall be removed and discarded. 
(5)  Outlining of graves or memorials in any fashion, including but not limited to, metal frames, stones and/or stripping with sod, is prohibited. 
(6)  Growing of shrubs and/or bushes is prohibited at all times. 
(7)  All forms of decoration not specifically permitted hereunder are prohibited and shall be removed, including but not limited to, jars, bottles, statuary, cans, globes, shells, and other ornaments. 
(d)  Decorations for grave sites; seasonal rules. 
(1)  Growing season. For the purposes of this section, the term growing season shall mean the period each year commencing April 15 and ending October 15. During the growing season, the following grave site decorations are permitted: 
a.  Natural flowers, provided that such flowers are placed in a pin type, or other approved vase. Permanent vases are prohibited. Permanent upright vases installed prior to the adoption of these rules and regulations may continue to be used, but must be lowered to ground level during the nongrowing season. 
b.  Potted plants, provided that such plants are positioned close to the front of the marker, and not more than one (1) six-inch or eight-inch pot is placed at any grave site. 
c.  Boxed plants, provided that such plants are placed in wood or plastic boxes not larger than fifteen (15) inches by eight (8) inches, and not more than one (1) boxed plant is placed at any grave site. 
d.  Flags, provided that flags may be placed not more than three (3) days prior to Memorial Day, Independence Day, and/or Veteran's Day, and are removed not later than the first business day thereafter. 
e.  Hinged veterans emblems, set flush to the ground, provided that such emblem shall be set in the upright position not more than three (3) days prior to Memorial Day, Independence Day, and/or Veteran's Day, and shall be returned to the lowered position not later than the first business day thereafter. 
Boxes and pots shall be placed on the grass and not dug in, and shall be placed in front of, and as close as possible to, the memorial. Boxes and pots may be placed on the marker provided they do not stain the same. Artificial flowers are prohibited during the growing season. 
(2)  Nongrowing season. For the purposes of this section, the term nongrowing season shall mean the period of each year prior to March 1, and/or after November 15. During the nongrowing season artificial flowers, placed in stands, approved vases, pots or boxes in the same manner as provided for natural plants in boxes and pots hereinabove, shall be permitted decorations for grave sites. Further, one (1) artificial wreath shall be permitted at each grave site, provided that such wreath is less than thirty (30) inches in diameter, and is permanently attached to a stand or easel. Evergreen blankets and other winter type decorations are prohibited. 
(3)  Spring and fall clean up. 
a.  The period from March 1 through April 14 of each year shall be used for maintenance and groundskeeping purposes to prepare for the growing season. All nongrowing season decorations shall be removed by the city on or after March 1. 
b.  The period from October 16 through November 15 shall be used for maintenance and groundskeeping purposes to prepare for the growing season. All growing season decorations shall be removed by the city on or after October 16. 
(Ord. No. 06-O-0001, § 6, 2-6-2006)  
Chapter 14 - POLLUTION CONTROL AND ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 4; housing, Ch. 7; nuisances, Ch. 10; water and sewer services, Ch. 18. 
 
ARTICLE I. - POLLUTION CONTROL 
 
Sec. 14-1. - Short title. 
This chapter shall be known, cited and referred to as "The City of West Chicago Pollution Control Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 1068, § 1.1, 11-2-70)  
Sec. 14-2. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter the following terms shall have the meanings indicated unless their context requires otherwise: 
Air contaminant is particulate matter, dust, fumes, gas, mist, smoke or vapor or any combination thereof. 
Air contaminant source is any and all sources of emission of air contaminants, whether privately or publicly owned or operated. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, this term includes all types of business, commercial and industrial plants, works, shops and stores and heating and power plants and stations, buildings and other structures of all types including single-and multiple-family residences, apartment houses, office buildings, hotels, restaurants, schools, hospitals, churches and other institutional buildings, automobiles, trucks, tractors, buses and other motor vehicles, garages and vending and service locations and stations, railroad locomotives, ships, boats and other waterborne craft, portable fuel-burning equipment, incinerators of all types, indoor and outdoor, refuse dumps and piles, and all stack and other chimney outlets from any of the foregoing. 
Air pollution is present in the outdoor atmosphere if there are one or more air contaminants in sufficient quantities and of such characteristics and duration as to be injurious to human, plant or animal life or to property or which unreasonably interferes with the enjoyment of life and property. 
Air quality standard means ambient air quality goal established for the purpose of protecting public health and welfare. 
Combustible refuse is any solid or liquid combustible waste material containing carbon in a free or combined state. 
Emission standard means that level of air contaminant emitted from an air contaminant source which is established by authority. 
Equipment is any fuel-burning, refuse-burning, combustion process device or apparatus used for the burning of fuel or combustible material from which the products of combustion are emitted. Also this shall include apparatus which generate heat and may emit products of combustion, and manufacturing, chemical, metallurgical or mechanical processes which may emit air contaminants. 
Organic materials are chemical compounds of carbon excluding carbon monoxide, carbon dioxide, carbonic acid, metallic carbides, metallic carbonates and ammonium carbonate. 
Organic solvent is organic materials which are liquids at standard atmospheric conditions and which are used as dissolvers, viscosity reducers, cleaning agents, diluents or thinners. 
Photochemically reactive solvent is any solvent with an aggregate of more than twenty (20) percent of its total volume composed of chemical compounds classified below or which exceeds any of the following individual percentage composition limitations, referred to the total volume of solvent: 
(1)  A combination of hydrocarbons, alcohols, aldehydes, esters, ethers or ketones having an olefinic or cycloolefinic type of unsaturation: Five (5) percent; 
(2)  A combination of aromatic compounds with eight (8) or more carbon atoms to the molecule except ethylbenzene: Eight (8) percent; 
(3)  A combination of ethylbenzene, ketones having branched hydrocarbon structures, trichloroethylene or toluene: Twenty (20) percent. 
Ringlemann Chart is the chart which is described in the U. S. Bureau of Mines Information Circular 7718, and on which are illustrated graduated shades of gray to black for use in estimating the light-obscuring power of smoke. 
(Ord. No. 1068, §§ 1.1, 2.2, 11-2-70)  
Sec. 14-3. - Air pollution control officer—Power of enforcement. 
The mayor and council are hereby authorized to designate the pollution control officer and enforcing officers, who shall exercise the duties set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1068, § 3.1-1, 11-2-70)  
Sec. 14-4. - Same—Duties. 
The duties of the pollution control officer shall be to: 
(1)  Supervise the execution of all laws, ordinances, rules and regulations pertaining to environmental pollution; 
(2)  To institute necessary proceedings to prosecute violations of this article and compel the prevention and abatement of environmental contaminants and nuisances arising therefrom; 
(3)  To examine and approve the plans of pollution control devices proposed, installed, constructed, reconstructed, repaired or added to, in any building, location or on any premises within the boundaries of the city; 
(4)  To cause inspections to be made of pollution control devices; 
(5)  To investigate complaints, make observations of contaminant conditions and take the necessary and proper action to abate nuisances therefrom; 
(6)  To advise, consult and cooperate with other governmental agencies in the furtherance of the purpose of this chapter; 
(7)  To collect, publish and disseminate appropriate educational literature and other information to the public for the purpose of advising of the necessity, purpose and methods of pollution prevention; 
(8)  To issue all permits, certificates, notices or other matters required under the provisions of this chapter; and to notify all persons concerned of any decision rendered and to provide such persons with an opportunity to be heard; 
(9)  To enlist the cooperation of civic, technical, scientific and educational groups, societies and organizations in respect to the reduction and abatement of air contaminants; 
(10)  To cause to be instituted in the court legal proceedings by the city attorney to compel compliance with any order or determination entered on recommendation of the pollution control officer and pollution committee. 
(Ord. No. 1068, § 3.1-2, 11-2-70)  
Sec. 14-5. - Same—Right of entry; badge and identification card; assistance from other officers. 
(a)  In the discharge of his duties, the pollution control officer or his authorized inspectors shall have the authority to enter, at any reasonable hour, any building, structure or premises within the incorporated area of the city to enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  The council shall issue to the pollution control officer a badge of office and an identification card as is customarily issued by the city, for himself and his representatives, which shall be displayed for the purpose of identification. 
(c)  The assistance and cooperation of health, police, legal and other officers shall be available to the pollution control officer when required in the performance of his duties. 
(Ord. No. 1068, § 3.1-3, 11-2-70)  
Sec. 14-6. - Appeals. 
(a)  The council shall have the duty and power to hear and determine appeals of the decisions and orders of the pollution control officer and to confirm, vary or reverse any such decision or order. 
(b)  Any person aggrieved by an order or decision of the pollution control officer may appeal the same to the council within twenty (20) days of said order, decision or ruling, by filing with the pollution control officer and the city clerk written notice of appeal; and said notice shall give the address where notices can be served upon him. 
(c)  The pollution control officer, upon receipt of the notice of appeal, shall forthwith transmit to the council all papers and documents constituting the record upon which his decision, order or ruling was based. The council shall set a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal and give due notice thereof by certified mail to the parties in interest. Said notice of appeal shall act as a stay of any decision, ruling or order until either approved, modified or set aside by the council. A fee of ten dollars ($10.00) shall be paid to the city at the time the notice of appeal is filed with the clerk. 
(d)  The council shall decide said appeal within a reasonable time and shall forthwith by certified mail notify all parties of its decision. 
(Ord. No. 1068, §§ 3.2-1—3.2-4, 11-2-70)  
Sec. 14-7. - Installation permit for fuel-burning, combustion or process equipment. 
(a)  No person shall construct, install or alter any fuel-burning, combustion or process equipment or any equipment pertaining thereto for use within the incorporated areas of the city until an application including suitable plans and specifications of the equipment and structures or buildings used in connection therewith has been filed in duplicate by the person or his agent in the office of the pollution control officer and an installation permit has been issued by the building inspector. 
(b)  The plans and specifications shall show the form and dimension of the fuel-burning, combustion or process equipment, the proposed boiler, furnace, fuel burner stack, ducts, drains and sewer connections, together with the description and dimensions of the building or part thereof in which such equipment is to be located, the character of the fuel to be used, the maximum quantity of such fuel to be burned per hour, the character and concentration of liquid wastes, the operating requirements and the use to be made of the equipment. 
(c)  In the case of routine maintenance work or minor alterations or repairs which do not adversely affect the production, emission or discharge of smoke, dust, fly ash, soot, fumes, solid or gaseous product of combustion, solid or liquid waste products, this section shall not apply. 
(d)  In the case of an emergency repair where serious consequences would otherwise result this section shall not apply; provided that application for the necessary installation permit is filed in accordance with this section on the first business day following the commencement of the repair work. 
(e)  If the proposed plans and specifications submitted pursuant to this section are not sufficiently complete, in the judgment of the pollution control officer, to show that the equipment or device for which such plans and specifications were submitted will consistently comply with and can be operated within the provisions of this chapter, by reason of the design or process being unconventional or untried; or because the person has elected to omit confidential details; or because there is insufficient data on which to estimate the air pollution potential, the pollution control officer is hereby authorized to require as a condition precedent to the issuance of an installation permit or certificate of operation proof of financial responsibility and ability to make any changes that may be required after the construction to insure compliance with the provisions of this chapter. Such proof, in the discretion of the pollution control officer, may be a written statement to such effect, signed by the owner or a responsible officer of a financially sound organization or a written guarantee of performance signed by a responsible supplier or contractor or other responsible person. The responsibility of any such person or soundness of any such organization shall be a matter within the judgment of the pollution control officer, subject to the right of appeal. 
(f)  In the event that he is not given adequate proof of financial responsibility and of ability to make any changes that may be required, the pollution control officer may require any such person, as owner, lessee, operator, supplier, contractor, vendor, or other person, to file with the pollution control officer a surety bond running to the city in the sum of not to exceed fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00), executed by such person or persons, as principal and two (2) or more sureties, or a surety company authorized to do business in this state. 
(Ord. No. 1068, §§ 4.1-1—4.1-4, 11-2-70)  
Sec. 14-8. - Work to be commenced within one year; extension. 
If construction, installation or alteration is not started within one year of the date of the installation permit, the permit shall become void and all fees shall be forfeited. An extension, not to exceed six (6) months, may be granted by the council, upon proper application. 
(Ord. No. 1068, § 4.1-5, 11-2-70)  
Sec. 14-9. - Operating permit for fuel-burning equipment. 
After any work of erecting, constructing, reconstructing, installing, altering or repairing any fuel-burning equipment is completed, the pollution control officer shall inspect the same; and, if such work conforms to the application, plans and specifications filed and to the provisions of this chapter, there shall be issued a permit, known as an operating permit, to the person to whom the installation permit was issued, which operating permit shall be posted in a conspicuous position adjacent to the equipment. 
(Ord. No. 1068, § 4.1-6, 11-2-70)  
Sec. 14-10. - Violations subsequent to construction. 
The authorization of the issuance by the pollution control officer of any installation permit or operating permit shall not be held to exempt the person to whom the permit has been issued or who is in possession of the same, from prosecution for violation of provisions of this chapter. 
If, at the time of the annual inspection, it is found that the equipment is in such condition that it cannot be operated within the provisions of this chapter, the pollution control officer is hereby authorized to give notice in writing to the person owning, operating or in charge of such equipment of the defects found and an order to correct, repair or replace the defective equipment. Failure to comply with this order within thirty (30) days from its date shall be a violation of this section and the pollution control officer is hereby authorized to seal the equipment. No person shall violate the seal on any equipment that has been sealed at the direction of the pollution control officer unless authorized by him in writing to do so. 
(Ord. No. 1068, § 4.1-7, 11-2-70)  
Sec. 14-11. - Variances. 
The council is hereby given authority for the granting of individual variances for any fuel-burning, combustion or process equipment or device, beyond the limitations prescribed in this chapter whenever it is found, upon the presentation of adequate proof, that compliance with any provision of this chapter or other ordinance relating to pollution, or any rule, regulation, requirement or order of the pollution control officer, will result in an arbitrary and unreasonable taking of property or in the practical closing and elimination of any lawful business, occupation or activity, in either case without a sufficient corresponding benefit or advantage to the people in the reduction of pollution; in such case, there shall be prescribed other and different requirements, not more onerous, applicable to plants or equipment involved. 
(Ord. No. 1068, § 4.2, 11-2-70)  
Sec. 14-12. - Extension of time for compliance with chapter. 
In the event any person is compelled to, or deems it advisable to, install any new equipment, processes or devices, appliances, means or methods, including needed pollution control equipment, in order to comply with any provisions of this chapter, such person may obtain a continuance in order to effect such compliance in accordance with the following procedure. To obtain such continuance, a written request shall be filed with the pollution control officer by any such person and shall set forth that, following normal good operating procedures, it is impossible in the operation of any plant, fuel-burning, combustion or process equipment or devices or apparatus, to operate the same in compliance with the requirements of this chapter. Said requests shall also state evidence satisfactory to the pollution control officer that such person has taken, or will take, all steps necessary to provide for future compliance with the provisions of this chapter. The pollution control officer shall be assured that the acquisition and installation of the proper equipment, processes, devices or appliances or control equipment, will be effected within the period of time specified. 
(Ord. No. 1068, § 4.3, 11-2-70)  
Sec. 14-13. - Fees. 
Fees required for permits, certificates and inspection of equipment and other sources of emissions shall be as prescribed in Appendix G. 
(Ord. No. 1068, § 4.4, 11-2-70; Ord. No. 11-O-0007, § 39, 5-16-2011)  
Sec. 14-14. - Persons liable for violations. 
All persons, owning, operating or in charge or control of any equipment who violate or cause, suffer or allow any violation of this chapter either as owners, occupants, managers or agents, shall be jointly and severally liable to the penalties imposed for such violations. 
(Ord. No. 1068, § 4.5, 11-2-70)  
Sec. 14-15. - Air quality standards. 
(a)  Purpose: Air quality standards are ambient air quality goals established for the purpose of protecting public health and welfare. The levels of air quality designated by the standards are designed to protect against injury to human, plant or animal life; they are further intended to allow maximum enjoyment of property consistent with the intent of this chapter. 
The first use of air resources is to sustain life. Air entering the respiratory tract must not menace health. Therefore, the air quality standards herein set forth must, as a minimum, provide air which will not adversely affect through acute or chronic symptoms, the health of the community. 
The air quality standards herein set forth will provide a basis for planning to achieve cleaner air. Even though in certain areas of the city the quality of the air may be lower than the standards, they are not a license allowing unnecessary degradation of the air, going against the intent of the act which requires a maintenance of the purity of the air resources of the state. 
The standards have also been designed for use as a basis for the development of implementation plans for the abatement and control of pollutant emissions from existing sources including development of air contaminant emission limitations and the setting of long-and short-range objectives for reduction of total emission of air contaminants as determined by emission inventories. And they will be used in the determination of air pollution control emission limitations for future installations to insure that urban and economic growth trends do not add to community air pollution problems. 
(b)  Established: Ambient air quality standards applicable in those positions of West Chicago, Illinois: 
Suspended Particulates Micrograms/cubic meter 	Interim Goal 	Standard 
Date to meet value 	January 1, 1972 	January 1, 1974 
Geometric Mean 	100 	75 
99% Point 	275 	200 
24 hour Maximum 	325 	300 
 
Sulfur Dioxide (SO 2 ) ppm 	Interim Goal 	Standard 
Date to meet value 		January 1, 1974 
Geometric Mean (24 hour 
average) 	0.03 	0.015 
99% (24 hour average) 	0.15 	0.10 
24 hour Maximum 	0.125 	0.20 
1 hour Maximum 		0.50 
 
(c)  Open fires: No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit open burning of refuse or other matter. 
(d)  Prohibited discharges: A person shall not discharge into the atmosphere from any single source of emission any air contaminants for a period or periods aggregating more than three (3) minutes in any one hour which is: 
(1)  As dark or darker in shade as that designated as No. 1 on the Ringelmann Chart, or 
(2)  Of such opacity as to obscure an observer's view to a degree equal to or greater than does smoke described in subsection (1) of this section. 
(e)  Nuisance: A person shall not discharge from any source whatsoever such quantities of air contaminants or other material which cause injury, detriment, nuisance or annoyance to any other person or to the public or which endanger the comfort, repose, health or safety of any such persons or the public or which cause or have a natural tendency to cause injury or damage to business or property. 
(f)  Particulate matter: A person shall not discharge into the atmosphere from any source particulate matter in excess of 0.10 grains per standard cubic foot of gas at standard atmospheric conditions. 
(g)  Specific contaminants: 
(1)  Sulfur Dioxide Limitation: 
a.  No person shall cause or permit the use of or if intended for use in the city the purchase, sale, offers for sale, storage or transportation of fuel which, as determined by the methods of the American Society for Testing and Materials, contains more than the following percentage of sulfur by weight: 
1.  For a period of two (2) years, beginning one year after November 2, 1970: fuel: 2.5 percent; 
2.  For a period of eighteen (18) months, beginning three (3) years after November 2, 1970: fuel: 2.0 percent; 
3.  Thereafter: fuel: 1.5 percent. 
b.  Upon the application of any person engaged in the operation of fuel-burning equipment, the pollution control officer with the approval of the council may issue a certificate of operation in those cases wherein the applicant shall establish that the fuel-burning equipment is operated in such a manner or is equipped with such control apparatus, as to continually prevent the emission of any sulfur compound or compounds in amounts greater than those that would be emitted from the burning (in the same fuel-burning equipment without such control apparatus) of fuel containing any amount permitted at the applicable time by this section. 
c.  When periods of stagnation, for twenty-four (24) hours or greater, occur, the pollution control officer with council approval shall have the power to implement a pollution incident control plan, whereby plants are required either to switch to a low sulfur fuel (less than 1.5% sulfur by weight) or curtail emission of sulfur dioxide pollution during this period until the pollution control officer determines that the stagnation period no longer exists. 
d.  Any series of articles, machines, equipment or other contrivances designed for processing a moving sheet, web, strip or wire which is subject to any combination of operations described in this subsection (g) involving any photochemically reactive solvent or material containing such solvent, shall be subject to compliance with this subsection (g). Where only non-photo-chemically reactive solvents or materials containing only such solvents are employed or applied, and where any portion or portions of said series of articles, machines, equipment or other contrivances involves operations described in this subsection (g), said portions shall be collectively subject to compliance with this subsection (g). 
(h)  Organic material: 
(1)  A person shall not discharge organic materials into the atmosphere in any one day from any article, machine, equipment or other contrivance in excess of the following quantities: 
a.  More than fifteen (15) pounds when any organic solvent comes into contact with flame or is baked, heat cured or heat-polymerized, in the presence of oxygen, unless all organic materials have been reduced either by at least eighty-five (85) percent overall or to not more than fifteen (15) pounds in any one day. 
b.  More than forty (40) pounds when employing, applying, evaporating or drying any photochemically reactive solvent or material containing such solvent unless all organic materials have been reduced either by at least eighty-five (85) percent overall or to not more than forty (40) pounds in any one day. 
Emissions of organic materials to the atmosphere from the cleanup with photochemically reactive solvents of any article, machine, equipment or other contrivance described in subsection (1)a. or (1)b., shall be included with the other emissions of organic materials from that article, machine, equipment or other contrivance for determining compliance with this chapter. 
(3)  Emissions of organic materials to the atmosphere as a result of spontaneously continuing dry or products for the first twelve (12) hours after their removal from any article, machine, equipment or other contrivance described in subsection (1)a. or (1)b. shall be included with other emissions of organic materials from that article, machine, equipment or other contrivance for determining compliance with this chapter. 
(4)  Any person using organic solvents or any materials containing organic solvents shall supply the pollution control officer, upon request and in the manner and form prescribed by him, written evidence of the chemical composition, physical properties and amount consumed for each organic solvent used. 
(5)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to: 
a.  The manufacture of organic solvents or the transportation or storage of organic solvents. 
b.  The spraying or other employment of insecticides, pesticides or herbicides. 
c.  The employment, application, evaporation or drying of saturated halogenated hydrocarbons or perchloroethylene. 
(6)  No person shall, during any one day, dispose of a total of more than one and one-half (1½) gallons of any photochemically reactive solvent or any material containing more than one and one-half (1½) gallons of any such solvent by any means which will permit the evaporation of such solvent into the atmosphere. 
(Ord. No. 1068, §§ 5.1-1—5.4-8, 11-2-70)  
Sec. 14-16. - Particulate matter. 
(a)  No person shall cause or permit particulate matter to be handled, transported or stored in a manner which allows or may allow the particulate matter to become airborne. 
(b)  No person shall cause or permit a building or its appurtenances or a road to be constructed, altered, repaired or demolished without taking such precautions as may be required by the pollution control officer to prevent particulate matter from becoming airborne. 
(c)  No person shall cause or permit untreated open areas to be maintained without taking reasonable precautions to prevent particulate matter from becoming airborne. 
(Ord. No. 1068, § 5.5, 11-2-70)  
Sec. 14-17. - Odors. 
No person shall cause or permit the emission of odorous air contaminants, including any air contaminants whose emission is not otherwise prohibited by this article, if the air contaminants cause or may cause detriment to the health, safety, welfare or comfort of any person. 
(Ord. No. 1068, § 6.1, 11-2-70)  
Sec. 14-18. - Toxics. 
No activity or operation shall cause, at any time, the discharge of toxic matter into the atmosphere in such concentrations as to be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety or welfare, or cause injury or damage to property or business, or be needlessly destructive of any insect, plant or animal life which contributes to the general welfare. 
(Ord. No. 1068, § 7.1, 11-2-70)  
Sec. 14-19. - Tests. 
(a)  If the pollution control officer has reasonable cause to believe that any equipment or fuel is in violation of this chapter, the pollution control officer may order the owner or lessee of the equipment or fuel, or his agent, to conduct and pay for such tests as are necessary in the opinion of the pollution control officer to determine whether the equipment or fuel is in violation of this chapter and to submit the test results to the pollution control officer within ten (10) days after the tests are completed. 
(b)  Such tests shall be conducted in a manner approved by the pollution control officer. If any part of the test is conducted at a place other than the site where the equipment or fuel is located, that part of the test shall be certified by a responsible laboratory. 
(c)  The owner or lessee, or his agent, shall notify the pollution control officer of the time and place of a test at least seven (7) days before the commencement of a test. Reasonable facilities shall be made available for the pollution control officer to witness the test. 
(Ord. No. 1068, §§ 8.1-1—8.1-3, 11-2-70)  
Secs. 14-20—14-29. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENT IN CONNECTION WITH ZONING AND SUBDIVISION MATTERS 
 
Sec. 14-30. - Policy and intent. 
In concert with enhancing and preserving environmental quality, it is the policy of the city to use all practicable means and measures to create and maintain conditions under which man and nature can exist in productive harmony and fulfill the social, economic and other requirements of present and future generations. Every citizen has a responsibility to contribute to the preservation and enhancement of the quality of the environment. There is a need to understand the relationship between the maintenance of high-quality ecological systems and the general welfare of the people of the city, including their enjoyment of the natural resources of the city. It is the intent of the city that the protection and enhancement of the environment shall be given appropriate weight with social and economic considerations in public policy. Social, economic, and environmental factors shall be considered together in reaching decisions on proposed activities. In order to carry out the provisions of this article, it is the continuing responsibility of the city to use all practicable means, consistent with other essential considerations, to improve and coordinate plans, functions, programs and resources to the end that the city may: 
(1)  Fulfill the responsibilities of each generation as trustee of the environment for succeeding generations; 
(2)  Assure for all citizens, safe, healthful, productive, and aesthetically and culturally pleasing surroundings; 
(3)  Attain the widest range of beneficial uses of the environment without degradation, risk to health or safety or other undesirable and unintended consequences; 
(4)  Preserve important historic, cultural and natural aspects of our heritage, and maintain, wherever possible, an environment which supports diversity and variety of individual choice; 
(5)  Achieve a balance between growth and resource use which will permit high standards of living and a wide sharing of life's amenities; and 
(6)  Enhance the quality of renewable resources and approach the optimum attainable recycling of depletable resources. 
(Ord. No. 1254, § 1, 10-21-74)  
Sec. 14-31. - When statement required. 
Every applicant whose zoning matter or subdivision matter is referred to the city shall file an environmental impact statement with the city administrator. The requirement for an environmental impact statement does not apply to actions limited to a single-family dwelling to be used as a residence, nor extensions, enlargements, additions, changes or alterations thereof, nor ancillary structures thereon. 
(Ord. No. 1254, § 2, 10-21-74)  
Sec. 14-32. - Waiver of article provisions. 
The provisions of this article may be waived by the city council whenever the applicant has previously filed with the city an acceptable environmental impact statement for the same property and there has been no substantial change in the project or activity. Waiver may also be granted by the city council whenever an environmental impact statement acceptable to the council has been submitted and approved by another governmental unit. Applicants seeking waiver shall file a request for waiver. Such request shall be granted or denied by the city council within thirty (30) days of being filed. 
(Ord. No. 1254, § 3, 10-21-74)  
Sec. 14-33. - Applicant to receive copy of article; copies of statement to be sent city agencies. 
Promptly upon referral to the city of a zoning matter or subdivision matter, the city administrator shall send the applicant a copy of this article. 
The city administrator shall promptly, upon receipt of a referral, send notice of the proposed change with applicable environmental impact statement when filed, to the members of the plan commission and/or zoning board and other appropriate city committees and shall provide public notice of the availability of copies of the environmental impact statement. 
(Ord. No. 1254, § 4, 10-21-74)  
Sec. 14-34. - Contents of statement. 
Each environmental impact statement prepared in accordance with this article shall include: 
(1)  A description of the proposed action. 
(2)  A description of the existing environmental setting. 
(3)  The favorable and adverse environmental impacts of the proposed action. 
(4)  The means and estimated costs necessary to minimize the adverse impacts. 
(5)  Identification of alternatives to the proposed action including their impact on the environment. 
(6)  Identification of any irreversible commitment of natural resources as a result of the proposed action. 
(7)  The growth-inducing aspects of the proposed action as related to natural resources. 
The city administrator may issue further guidelines clarifying the above as directed by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1254, § 5, 10-21-74)  
Sec. 14-35. - Application of article to city. 
The city declares its intention to subject its own designated actions to scrutiny on environmental considerations by providing a public environmental impact statement for review by the plan commission and/or zoning board and its citizens. 
(Ord. No. 1254, § 6, 10-21-74)  
Sec. 14-36. - Application of article to other governmental units. 
The city administrator is hereby directed to contact any state or local governmental unit proposing to engage in any activity having substantial environmental relevance in or near the city and to request that unit to cooperate fully with the city in carrying out the intent of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1254, § 7, 10-21-74)  
Secs. 14-37—14-39. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - STORM WATER CONTROL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1370, § 1, adopted May 15, 1978, specifically amended the Code by adding Art. III, §§ 14-40—14-47, as herein set out. 
 
Sec. 14-40. - Intent and purpose. 
(a)  This article is adopted for the purpose of improving and protecting the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare of the people. These purposes are accomplished by the following objectives: 
(1)  To insure and preserve the natural resources of the city. 
(2)  To prevent the flooding and inundation of land by surface water, in its natural, accumulated, dammed or impounded state. 
(3)  To conserve and maintain the taxable value of land and buildings throughout the city. 
(4)  To avoid the inappropriate development of lands and to provide for adequate drainage, the cessation of erosion and reduction of flood damage. 
(5)  To fix reasonable standards to which ponds, dams, runoffs and spillways shall conform. 
(6)  To prevent such additions to, and alterations or remodeling of, existing storm water storage area as would not comply with the restrictions and limitations imposed herein. 
(7)  To foster a more rational pattern of relationship between residential, business, commercial and manufacturing uses for the mutual benefit of all so far as concerns surface water. 
(8)  To isolate or control the location of unavoidable nuisance-producing uses, and to protect against damages from surface water and flooding. 
(9)  To define the powers and duties of the administrative and enforcement officers and bodies. 
(10)  To prescribe penalties for any violation of the provisions of this article, or of any amendment thereto. 
(b)  The standards and requirements contained in this article are intended to implement the objectives of the comprehensive plan for the City of West Chicago, the provisions of Illinois Revised Statutes, Chapter 109, Section 2, and the floodplain statute and other statutes and ordinances pertaining thereto. 
(Ord. No. 1370, § 1, 5-15-78)  
Sec. 14-41. - Scope of regulations. 
(a)  All storm water storage areas erected hereafter shall be subject to this article. 
(b)  All storm water storage areas built hereafter shall comply with this article. Any structure rebuilt or restored after damage or destruction shall be considered to be a structure built hereafter. 
(Ord. No. 1370, § 1, 5-15-78)  
Sec. 14-42. - Rules. 
[The following rules of interpretation shall be observed in the use and enforcement of this article:] 
Masculine gender includes the feminine gender. 
Measured distances, expressed in feet, shall be to the nearest tenth foot. 
Present tense includes past tense and future tense. 
Plural number includes singular. 
Singular number includes plural. 
(Ord. No. 1370, § 1, 5-15-78)  
Sec. 14-43. - Definitions. 
Whenever a word or term defined hereinafter appears in the text of this article, its meaning shall be construed as set forth in the definition thereof; and any word appearing in parenthesis, between a word and its definition herein, shall be construed in the same sense as that word. Words herein not defined shall be interpreted in accordance with applicable definitions contained in Webster's dictionary. 
Base flood and base flood elevation: As defined in Ordinance No. 1345 [Chapter 4, Article III of this Code], as amended. 
By-pass channel: A channel formed in the topography of the earth's surface to carry storm water runoff through a specific area. 
Control structure: A structure designed to control the volume of storm water runoff that passes through it during a specific length of time. 
Dry bottom storm water storage area: A facility that is designed to be normally dry and contains water only when excess storm water runoff occurs. 
Environmental impact statement: That statement required by city Ordinance No. 1254 [section 14-30 et seq. of this Code], as amended. 
Excess storm water: That portion of storm water runoff which exceeds the transportation capacity of storm sewers or natural drainage channels serving a specific watershed. 
Ground water recharge: Replenishment of existing natural underground water supplies. 
Natural drainage: Channels formed by the existing surface topography of the earth prior to changes made by unnatural causes. 
Positive gravity outlet: A term used to describe the drainage of an area by means of natural gravity so that it lowers the free water surface to a point below the existing grade, or invert of storm drains within the area. 
Recognized agency: An agency or governmental unit that has statistically and consistently examined local and climatic and geologic conditions, and maintained records as they apply to storm water runoff, e.g., Metropolitan Sanitary District of Greater Chicago, U.S. Weather Bureau, University of Illinois Engineering Experiment Station, Illinois State Water Survey, etc. 
Safe storm drainage capacity: A term used to describe the quantity of storm water runoff that can be transported by a channel or conduit without having the water surface rise above the level of the earth's surface over the conduit, or adjacent to the waterway. 
Self-cleaning velocity: A velocity of flow greater than three (3) feet per second. 
Storm water storage area: Areas designated to store excess storm water. 
Storm water runoff release rate: The rate at which storm water runoff is released from dominant to servient land. 
Storm water runoff: Water that results from precipitation which is not absorbed or detained by the soil or plant material. 
Tributary watershed: All of the area that contributes storm water runoff to a given point. 
West Chicago General Development Plan: City Ordinance No. 1260, as amended [see section 2-10 of this Code]. 
Wet bottom storm water storage area: A facility that is designed to be maintained as free-water surface or pond. 
Zoning ordinance: City Ordinance No. 717 [Appendix A of this volume], as amended. 
(Ord. No. 1370, § 1, 5-15-78)  
Sec. 14-44. - Storm water storage areas. 
(1)  Storm water storage areas shall be required in accordance with the following standards: When it is required by the city engineer, the controlled release and storage or combination thereof, of excess storm water runoff shall be required in combination for all new development for commercial, industrial, residential, planned unit developments, and special uses in the City of West Chicago. 
(2)  Storm water storage areas may be permitted under the following conditions: 
(a)  Whenever the same are requested by the owner of land located within the City of West Chicago, or within one and one-half (1½) miles from the boundary thereof. 
(b)  The said owner has complied with subsection 14-44(3) through (6) of this article. 
(3)  Whenever storm water storage areas are to be constructed and/or used within the city, or [within] one and one-half (1½) miles thereof, the owner shall not build, nor use the same, without obtaining a permit so to do. 
(4)  The owner shall submit to the city administrator of the City of West Chicago an application for a storm water storage area permit, on a form provided together with the following documents, and a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00), plus any costs in excess of fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(a)  A survey of the lands to be served by said storm water storage area, to a scale not smaller than one inch equals one hundred feet (1"=100'), spotting to said scale the storm water storage area to be constructed or used thereon. 
(b)  A topographic survey of the land to be served by said storm water storage area, to a scale, not smaller than one inch equals one hundred feet (1"=100'), showing two-foot contours, spotting to said scale the storm water storage area to be constructed or used thereon. 
(c)  Drawings showing the plan and cross-sections of said storm water storage area to a scale of not smaller than one inch equals forty feet (1"=40') and specifications, with detail to show compliance, or noncompliance with subsection 14-44(5) through (5.1) of this article. 
(d)  All calculations used in determining the final design of the storm water storage area, outfall structure and storm sewers. 
(e)  Items (4)(a), (b), (c), and (d) of this section shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or a land surveyor of the State of Illinois, as applicable. 
(f)  An environmental impact statement stating the effect upon the environment within the drainage basin served by the construction of the storm water storage area. Such statement should be in such detail as to show factual reasons for the conclusions set forth, and shall consider all facets of the natural environment. A list of the names and addresses of all the record owners of such land where such environmental impact shall be required shall be attached. 
(g)  A sworn statement signed by the owner listing all items of a nonnatural nature, to be damaged, covered or destroyed by the construction and use of said storm water storage area. 
(h)  A statement by the owner supported by plans and drawings, if required, showing the changes in drainage, if any, of the area lying within the drainage basin of said storm water storage area. 
(i)  A statement by the owner of the proposed maintenance of said storm water storage area. 
(j)  A statement, by the owner, suggesting uses the said city may make, other than retention of surface water, of the completed storm water storage area. 
(5)  The construction of storm water storage areas shall be in accordance with the following design standards: 
(a)  The controlled release of storm water runoff from all developments described in section 14-44(1), shall not exceed the existing safe storm drainage capacity of the natural downstream outlet channel or storm sewer system. The release rate shall be an average value computed as a direct ration to the tributary watershed area. In any case, this value shall not exceed fifteen hundredths (0.15) inches per hour from an area designed to provide storage from excess storm water. The rate at which storm water runoff is transported into a designated storage area may be determined by the design engineer, but in no case shall the velocity be below self-cleaning velocity for a storm sewer flowing full. 
(b)  The required volume for storm water detention shall be calculated on the basis of the runoff from a 100-year return frequency rainfall for the critical duration for the basin size, as published by a recognized agency. This volume of storage shall be provided for the fully developed watershed that is tributary to the area designated for detention purposes. The storm water release rate shall be considered when calculating the storm water storage capacity, and the control structure designed to maintain a relatively uniform flow rate regardless of depth of storm water in the storage area. The required storm water storage area volume shall not be located below the base flood elevation, as defined in the Corps of Engineers Flood Insurance Study for the City of West Chicago, May, 1977, as amended. 
(c)  Detention reservoirs or dry bottom storm water storage areas shall be designed to serve a secondary purpose for recreation, open space or other types of uses that will not be adversely affected by occasional or intermittent flooding. A method of carrying the low flow through these areas shall be provided in addition to a system of drains, and both shall be provided with a positive gravity outlet to a natural channel or other storm sewer facility with adequate capacity according to the definition of the term "safe storm drainage capacity." 
The combination of storage of the water from a 100-year storm and the design release rate shall not result in a storage duration in excess of seventy-two (72) hours. Maximum depths of planned storm water storage shall not exceed four (4) feet, unless the existing natural ground contours and other conditions lend themselves to greater storage depth, which shall be approved by the city engineer. Minimum grades for turf areas shall be two (2) percent, and maximum slopes shall be ten (10) percent ten (10) units horizontally to one unit vertically). Storage area side slopes shall be kept as close to the natural land contours as practical, and a ten (10) percent slope or less shall be used wherever possible. If slopes greater than ten (10) percent are necessary to meet storage requirements or area restrictions, approval shall be obtained from the city engineer. All detention ponds shall be seeded or sodded to control erosion, and constructed in accordance to the methods specified in "Standard Specifications for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control," as published by the soil and water conservation district. Outlet control structures shall be designed as simply as possible, and shall require little or no maintenance and/or attention for proper operation. Each storm water storage area shall be provided with a method of emergency overflow in the event that a storm in excess of the 100-year return frequency storm occurs. This emergency overflow facility shall be designed to function without maintenance and/or attention, and shall become part of the natural or surface channel system described in a preceding paragraph. Hydraulic calculations shall be submitted to substantiate all design features. Both outlet control structures and emergency overflow facilities shall be designed and constructed to fully protect the public health, safety and welfare. Storm water runoff velocities shall be kept to a minimum and turbulent conditions at an outfall control structure will not be permitted without complete protection for the public safety. The use of restrictive fences shall be kept to a minimum and shall be used only as a last resort when no other method is feasible. 
(d)  Retention reservoir or wet bottom storm water storage areas shall be designed with all of the items required for detention reservoir storage areas, except that a low flow conduit and a system of drains with a positive gravity outlet shall not be required. However, the following additional conditions shall be complied with: 
1.  Water surface area shall not exceed one-tenth ( 1/10 ) of the tributary drainage area. 
2.  Shoreline protection shall be provided to prevent erosion from wave action. 
3.  Minimum normal water depth shall be four (4) feet. If fish are to be used to keep the pond clean, a minimum of one-fourth (¼) of the pond area shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet deep. 
4.  Facilities shall be available, if possible, to allow the pond level to be lowered by gravity flow for cleaning purposes and shoreline maintenance. 
5.  Control structures for storm water release shall be designed to operate at full capacity with only a minor increase in the water surface level. Hydraulic calculations shall be submitted to substantiate all design features. 
6.  Aeration facilities to prevent pond stagnation, if required, shall be provided. Design calculations to substantiate the effectiveness of these aeration facilities shall be submitted with final engineering plans. 
7.  In the event that the water surface of the pond is to be raised for purposes of storing water for irrigation or in anticipation of the evapotranspiration demands of dry weather, the volume remaining for storage of excess storm water runoff shall still be sufficient to contain the 100-year storm runoff. 
(e)  Paved surfaces that are to serve as storm water storage areas shall have minimum grades of one percent, and shall be restricted to a storage depth of one foot maximum. Rooftop storage shall be designed with permanent-type control inlets and parapet walls to contain runoff on the rooftop. Emergency overflow areas shall be provided to insure that the weight of water stored will not exceed the structural capacity of the roof. Release rate and storage volume requirements for paved storage areas shall be as hereinabove outlined in subparagraphs (a) and (b). If a portion of an area within a storm water storage area is to be paved for parking or recreational purposes, the paved surface shall be placed at the highest elevation within the storage area as possible. 
(f)  Where developments form only a portion of a watershed or contain portions of several watersheds, the requirements for providing storage shall be based upon that proportion of the area being developed as compared to the total watershed tributary to the storage area. Compensating storage will be acceptable whenever it is justified and feasible. 
(g)  The ability to retain and maximize the ground water recharge capacity of the area being developed is encouraged. Design of the storm water runoff control system shall give due consideration to providing ground water recharge to compensate for the reduction in the percolation that occurs when the ground surface is paved and/or roofed over. Specific design calculations and details shall be provided with the final plans and specifications presented for review. The use of natural gravel deposits for the lower portions of storm runoff storage areas, the flattening of drainage slopes and the retention of existing topography are samples of possible recharge methods. 
(h)  Where development of a property presents the threat of flooding or damage by flash runoff to downstream residents, the facilities for storm water runoff control shall be constructed prior to any earthmoving or drainage construction on the project site. 
(i)  The construction of the storm water control system shall be accomplished as part of the cost of land development. If the amount of storage capacity can be increased to provide benefit to the municipality, negotiations for public participation in the cost of development may be feasible. 
(j)  During the construction phases of land development, facilities shall be provided to prevent the erosion and washing away of the earth. Silting of downstream areas can be prevented through the strategic use of stilling basins, sodding of runoff channels, and by limiting the period of time during which the earth is stripped of vegetation. 
(k)  Final engineering plans shall show complete details for all of the items covered in this article and shall be submitted for review and approved prior to the start of construction. 
(5.1)  A floodway for all tributary upstream areas shall be provided in accordance with the following standards: A "natural" or surface channel system shall be designed with adequate capacity to convey through the development the storm water runoff from all tributary upstream areas. This "by-pass" channel shall be designed to carry the peak rate of runoff from a base flood assuming all storm sewers are blocked and that the upstream areas are fully developed and have been saturated with antecedent rainfall. No habitable structures shall be constructed within this floodway; however, streets and parking or playground areas and utility easements shall be considered compatible uses. Design of this floodway system shall also take into consideration control of storm water velocity to prevent erosion or other damage to the facility which will restrict its primary use. Depths of flow shall be kept to a minimum and retention of channel configurations shall be totally under municipal control. In the event that the area within this "by-pass" channel is re-shaped or restricted for use as a floodway, the municipality will cause to have any restrictions removed at the expense of the party or parties causing said restriction. Should the development contain an existing "natural" waterway, this land configuration shall be preserved as part of the "by-pass" channel system. Construction of a "low flow" system of storm sewers to carry the minor storm runoff and re-shaping of the channel with a maximum of six (6) horizontal to one vertical side slopes and bottom of a width adequate to facilitate maintenance and carry the flood runoff without eroding velocities shall be included in the plans for land development. 
(6)  The owner of said storm water storage area shall place, with the city, a cash escrow fund, letter of credit, or other security in an amount not less than one hundred twenty-five (125) percent of the estimated construction cost, as prepared by a registered professional engineer and as approved by the city attorney and city engineer, to guarantee that construction shall be in accordance with all statutes, laws and ordinances governing the same, and, such security shall not be released until the city engineer of the City of West Chicago certifies that the same has been so completed. 
(Ord. No. 1370, § 1, 5-15-78)  
Sec. 14-45. - Hearings and fact finding. 
(1)  When all the documents set forth in section 14-44(4) have been submitted to the city administrator, and show that the proposed storm water storage area serves an area greater than ten (10) acres or that the storm water storage area is proposed to be dedicated to the City of West Chicago, the administrator shall cause the documents to be delivered to the secretary of the plan commission. 
(2)  Upon reviewing said documents, the said secretary shall: 
(a)  Schedule, within sixty (60) days, a public hearing on said application. 
(b)  Cause a publication of such hearing to be made in a newspaper of general circulation within said city for three (3) consecutive weeks, the first publication to be not more than twenty-eight (28) days from the date of the hearing. 
(c)  Serve notice by depositing the same in the United States mail to all persons, at the address shown, set forth in section 14-44(4)(f). 
(d)  The public hearing shall be conducted as follows: 
i.  The plan commission shall hear any and all testimony and evidence offered relevant to the storm water storage area. 
ii.  The hearing may be continued from time to time by the plan commission. 
iii.  Within thirty (30) days from the final hearing on said application, the plan commission shall recommend, or not recommend, to the city council, a plan for the designated use of said storm water area, taking into account the guidelines pertaining thereto in this article, and other ordinances of the City of West Chicago and statutes of the United States of America and the State of Illinois. 
(e)  The city council may either approve, disapprove, or amend said recommendation, and, if not disapproved, forward the same to the engineering department for plan review. Said engineering department shall, if said plan conforms with this article, forthwith issue a permit. 
(3)  When the area served by a proposed storm water storage area is less than ten (10) acres, or the proposed storm water storage area is to be private, the hearing and fact finding requirements of subsections (1) and (2) shall be waived. 
(Ord. No. 1370, § 1, 5-15-78)  
Sec. 14-46. - Use and maintenance of said storm water storage area. 
(1)  Each and every storm water storage area plan, approved as above set forth, shall be designated and used as follows: 
(a)  Either: 
1.  Public. In which event it shall be dedicated, with sufficient land around said pond as to compatibly secure its use by the City of West Chicago, in accordance with rules and regulations adopted by the city council, from time to time, for one of the following uses: 
(aa)  Environmental: Whenever, in the opinion of the plan commission, it receives an environmental statement, as herein provided, or otherwise, to the effect that the area served by said storm water storage area or the storm water storage area itself, has a positive impact on a unique part or portion of the environment, then, and in that event, said storm water storage area shall be designated for "environmental use," and its construction, operation and maintenance shall also be directed towards that end. 
(bb)  Recreational: Whenever, in the opinion of the plan commission, it believes that the area served by said storm water storage area, or the storm water storage area itself, can best be used by the citizens of the City of West Chicago, for recreational purposes, then, and in that event said storm water storage area shall be designated for "recreational use" and its construction, operation and maintenance shall also be diverted towards that end. 
2.  Whenever a storm water storage area is not, as hereinbefore provided, designated a public use, then, and in that event, it shall be designated as a private storm water storage area. 
(b)  Whenever a storm water storage area is designated a public use, hereinabove, then, and in that event, the land used for such storm water storage area, and so much additional land as shall allow proper use for the public use so designated, shall be dedicated to the city. 
(2)  Maintenance: 
(a)  Public. Whenever a storm water storage area is designated a public use hereinabove, the maintenance of said storm water storage area, as well as the public use, other than as a storm water storage area, shall be the responsibility of the city. 
(b)  Private use: Whenever a storm water storage area is designated a private storm water storage area under section 14-46(1)(1)2., hereinabove, then, and in that event, the following maintenance shall be provided: 
1.  The design, storage capacity and other features of the storm water storage area shall be maintained at all times. The city engineer shall make periodic inspections to determine if the storm water storage area is being maintained in accordance with the original design and provides the required controlled release and storage of excess storm water for the area served. In the event the city engineer determines any deficiencies exist in a privately owned storm water storage area, the city engineer shall take action in accordance with section 14-47. 
2.  The owner, planner or developer shall present to the city council for its approval, a plan to finance, in perpetuity, the maintenance above required. 
3.  In the event, for any reason whatsoever, the maintenance of said private retention pond, is no longer required, any sums, of any nature, kind, or description, placed with the city, or under its management or control, for maintenance shall become the sole and exclusive funds of the city and may be used by it for any purpose whatsoever. 
In the event a private retention pond shall, at a former date, have been determined to be a private retention pond and the owner of the same determines that the use has so changed, so that in effect said retention pond fits the definition of a public retention pond, as herein set forth, he may file a petition herein setting forth such facts with the city administrator, together with all the documents required in section 14-44(4) hereof, and shall be accompanied by a deposit fee of one hundred five dollars ($105.00), plus any costs in excess of one hundred five dollars ($105.00). Upon receipt of all of the required documents, the petition shall be heard in accordance with the proceedings set forth in section 14-45 hereof. 
(Ord. No. 1370, § 1, 5-15-78; Ord. No. 1429, § 1, 7-2-79)  
Sec. 14-47. - Adherence to approved drainage plans; enforcement appeal and penalties. 
(a)  Adherence to approved plans. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to construct or improve any structure, to grade or do any earth moving, to construct or improve any by-pass channel or storm water storage area, or to install any control structure, on any property subject to this article, or on any property for which final engineering plans have been approved pursuant to this article, except as provided for in such final engineering plans as are approved pursuant to this article. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any property which has been improved, graded or developed in accordance with final engineering plans approved pursuant to this article or upon which a control structure has been installed or a by-pass channel or storm water storage area has been constructed in accordance with such engineering plans, to alter or change any structure, grade, contour line, by-pass channel or storm water storage area in contravention of such approved engineering plans; to alter or remove any control structure required by such approved engineering plans; or to allow the property to remain or become in a condition which does not conform to such approved engineering plans in any respect. 
(b)  Enforcement. The city engineer is hereby authorized and directed to enforce all of the provisions of this article. The city engineer and his duly authorized representatives may enter, at reasonable times, upon any property within the city to investigate or ascertain the condition of the subject property in regard to any aspect regulated by this article. 
(c)  Duty of property owner. It shall be the duty of the owner of any property required to be improved, developed or maintained in conformance with final engineering plans approved pursuant to this article to bring such property into compliance with said engineering plans within a specified time or receipt of notice from the city engineer, that a determination has been made that the said property does not conform to final engineering plans under which said property was improved or developed. 
(d)  Penalties. Any person, firm or corporation violating any provisions of this article shall be penalized as provided in section 1-8 of this Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 1370, § 1, 5-15-78)  
Sec. 14-48. - DuPage County Countywide Stormwater and Flood Plain Ordinance. 
(a)  Ordinance adopted. There is hereby adopted by reference as if fully set out herein that certain ordinance known as DuPage County Ordinance No. SM-O-0028-19, entitled "DuPage County Countywide Stormwater and Flood Plain Ordinance," effective May 28, 2019, adopted and published by the County of DuPage, State of Illinois, and all future amendments to the "DuPage County Countywide Stormwater and Flood Plain Ordinance" adopted by the County of DuPage, together with the additions, insertions, deletions and amendments hereinafter set forth, three (3) copies of which have been on file for a period of more than thirty (30) days prior to the adoption of this section and now are on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(b)  Ordinance adopted. There is hereby adopted by reference as if fully set out herein that certain ordinance known as Ordinance No. OSM-002-09, "Illicit Discharge Detection and Elimination Ordinance," effective May 26, 2009, adopted and published by the County of DuPage, State of Illinois, and all future amendments to the "Illicit Discharge Detection and Elimination Ordinance" adopted by the County of DuPage, together with the additions, insertions, deletions and amendments hereinafter set forth, three (3) copies of which have been on file for a period of more than thirty (30) days prior to the adoption of this section and now are on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(c)  Amendments. The following additions, insertions, deletions and changes are hereby made to the DuPage County Countywide Stormwater and Flood Plain Ordinance: 
(1)  Section 15.40.D.1 - Amend by deleting the words "which are not Minor Developments," and inserting the following language at the end of section 15.40.D.1: 
"For Minor Developments, the Administrator may elect not to require a development security if the development meets the requirements of this section and it is adequately demonstrated by the applicant that it is not practical or necessary to provide the security based upon the overall watershed impact of the project." 
(2)  Section 15.47.B - Amend by inserting the following additional language at the end of Section 15.47.B: 
"The Administrator may require additional documentation after construction to demonstrate that construction was completed and will perform in accordance with the Certification." 
(3)  Section 15-54-B.1.b. - Amend by deleting the words "one hundred ten percent (110%)" and in place thereof inserting the words "one hundred twenty-five percent (125%)". 
(4)  Section 15-54-C.1.a. - Amend by deleting the words "one hundred ten percent (110%)" and in place thereof inserting the words "one hundred twenty-five percent (125%)". 
(5)  Section 15-54.D.1.b. - Amend by deleting the words "one hundred ten percent (110%)" and in place thereof inserting the words "one hundred twenty-five percent (125%)". 
(6)  Section 15-54.D.3 - Amend by deleting the words "one hundred ten percent (110%)" and in place thereof inserting the words "one hundred twenty-five percent (125%)". 
(7)  Section 15-72.D.4 - Amend by inserting the following additional language at the end of Section 15-72.D.4: 
"If said maximum release rate as provided hereinabove exceeds the carrying capacity of the downstream conveyance system, then the maximum release rate shall be reduced to a rate equal to the downstream carrying capacity." 
(8)  Section 15-97 - Amend by deleting Section 15-97 in its entirety and in lieu thereof, the following language shall be substituted: 
"15-97. Site Runoff Storage Variance Fee Program 
15-97.A Where a variance to the site runoff storage requirements of Section 15-72 is granted, payment into the City's Site Runoff Storage Variance Fee ("Fee-in-lieu") Program shall be made prior to the issuance of a Stormwater Management Certification as a condition of the variance. 
15-97.B All developments for which a variance to the site runoff storage requirements is granted shall participate in the City's Fee-in-lieu program. 
15-97.B.1 Payment of a Site Runoff Storage Variance Fee for the varied storage shall be made to the City and the amount shall be determined by applying the first applicable criteria as follows: 
15-97.B.1.a. Where the Program has a designed or established off-site storage facility(ies) the fee shall be calculated by multiplying the per acre-foot cost of the closest off-site storage facility times the varied storage where: 
15-97.B.1.a.1. A design concept plan for the facility has been approved by the City, containing an estimate of the per acre-foot cost of constructing the storage, including operations and maintenance costs; and 
15-97.B.1.a.2. A formula has been developed to determine that any Development's investment in the facility shall be at least equal to the cost of planning, acquiring of lands, constructing, operating, and maintaining the facility; and 
15-97.B.1.a.3. The facility is located in the same watershed planning area as the Development receiving the variance. 
15-97.B.1.b. Where the Program has not established off-site storage facility(ies) in accordance with sub-parts B.1.a.1 through B.1.a.3 above, a Site Runoff Storage Variance Fee shall be paid to the City in accordance with this section. The fees established by this section identify reasonable and rational costs to provide site runoff storage in the same watershed planning area as the Development receiving the variance. The detention variance fee includes the cost of planning, acquiring land, construction, operation, and maintenance. The fees for the watershed planning areas within the City are as follows: 
(1)  Fox River Tributaries: 
$81,000 per acre-ft 
(2)  West Branch DuPage River: 
$94,000 per acre-ft 
15-97.B.2 Fee-in-lieu funds collected shall be accounted for in separate project or watershed planning area accounts. Funds shall be used in the same watershed planning areas as collected to enlarge or enhance existing site runoff storage facilities and related components, construct off-site facilities and related components, provide maintenance of stormwater facilities, or undertake other development that provides a watershed benefit. 
15-97.B.3 The Program Administrator shall provide an annual accounting of all funds deposited in each development or watershed planning account and shall account for each fund on a first-in, first-out basis. 
15-97.B.4 The Program Administrator may prioritize and allocate funds for budgeting purposes on an annual basis within each watershed planning area account. 
15-97.B.5 Site Runoff Storage Variance Fees shall be refunded to the person who paid the fee, or to that person's successor in interest, in accordance with Sec. 15-97.B.6, whenever the Program Administrator fails to encumber fees collected within 10 years from the date on which such fees were collected. 
15-97.B.6 Refunds shall be made provided that the appropriate party files a petition with the Program Administrator within one year after the expiration of the 10-year encumbrance period." 
(9)  Section 15-98. - Amend by deleting Section 15-98 in its entirety and in lieu thereof, the following language shall be substituted: 
"Sec. 15-98. Post Construction BMP ("PCBMP") Fee-in-Lieu Program 
15-98.A With the approval of the Administrator, and provided the conditions of Section 15-63 apply, the applicant may be allowed or required to pay a PCBMP fee-in-lieu payment. Payment into the PCBMP fee-in-lieu program shall be made prior to the issuance of a Stormwater Management Certification. 
15-98.B Development shall participate in the City's PCBMP fee-in-lieu program, in the following manner: 
15-98.B.1 A PCBMP fee-in-lieu payment shall be calculated by applying the fee schedule below, that identifies reasonable and rational cost to construct and maintain similar PCBMPs for those areas of the development that remain without effective water quality treatment. For PCBMP, fee-in-lieu payment of $500 per 1,000 square feet of net new impervious area shall be made to the City. 
15-98.B.2 PCBMP funds collected shall be separately accounted for in project or watershed planning area accounts. Funds shall be used in the same watershed planning areas as collected solely to design, construct, and maintain water quality or runoff volume reduction improvements. Funds may not be used to fulfill obligations required by the Ordinance for a Development. 
15-98.B.3 The Program Administrator shall provide accounting on an annual basis of all funds deposited in each watershed planning account and shall account for each fund on a first-in, first-out basis. 
15-98.B.4 The Program Administrator may prioritize and allocate funds for budgeting purposes on an annual basis within each watershed planning area account. 
15-98.B.5 All BMP fee-in-lieu payments shall be refunded to the person who paid the fee, or to that person's successor in interest, in accordance with Section 15-98.B.6, when the Program Administrator fails to encumber that development's fees collected within ten (10) years of the date on which such fees were collected. 
15-98.B.6 Refunds shall be made provided that the appropriate party files a petition with the Program Administrator within one year after the expiration of the 10-year encumbrance period." 
(10)  Appendix A, Definition of "Impervious Area" - Amend by deleting the definition of "Impervious Area" in its entirety and in lieu thereof, the following language shall be substituted: 
"Land cover that includes, but is not limited to, non-porous asphalt or asphalt sealants, non-porous concrete, roofing materials except planted rooftops designed to reduce runoff, and gravel surfaces used as roadways or parking lots. Proposed graveled surfaces used for storage of materials may be counted only 60% impervious provided it can be demonstrated by the applicant to the Administrator's satisfaction that aggregate gradation has a high porosity, which porosity will be retained throughout the material's design life. Ponded water shall be considered impervious area (at its normal water elevation), but vegetated wetlands or constructed wetland basins shall not be considered impervious area. The pre-development impervious area of a development site is the maximum permitted and constructed extent of the impervious surfaces that existed at the same time on the development site in any of the 3-years preceding the date of the application." 
(d)  Incorporation of documents/flood insurance rate maps: 
(1)  Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), DuPage County, Illinois, and incorporated areas County Number 17043C, City of West Chicago Community Number 170219, panel numbers 0017, 0019, 0036, 0037, 0038, 0039, 0041, 0043, 0107, 0126, 0127, and 0131, effective date August 1, 2019, and all subsequent revisions. 
(2)  Flood Insurance Study, DuPage County, Illinois, and incorporated areas, dated August 1, 2019, and all subsequent revisions. 
(Ord. No. 10-O-0038, § 1, 2-15-2010; Ord. No. 12-O-0021, § 1, 7-16-2012; Ord. No. 19-O-0021, § 1, 6-17-2019)  
Sec. 14-49. - General certifications for the Dupage County Countywide Stormwater and Floodplain Ordinance. 
The following General Certifications for the DuPage County Countywide Stormwater and Floodplain Ordinance are hereby adopted by reference as if fully set out herein for use within the City of West Chicago: 
(1)  General Certification #1, Pertaining to the Construction of Accessory Structures in a Floodplain, adopted by the DuPage County Board on April 24, 2012. 
(2)  General Certification #2, Pertaining to the Construction of Boardwalks, adopted by the DuPage County Board on April 24, 2012. 
(3)  General Certification #3, Pertaining to the Construction of Boat Lifts and Piers in a Floodplain, Buffer and/or Wetland, adopted by the DuPage County Board on April 24, 2012. 
(4)  General Certification #4, Pertaining to the Construction of a Deck in a Floodplain or Buffer, adopted by the DuPage County Board on April 24, 2012. 
(5)  General Certification #5, Pertaining to the Demolition of Structures Located in a Floodplain, Buffer, or Wetland, adopted by the DuPage County Board on April 24, 2012. 
(6)  General Certification #6, Pertaining to the Construction of Posts, Fencing, and Guard Rails in a Floodplain or Buffer, adopted by the DuPage County Board on April 24, 2012. 
(7)  General Certification #7, Pertaining to the Construction of Recreational Facilities Not Located in a Wetland, adopted by the DuPage County Board on April 24, 2012. 
(8)  General Certification #8, Pertaining to the Construction of Sidewalks, Trails, Patios and Driveways Outside of Wetlands, adopted by the DuPage County Board on April 24, 2012. 
(9)  General Certification #9, Pertaining to the Construction of Storm Sewer Outfalls and Outlet Channels Located in a Floodway, Floodplain, Buffer, and/or Wetland, adopted by the DuPage County Board on April 24, 2012. 
(10)  General Certification #10, Pertaining to the Construction of Shoreline or Stream Bank Stabilization Measures, adopted by the DuPage County Board on April 24, 2012. 
(11)  General Certification #11, Pertaining to Topsoil and Sand Restoration in a Floodplain, Floodway or Buffer, but Not Within a Wetland, adopted by the DuPage County Board on April 24, 2012. 
(12)  General Certification #12, Pertaining to the Construction of Utilities, adopted by the DuPage County Board on April 24, 2012. 
(Ord. No. 12-O-0022, § 1, 7-16-2012)  
ARTICLE IV. - EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION REGULATIONS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1376, § 1, adopted July 3, 1978, specifically amended the Code by adding Art. IV, §§ 14-50—14-55, as herein set out. 
 
Sec. 14-50. - Purpose. 
(a)  Whereas excessive quantities of soil are eroding from areas that are being developed for nonagricultural and agricultural uses, including but not limited to the construction of dwelling units, commercial buildings and industrial plants, the building of roads and highways, and the creation of recreational facilities; and, 
(b)  Whereas the washing, blowing and falling of eroded soil across and upon roadways endangers the health and safety of users thereof by decreasing vision and reducing traction of road vehicles, and; 
(c)  Whereas said soil erosion necessitates the costly repairing of gulleys, washed-out fills and embankments, and; 
(d)  Whereas the sediment from said soil erosion tends to clog sewers and ditches and to pollute and silt rivers, streams, lakes and reservoirs and; 
(e)  Whereas said sediment limits the use of water and waterways for beneficial purposes, destroying fish and other aquatic life, and that said sediment is costly and difficult to remove, and; 
(f)  Whereas said sediment reduces the channel capacity of waterways, resulting in greatly increased chances of flooding at grave danger to public health and safety. 
(g)  Therefore, the city council declares the purpose of this article is to provide minimum standards to safeguard persons, to protect property and prevent the despoliation of the environment, and to promote the public welfare, by regulating and controlling the design, construction, quality of materials, and use and maintenance of any development or other activity which disturbs or breaks the topsoil or otherwise results in the movement of earth or land, whether nonagricultural or agricultural, situated in the city. 
(Ord. No. 1376, § 1, 7-3-78; Ord. No. 2112, § 2, 12-5-88)  
Sec. 14-51. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, certain terms used herein are defined as set forth below: 
Building permit: A permit issued by the City of West Chicago for the construction, erection or alteration of a structure or building. 
Certify or certification means that the specific inspections and tests, where required, have been performed, and that such tests comply with the applicable requirements of this article. 
Cubic yards: The amount of material in excavation and/or fill measured by the method of "average and areas." 
Excavation: Any act by which organic matter, earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other similar material is cut into, dug, quarried, uncovered, removed, displaced, relocated or bulldozed and shall include the conditions resulting therefrom. 
Existing grade: The vertical location of the existing ground surface prior to excavation or filling. 
Fill: Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other material is deposited, placed, replaced, pushed, dumped, pulled, transported or moved by man to a new location and shall include the conditions resulting therefrom. 
Grading: Excavation or fill or by combination thereof and shall include the conditions resulting from any excavation or fill. 
Land surveyor: A registered surveyor of the State of Illinois. 
Parcel: All contiguous land is one ownership. 
Permittee: Any person to whom a site development permit is issued. 
Person: Any person, firm or corporation, public or private, the State of Illinois and its agencies or political subdivision, and the United States of America, its agencies and instrumentalities, and any agent, servant, officer or employee of any of the foregoing. 
Removal: Cutting vegetation to the ground or stumps, complete extraction or killing by spraying. 
Site: A lot or parcel of land, or a contiguous combination thereof, where grading work is performed as a single unified operation. 
Site development: Altering terrain and/or vegetation and constructing vehicular access. 
Soil map: A map showing the distribution of soil types or other soil mapping units in relation to the prominent physical and cultural features of the earth's surface as developed by the Soil Conservation Service, USDA, according to the National Cooperative Soil Survey. 
Vacant: Land on which there are no structures or only structures which are secondary to the use or maintenance of the land itself. 
(Ord. No. 1376, § 1, 7-3-78)  
Sec. 14-52. - General criteria and standards. 
The following general principles shall apply to any movement of earth, any sedimentation and erosion control plan and the granting of a permit for the execution of said plan as hereinafter provided: 
(1)  The smallest practical area of land shall be exposed at any given time during development. 
(2)  Such minimum area exposure shall be kept to as short a duration of time in accordance with good engineering standards. 
(3)  Temporary vegetation or, where appropriate, mulching or other nonviable cover shall be used to protect areas exposed during development. 
(4)  Sediment basins, debris basins, desilting basins, or silt traps shall be installed and maintained to remove the sediment from runoff waters from land undergoing development. 
(5)  Provision shall be made to effectively accommodate the increased runoff caused by changed soil and surface conditions during and after development. 
(6)  Permanent, final plant covering or structures shall be installed in accordance with good engineering standards. 
(7)  The plan of development shall relate to the topography and soils of the site so that the lowest potential for erosion is created. 
(8)  Natural plant covering shall be retained and protected so far as it is consistent with developing site. 
(Ord. No. 1376, § 1, 7-3-78; Ord. No. 2862, § 1, 4-3-95; Ord. No. 2905, § 1, 5-2-95)  
Sec. 14-53. - Plan and permit. 
(A)  Permit required. 
(1)  Before land is cleared, graded, transported, or otherwise disturbed by the movement of earth for purposes including, but not limited to, the construction of buildings, the mining of minerals, including sand and gravel, the development of golf courses, and the construction of roads and streets by an person, partnership, or corporation within a city, a site development permit embodying the proposed earth movement shall be obtained from the city, where development comes under any one or more of the following provisions, unless such development is exempted therefrom by subsection (2) of this section: 
(a)  Excavation, fill, or any combination thereof will exceed one hundred (100) cubic yards. 
(b)  Fill will exceed three (3) feet in vertical depth at its deepest point measured from the natural ground surface. 
(c)  Excavation will exceed four (4) feet in vertical depth at its deepest point. 
(d)  Excavation, fill, or any combination thereof will exceed an area of five thousand (5,000) square feet. 
(e)  Plant cover is to be removed from an area exceeding five thousand (5,000) square feet on any vacant parcel of land or any parcel of land in excess of ten (10) acres. 
(2)  A site development permit shall not be required in the following cases: 
(a)  Excavations below finished grade for tanks, vaults, tunnels, equipment basements, swimming pools, cellars, or footings of buildings or structures for which a building permit shall have been issued by the city, unless part of a development which would otherwise require such a permit. 
(b)  Excavation or removal of vegetation in public utility easements by public utility companies for the purpose of installing underground utilities. 
(B)  Application. 
(1)  No site development or building permit shall be issued until said developer submits a site development plan, together with other requirements of this article, and certifies that any land-clearing construction or development involving the movement of earth shall be in accordance with such plan and submissions. 
(2)  Each application for a site development permit shall be made by the owner of the property or his authorized agent to the city engineer on a form furnished for that purpose. When grading or plant cover removal is proposed as a part of a building permit application, it may be combined on one plot, plan and may be submitted showing building plans and site development plans. In such instances, a registered land surveyor shall certify as to the accuracy of the existing and proposed contour lines. Each application shall be accompanied by the following, unless the city engineer finds any item unnecessary to insure compliance with the provisions of this article; provided, however, that no exemption from subsection (a) hereof shall be granted to any applicant who intends to move in excess of five hundred (500) cubic yards of dirt: 
(a)  Site developments: A vicinity sketch, showing acreage of site, boundary line survey, zoning, type of proposed sewer and water facilities, location of existing utilities, buildings and drains on and within one hundred (100) feet of the site, together with a legend and scale. 
(i)  A soil map of the subject property showing the predominant soil types on the site. 
(ii)  Information on those areas abutting or adjacent to the site required to show existing drainage patterns and the drainage course that may be affected by the development. 
(iii)  The name and address of all developers or owners. 
(iv)  The name and address of all consulting firms retained by the applicant, together with the name of applicant's principal contact at such firm. 
(v)  Limits of natural floodplains, if any. 
(vi)  Areas to be sodded, seeded, mulched, or paved. 
(vii)  Acreage of area to be vegetatively stabilized, if any. 
(viii)  Areas to be left undisturbed. 
(b)  Site grading: A map showing existing topography of the site and a 100-foot adjacent peripheral strip, proposed contours and final grades, and street profiles; and, indicating what measures will be employed to protect cut and fill slopes from surface runoff. 
(c)  Storm drainage: A plan based upon a competent storm drainage study, including a drainage area map and computations and indicating what conditions now prevail at proposed and natural outlets and a statement including, but not limited to; 
(i)  Whether the drainage course is bare earth or vegetated. 
(ii)  Whether the constructed outlet will be in open sun, open shade or dense shade. 
(iii)  Whether the natural or proposed outlet is subject to long term or continuous flow. 
(iv)  Whether the existing outlet is actively eroding. 
(v)  Whether there is evidence of a high water table and, if so, is the same permanent or seasonal. 
(vi)  Whether the area is subject to seepage or spring flow. 
(vii)  The elevation of normal water level in all proposed and natural outlets. 
(viii)  A profile below outlet for a sufficient distance to indicate the natural gradient of the accepting natural outlet and/or stream channel. 
(ix)  A cross-section and profile of existing stream channels where applicable. 
(x)  A ditch design and computations for all seeded, sodded or bare earth outlets, ditches and similar water conduction facilities. 
(d)  An estimate schedule and phasing of development of the site as follows: 
Phase I—Stripping and/or clearing 
Phase II—Rough grading and construction 
Phase III—Final grading and vegetative establishment 
Phase IV—Maintenance 
All erosion and sediment control plans submitted to the city engineer for approval shall show erosion and sediment control measures needed to provide protection throughout the construction listed above. These plans shall also include any off-site borrow and spoil areas, sewer lines, utility lines and haul and access roads, and shall further indicate: 
(i)  The start of clearing date; 
(ii)  Duration of exposure of disturbed areas; 
(iii)  Installation of temporary sediment control measures both vegetative and structural by phase and date; 
(iv)  Installation of storm drainage by phase and date; 
(v)  Paving of streets and parking areas, if any, by phase and date; 
(vi)  Establishment of permanent vegetative cover plans that show what will be done to shorten the duration of exposure of disturbed areas after grading, including seeding mixes and rates, type of sod, seedbed preparation, seeding dates, lime and fertilizer application, temporary seedings, if needed, mulching, or similar stabilization procedures; 
(vii)  Details of all structural sediment control measures; 
(viii)  Computations for sediment basins. 
(C)  Bonds. The applicant shall be required to file with the city a performance bond, letter of credit, or other improvement security satisfactory to the city attorney in the amount deemed sufficient by the city engineer to cover all the costs of improvement, landscaping, maintenance of landscaping, engineering, inspection fees and incidental expenses. 
(D)  Review. 
(1)  Procedure. The city engineer shall review, and approve, the application for the proposed site development in accordance with this and other applicable ordinances, rules, regulations and statutes. 
(2)  Prohibition of earth removal. No site development permit shall be issued for an intended building site unless: 
(a)  Such permit is accompanied by or combined with a valid building permit issued by the city; or 
(b)  The proposed earth moving is coordinated with any overall plan previously approved by the city for the area in which the site is situated. 
(E)  Appeals. The applicant may appeal the decision of the city engineer to the city council. Upon receipt of an appeal, the council shall schedule and hold a public hearing, after giving fifteen (15) days' notice thereof in a newspaper of general circulation within said city. The council shall, if practicable, render a decision within thirty (30) days of the hearing. Factors to be considered on review shall include, but not be limited to, possible saturation of fill and unsupported cuts by water, both natural and domestic; runoff surface waters that produce erosion, and silting of drainage ways; nature and type of soil or rock that when disturbed by the proposed grading may create earth movement and produce slopes that cannot be landscaped, and excessive and unnecessary scarring of the natural landscape through grading or removal of vegetation. All decisions of the city council shall be considered final and binding. 
(F)  Retention of plans. Plans, specifications and reports for all site developments shall be retained as filed by the city engineer. 
(G)  Inspections. The city engineer shall make inspections as hereinafter required and shall either approve that portion of the work completed or shall notify the permittee wherein the same fails to comply with the site development plan. Where it is found by inspection that conditions are not substantially as stated or shown in the said plan, the city engineer may stop further work until approval is obtained for a revised grading plan conforming to the existing conditions. Plans for grading work, bearing the stamp of approval of the city engineer, shall be maintained at the site during progress of the grading. Until the final inspection is made, a sign issued by the city, indicating permission to grade has been granted by the city, shall be prominently displayed on the front property line of the property involved so as to be visible from the street on which the property fronts. In order to obtain inspections in accordance with the following schedule, the permittee shall notify the city engineer at least one full working day before the said inspection is to be made: 
(1)  Rough grading. When all rough grading has been completed; and 
(2)  Final inspection. When all work, including installation of all drainage and other structures and required planting, has been completed. 
(Ord. No. 1376, § 1, 7-3-78)  
Sec. 14-54. - Operation standards and requirements. 
(A)  Applicability. All earth moving and grading operations not specifically exempted by the provisions of this article shall comply with the applicable standards and requirements set forth in this section 14-54, in addition to the other requirements of this article. 
(B)  Special precautions. 
(1)  If at any stage of the grading the city engineer determines by inspection that the nature of the formation is such that further work as authorized by an existing permit is likely to imperil any property, public way, watercourse or drainage structure, the city engineer may require, as a condition to allowing the work to be done, that such reasonable safety precautions be taken as he considers advisable to avoid the likelihood of such peril. 
"Special precautions" may include, but shall not be limited to, specifying a more level exposed slope, construction of additional drainage facilities, berms, terracing, compaction, or cribbing, installation of plant materials for erosion control, and reports of a registered soils engineer and/or of a registered engineering geologist whose recommendations may be made requirements for further work. 
(2)  Where it appears that storm damage may result because the grading is not complete, work may be stopped and the permittee required to install temporary planting to control erosion, install temporary structures or take such other measures as may be required to protect adjoining property or the public safety. On large operations or where unusual site conditions prevail, the city engineer may specify the time of starting grading and time of completion, or may require that the operations be conducted in specific stages so as to insure completion of protective measures or devices prior to the advent of seasonal rains. 
(C)  Expiration of permit. Every site development permit shall expire by limitation and become null and void if the work authorized by such permit has not been commenced within one hundred and eighty (180) days and/or is not completed within one and one-half (1½) years from date of issue; except that the city engineer may, if the permit holder presents satisfactory evidence that unusual difficulties have prevented work being started or completed within the specified time limits, grant a reasonable extension date of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 1376, § 1, 7-3-78)  
Sec. 14-55. - Fees, deposits, bonds, appeals, exceptions and penalties. 
The cost of plan review and inspections made by the city shall be paid by the permitee and shall be as prescribed in Appendix G. 
(Ord. No. 1376, § 1, 7-3-78; Ord. No. 11-O-0007, § 40, 5-16-2011)  
Secs. 14-56—14-69. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - STORM WATER CONVEYANCE SYSTEMS 
 
Sec. 14-70. - Definitions. 
(a)  Storm sewers. A watercourse which carries storm and surface waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and polluted industrial wastes. 
(b)  Man-made and natural watercourses. A natural or artificial channel of perceptible extent, with definite bed and banks to confine and conduct continuously or periodically flowing water. 
(c)  Floodplain. The area adjacent to a watercourse which has been or may be intermittently covered by floodwater as delineated on the flood hazard boundary maps prepared by the Federal Insurance Administration, Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(Ord. No. 1497, § 1, 11-3-80)  
Sec. 14-71. - Regulations. 
The keeping or disposal of trash, debris, obstructions or unwanted materials, unless otherwise permitted, into the storm sewers or man-made or natural watercourses or in areas identified as floodplain is unlawful. 
(Ord. No. 1497, § 1, 11-3-80)  
Sec. 14-72. - Powers and authority of inspectors. 
Duly authorized employees of the City of West Chicago bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter upon all properties for the purpose of inspection, observation and measurement, in accordance with the provision of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1497, § 1, 11-3-80)  
Sec. 14-73. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Notice of violation; correction. Any person found to be violating the provisions of this article shall be served by the City of West Chicago with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice permanently cease all violations and correct all existing violations noted in the written notice. 
(b)  Penalty for violation. Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit provided for in subsection 14-73(a) shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be fined in an amount of at least ten dollars ($10.00) but not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each violation. Each day in which any such violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(c)  Liability. Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become liable to the City of West Chicago for any expense, loss or damage occasioned the City of West Chicago by reason of such violation. 
(Ord. No. 1497, § 1, 11-3-80)  
Sec. 14-74. - Validity. 
(a)  All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed. 
(b)  The invalidity of any section, clause, sentence or provision of this article shall not affect the validity of any part of this article which can be given effect without such invalid part or parts. 
(Ord. No. 1497, § 1, 11-3-80)  
Secs. 14-75—14-79. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - SEWER DUMPING[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1533, § 1, adopted June 1, 1981, enacted provisions designated as Ch. 14, Art. V, § 14-60, which provisions have been redesignated by the editor as Ch. 14, Art. VI, § 14-80, inasmuch as the Code already contained an Art. V. 
Cross reference— Sewers generally, § 18-51 et seq.; use of the public sewers, § 18-58; prohibited discharges into storm water drainage system, penalty, § 18-59. 
 
Sec. 14-80. - Prohibited. 
(a)  In addition to any and all other prohibited acts of unlawful use of city sewers contained in this Code of Ordinances, it shall be unlawful for any person or entity to do any of the following acts without the prior permission of the City of West Chicago: 
(1)  Use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof at a location other than at a permitted connection. 
(2)  Assign the permission to use the public sewer connection to any person or entity. 
(3)  Use, alter or disturb a public sewer for purposes outside the normal and everyday use of sewers in which this person or entity is permitted to discharge materials. 
(4)  Transport waste, water, garbage, chemicals, solids in any form, whether organic or inorganic, with the intent to dispose, discharge or expel or with the intent to find a location in which to dispose, discharge or expel, within the facility planning area in which the City of West Chicago is the designated lead management agency. 
(5)  Contract for hire a person or entity to use, alter or disturb the sewers in a manner other than permitted in these ordinances. 
(b)  Any person or entity violating any portion of this section shall be fined one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed for each and every day during which the violation continues or exists. 
(c)  This section, and every provision thereof, shall be considered separable; and the invalidity of any section, clause, provision, or part of any section, clause, or provision of this section shall not affect the validity of any portion of this section. 
(Ord. No. 1533, § 1, 6-1-81)  
Secs. 14-81—14-89. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - POLLUTION CONTROL FACILITY SITE APPROVAL PROCEDURES 
 
Sec. 14-90. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Act means the Illinois Environmental Protection Act, as amended from time to time. (415 ILCS 5/1, et seq.) 
Applicant means any person, firm or partnership, association, corporation, company, limited liability company or organization of any kind proposing to obtain site location approval and IEPA permits for a new pollution control facility within the city's jurisdiction, and includes the fee owner of such site, the proposed operator, and any other party with an interest in the site, such as a lessee, contract purchaser or land trust beneficiary. 
West Chicago's jurisdiction refers to the corporate boundaries of the City of West Chicago. 
Board refers to the Illinois Pollution Control Board. 
City refers to the City of West Chicago, Illinois. 
City council refers to City Council of West Chicago, Illinois. 
County refers to the county in which the new pollution control facility is proposed to be located. 
Hazardous waste disposal site means a site at which hazardous waste is to be managed, i.e., treated, stored or disposed. Hazardous waste is waste so defined in the Act. 
Hearing officer refers to a person appointed by the mayor, with the advice and consent of the city council to conduct a public hearing and make findings of fact, conclusions of law and recommendations to the city council as provided by this article. 
IEPA refers to the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency. 
Operator means any person, firm or partnership, association, corporation, company, limited liability company or organization of any kind engaging in the activity of operating a pollution control facility within the city's jurisdiction. 
PCF refers to a pollution control facility as defined in the Act. PCF includes a new pollution control facility and a transfer station as defined by the Act. 
Rules and procedures refers to the "Rules and Procedures - Pollution Control Facility Siting - City of West Chicago, Illinois", established by the city council pursuant to section 14-97 this Code. 
All other terms used in this article and defined in the Act shall have the same definitions and meanings as found in said Act, including, but not limited to those terms defined in Section 3, thereof. (415 ILCS 5/3) 
(Ord. No. 12-O-0030, § 2, 8-20-2012)  
Sec. 14-91. - City approval of pollution control facilities. 
No site location approval for the development or construction of a new PCF within West Chicago's jurisdiction may be granted by the city council unless an application is filed for approval of such site and is submitted for consideration to said city council in accordance with this article, the Act and the rules and procedures. 
(Ord. No. 12-O-0030, § 2, 8-20-2012)  
Sec. 14-92. - Pollution control facility siting hearing officer. 
(a)  Within fourteen (14) days following the receipt of the request for site location approval, the mayor, with the advice and consent of the city council, shall appoint a hearing officer to serve during any public hearing concerning an application for site location approval. The hearing officer shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor. Compensation for the services of the hearing officer shall be agreed upon between the hearing officer and the city before the public hearing commences and shall be considered an expense for which the city may be reimbursed from the filing fee deposit. The duties of the hearing officer shall be as provided for herein and in the Rules and Procedures. 
(b)  All meetings and hearings on the siting application shall be at the call of the hearing officer at such times as may be required. 
(Ord. No. 12-O-0030, § 2, 8-20-2012)  
Sec. 14-93. - Procedure for filing an application for approval of a pollution control facility. 
(a)  (1)  To request siting approval for a new PCF within West Chicago's jurisdiction, an applicant must file an application with the city clerk, with a minimum of one original and three (3) paper copies of the application showing sufficient details describing the proposed facility to demonstrate compliance with the Act and applicable regulations. The application shall include all site plans, engineering (including calculations), exhibits and maps, and all documents, if any, to be submitted to the IEPA as of the date of filing the application. At a minimum, the application shall comply with this article and the Rules and Procedures incorporated herein. The applicant shall also produce thirty (30) copies of the entire application in .pdf or other searchable electronic format so that the application may be uploaded to the city website and so that read-only copies of the application may be provided to the city council, city staff, participants, interested parties, and members of the public that request same. 
(2)  A copy of the application and all related documents or other materials on file with the city council shall be made available for public inspection in the office of the city clerk during normal business hours. Members of the public shall be allowed to obtain a copy of said application or any part thereof upon payment of the actual cost of reproduction as outlined in the Illinois Freedom of Information Act (5 ILCS 140/1, et seq.). A read-only copy of the application shall be made available on the city's website. 
(3)  In addition to the foregoing, the applicant shall deposit with the city clerk at the time of filing the application for site location approval of a new PCF a filing fee deposit in the form of a certified or cashier's check of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00), except that a filing fee deposit of two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00) is required if said proposed facility is a landfill, is designed as a hazardous waste disposal site, or if the disposal or volume reduction of any waste will be by incineration or burning. If the applicant elects to file an amended application for site location approval for any PCF in accordance with this article, such filing shall be accompanied by payment of a supplemental fee of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00). The amount of the deposit may be reduced if prior to filing the application, such a request is approved by the city council. 
The applicable filing fee is intended to defray the reasonable and necessary costs of processing the application, including, but not limited to: Costs of site inspection, clerical expenses, copying costs, space rental, hearing officer compensation, court reporter expenses, transcription costs, public notice expenses, staff review time, if any, city attorney and city consultants (such as qualified professional engineers, planners, appraisers, environmental counsel, etc.) (including tests, exhibits, and testimony, if any, provided by said consultants), and other relevant costs incident to the consideration of an application, the costs incident to preparing the record for appeal, and the cost of representing the city on appeal in case of an appeal of a city council decision (collectively, and non-exclusively, the "city costs"). Should the city incur any additional costs in excess of the applicable filing fee deposit, the applicant shall bear any and all such additional costs and shall promptly pay over such additional amount to the city upon request or demand. If at any time the funds deposited by the applicant are reduced below twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00), the applicant shall deposit an additional twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) within fourteen (14) days from when the city provides written notice. 
If there are funds remaining in the filing fee deposit after payment of the city costs and the conclusion of the application process (including any appeals), such amount shall be refunded to the applicant upon the final resolution of the application process (including appeals to the Illinois Pollution Control Board, appellate court, Illinois Supreme Court, federal courts, and administrative review in the courts, if any). 
(4)  The application must contain all site plans, exhibits, maps and documents required by this article, the Act and by the Rules and Procedures. The date that the applicant files a complete application in proper form, together with the applicable filing fee deposit, with the city clerk shall be considered the official filing date for all time limit purposes. The applicant remains solely responsible to demonstrate that the location approval criteria are all met. 
At any time prior to completion by the applicant of the presentation of the applicant's factual evidence and an opportunity for cross-examination by the hearing officer, city representatives and any registered parties, the applicant may file not more than one (1) amended application upon payment of additional fees pursuant to Section 39.2(k) of the Act and this subsection. Provided, however, that the time limitation for final action set forth in Section 39.2(e) of the Act and subsection 14-96(b) shall be extended for an additional period of ninety (90) days. 
(5)  In the event a host agreement has been entered into between the city and the applicant, fees and costs will be paid in accordance with the host agreement in lieu of subsection (3) above. If, prior to making a final local siting decision, the city has negotiated and entered into a host agreement with the applicant, the terms and conditions of the host agreement, whether written or oral, shall be disclosed and made a part of the hearing record for that local siting proceeding. In the case of an oral agreement, the disclosure shall be made in the form of a written summary jointly prepared and submitted by the city and the applicant and shall describe the terms and conditions of the oral agreement. 
(b)  Applications shall include a written petition on recycled 8½? × 11? paper (except engineering plans and other drawings and plans) setting forth or including the following as may be applicable: 
(1)  The identification of the applicant, owner of the subject property and the proposed operator of the PCF, which should also indicate for each whether the applicant, the landowner and the operator is an individual, partnership, limited liability company, corporation, trust or unit of government. 
a.  If the subject property is owned in a trust, then also identify the beneficiary(ies) of the trust(s). 
b.  In the case of an individual, list his or her address. 
c.  In the case of a partnership, submit the names of all partners. 
d.  In the case of a limited liability company, submit the names and addresses of all members and managers and attach a certificate of good standing for the LLC from the Secretary of State's office. 
e.  In the case of a corporation, submit the names and addresses of all officers and directors, and the names and addresses of all shareholders owning ten (10) percent or more of the capital stock of the corporation; together with certified copies of the articles of incorporation in the State of Illinois or, if not incorporated in the State of Illinois, its certificate of authority to do business in the State of Illinois. 
(2)  The legal description of the proposed site of the PCF and a street address or some other reasonable description of where the facility is to be located. 
(3)  A description of the proposed PCF, its operation and the anticipated longevity thereof. 
(4)  The area to be served by the proposed PCF and a statement of the needs in such area for such a PCF. 
(5)  The expected types, amounts and methods of management, treatment or storage of all wastes proposed for the site and the origins of these wastes. 
(6)  The monitoring plan (including background analyses) for ground water and the procedure by which surface water and air will be monitored (including procedure by which the applicant will establish background levels). 
(7)  The plans for closure of the site and continued monitoring thereafter. 
(8)  Proof of notice pursuant to Section 39.2(b) of the Act. 
(9)  Site plans showing details of the proposed PCF. 
(10)  A detailed topographic survey of the subject property and the surrounding area— within five hundred (500) feet of the property line—indicating: topographical variations in no greater than two-foot intervals for the subject property and USGS data for the property within five hundred (500) feet of the property line (unless otherwise required); existing land uses; existing zoning; and, if applicable, the boundary of any floodway or floodplain. For all purposes related to any siting application, "floodway" and "floodplain" shall mean the regulatory "floodway" and regulatory "floodplain" as defined by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). These features may shown on one or more exhibits. 
(11)  A statement of the plan of operation for the proposed PCF including, but not limited to, the following as applicable: 
a.  Method of storage, landfilling, incineration, composting, resource recovery or other process; 
b.  Hours of operation; 
c.  Management personnel and their training; 
d.  Litter, vector, dust and odor control; 
e.  Surface drainage and erosion control (this information shall include proof of compliance with the DuPage County Countywide Stormwater and Floodplain Ordinance and/or the U.S. Clean Water Act); 
f.  Fire control; 
g.  Corrective actions for spills and other operational accidents; and 
h.  Coordination of operations with any other regional pollution control facility and/or recycling facility operated on, adjacent to, or within five hundred (500) feet of the PCF. 
(12)  A report analyzing the projected traffic impacts attributable to the proposed PCF and describing how the proposed PCF has been designed to minimize the impacts on existing traffic flows. The report shall include, but not be limited to the following as applicable: 
a.  Description of the anticipated number, type, size, origin, routing and expected distribution of arrival and departure times of all vehicles accessing the PCF site. If any of these factors are expected to vary significantly over the expected life of the PCF, details of the expected variance shall be presented along with the anticipated peak traffic data; 
b.  Description of any changes in traffic volumes or patterns to or from any existing development on the site that may be altered as a result of construction of the PCF; 
c.  Description of the roadway network adjacent to and surrounding the proposed PCF, including number of lanes, turning lanes at intersections, traffic controls, and vehicle turning and classification counts at the site entrances and exits, all signalized intersections and significant unsignalized intersections along principal routes of access. The area of detailed study shall extend along principal routes of access until the site traffic represents an insignificant percentage of the overall traffic stream. Traffic counts shall be taken during the expected daily peak periods of operation of the proposed PCF as well as the existing peak traffic periods on the surrounding roadways. 
d.  Descriptions of any traffic concerns identified by roadway jurisdictions within the area of detailed study; 
e.  Operational capacity analysis during peak periods at principal intersections within the area of detailed study for a minimum of two scenarios: (1) existing traffic volumes, and (2) with the addition of site traffic. If projected traffic volumes are analyzed, the report shall include the basis for the projections and the analysis should consider both build and no-build scenarios; 
f.  Analysis of vehicle accidents at intersections within the area of detailed study; 
g.  Detailed analysis of anticipated traffic at the entrance(s) and exit(s) to and from the proposed PCF, including either a traffic signal warrant analysis or gap study, and an intersection design study meeting the requirements of the agency having jurisdiction over the route providing access to the proposed PCF. This information should include information on traffic for all regional pollution control facility and/or recycling facility located on, adjacent to or within five hundred (500) feet of the PCF. 
(13)  A written commitment (by Host Agreement or otherwise) to obtain certificates of insurance from companies having a Best rating of A VI or better that shall, at such time as the PCF is permitted, cover accidents such as fires, explosions, nonsudden accidental occurrences and pollution impairment. 
(14)  If the site is a proposed hazardous waste PCF, a copy of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act Contingency Plan. 
(15)  A statement describing the past operating experience of the applicant and, if different, the operator in the field of solid or hazardous waste management. Also include a statement describing the past operating experience of subsidiaries of the parent corporation operating or licensed in Illinois in the field of solid or hazardous waste management. 
(16)  A statement setting forth a complete record of actual or alleged violations from the last ten (10) years of the applicant and any proposed operator with environmental laws and regulations governing solid or hazardous management operations or activities. Said statement shall include, but not be limited to, a citation of the applicable statute or ordinance violated or alleged to be violated and a brief written summary of the activities or operations giving rise to the actual or alleged violations and the ultimate outcome of the matter, including whether any fines or penalties were imposed. 
(17)  PCF construction quality assurance and quality control program. 
(18)  Personnel requirements for PCF operation and the training requirements for those personnel. 
(c)  It is the applicant's duty to comply with all notice requirements set forth in the Act. The applicant shall: 
(1)  No later than fourteen (14) days prior to filing an application for site location approval with the city clerk, cause written notice of such application to be served either in person or by registered mail, return receipt requested, on the owners of all property within the subject area not solely owned by the applicant, and on the owners of all property within two hundred fifty (250) feet in each direction of the lot line of the subject property, said owners being such persons or entities which appear from the authentic tax records of the county in which the facility is to be located; provided, that the number of all feet occupied by public roads, streets, alleys and other public ways shall be excluded in computing the two hundred fifty (250) feet requirement; provided further, that in no event shall this requirement exceed four hundred (400) feet, including public streets, alleys and other public ways. 
(2)  The applicant shall serve such written notice upon each member of the general assembly from the legislative district in which the proposed facility is to be located, and this notice shall also be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the county in which the site is located. 
(3)  The applicant shall state in such notice the name and address of the applicant, the location of the proposed site, the nature and size of the development, the nature of the activity proposed, the probable life of the proposed activity, the date when the request for site approval will be submitted to the city clerk, a description of the right of persons to comment on such request as hereafter provided, and any other information as may be required by the Rules and Procedures and the Act. 
(4)  The applicant shall include in the application proof of compliance with all pre-filing notice requirements, including verified or certified copies of those pre-filing notices required by Section 39.2(b) of the Act. 
(Ord. No. 12-O-0030, § 2, 8-20-2012)  
Sec. 14-94. - Procedure for filing written comments to an application for site location approval for a PCF. 
(a)  Any person may file written comments with the city clerk concerning the appropriateness of the proposed site for its intended purpose. The hearing officer shall consider any comment received or postmarked from the date of the application through and until thirty (30) days after the date of the last public hearing in making a final determination. Said written comments shall be mailed or delivered to the West Chicago City Clerk, 475 Main Street, West Chicago, Illinois 60185. Said written comments shall clearly designate reference to the PCF application to which they refer to ensure their consideration by the hearing officer. Upon receipt, the city clerk shall date stamp the comments and refer them to the hearing officer. 
(b)  The above-mentioned written comments shall become part of the record of the proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 12-O-0030, § 2, 8-20-2012)  
Sec. 14-95. - Hearings on applications. 
(a)  At least one (1) public hearing shall be held by the hearing officer no sooner than ninety (90) days but no later than one hundred twenty (120) days from and after the receipt of the application for PCF site location approval. Any city council member may attend such hearings and a transcript shall be made and retained of all portions of the public hearing. A quorum of the city council need not be present at any hearing. 
(b)  The applicant shall cause to be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the county of the proposed site and in a newspaper of general circulation in West Chicago a notice of such public hearing not later than fourteen (14) days prior to said hearing. 
The applicant shall also serve written notice of such hearing by certified mail, return receipt requested, on all members of the Illinois General Assembly from the district in which the proposed site is located, to the governing authority of every municipality contiguous to the proposed site or contiguous to the municipality in which the proposed site is to be located, to the county board of the county where the proposed site is to be located and to the IEPA. The applicant shall file with the city clerk copies of each notice with proof of service of such notice prior to the commencement of said public hearing. Such evidence of notice shall become a part of the record on the application for PCF local site approval. 
(c)  The hearing officer shall notify the applicant in writing of the date and location of the public hearing at least twenty-one (21) days prior to such hearing. 
(d)  Members or representatives of the governing authority of any municipality contiguous to the proposed site or contiguous to the municipality in which the proposed site is to be located and members or representatives of the county board of the county in which the proposed site is to be located may appear at and participate in the public hearings, but must register in the same manner provided for other participants or parties. 
(e)  The public hearing shall develop a record sufficient to form the basis of appeal of the decision in accordance with Section 40.1 of the Act. During the course of the public hearing before the hearing officer, the hearing officer shall receive testimony from the applicant and witnesses whom the applicant may call in support of the application, any city witnesses, any objectors, and any other witnesses having relevant information, and shall recommend approval only if the proposed facility meets the following criteria (or such amended criteria as may be set forth from time to time in the Act). 
(1)  That the facility is necessary to accommodate the waste needs of the area that it is intended to serve; and 
(2)  That the facility is so designed, located, and proposed to be operated that the public health, safety and welfare will be protected; and 
(3)  That the facility is located so as to minimize incompatibility with the character of the surrounding area and to minimize the effect on the value of the surrounding property; and 
(4)  (A) for a facility other than a sanitary landfill or waste disposal site, the facility is located outside the boundary of the 100-year floodplain or the site is flood-proofed; (B) for a facility that is a sanitary landfill or waste disposal site, the facility is located outside the boundary of the 100-year floodplain, or if the facility is a facility described in subsection (b)(3) of Section 22.19a [of the Act], the site is flood-proofed; 
(5)  That the plan of operations for the facility is designed to minimize the danger to the surrounding area from fire, spills, or other operational accidents; and 
(6)  That traffic patterns to or from the facility are so designed to minimize the impact on existing traffic flows; and 
(7)  That if the facility will be treating, storing or disposing of hazardous waste, an emergency response plan exists for the facility which includes notification, containment and evacuation procedures to be used in case of an accidental release; and 
(8)  That if the facility is to be located in a county where the county board has adopted a solid waste management plan consistent with the planning requirements of the Local Solid Waste Disposal Act, or the Solid Waste Planning and Recycling Act, the facility is consistent with that plan; and 
(9)  That if the facility will be located within a regulated recharge area, any applicable requirements specified by the Illinois Pollution Control Board for such areas have been met. 
The hearing officer and the city council may also consider as evidence the previous operating experience and past record of convictions or admissions of violations of the applicant (and any subsidiary or parent corporation of the applicant) in the field of solid waste management when considering criteria (2) and (5). The applicant shall affirmatively present oral testimony fairly showing the previous operating experience and past record of convictions or admissions of violations of the applicant (and any subsidiary or parent corporation of the applicant) in the field of solid waste management. 
(f)  A transcript shall be kept of all proceedings before the hearing officer. The hearing officer shall preside at the public hearing and shall make any decisions concerning the admission of evidence and the manner in which the hearing is conducted subject to this article and the Rules and Procedures. However, the hearing officer shall make all rulings and decisions in accordance with fundamental fairness. No ruling of the hearing officer concerning admissibility of evidence or procedural issues at the public hearing shall be appealable to the city council. Issues of jurisdiction shall be finally determined by the city council. 
(g)  The applicant for site location approval shall have the burden of proof and the burden of going forward with evidence. The testimonial evidence introduced by the applicant may not exceed the scope of the application. Such oral testimony may only explain and clarify the application, not expand, supplement or amend the application except as otherwise provided in this article for an amendment to the application. 
(h)  All persons desiring to provide public comment during the hearing, including members of the public, must submit written notification of said intent to the city clerk before the first day of the public hearing or register with the hearing officer on the first day of the hearing. Any person so appearing at such public hearing shall have the right to present public comment relating to the pending application. No advance written notification shall be required to present written comment in the manner described in section 14-94. 
(i)  Each person desiring to present evidence in the hearing and/or to cross-examine witnesses shall register as a party to the proceeding not less than ten (10) days prior to the commencement of the hearing. Any person registered as a party shall have the right to present their own personal testimony, to be represented by an attorney and, through such attorney, to present the testimony of other persons or to cross-examine witnesses. The city shall be deemed a participant and a party to all proceedings and shall proceed last with its case and cross-examination. 
(j)  All hearings shall be conducted in a manner which is consistent with the Act, this article and the Rules and Procedures. 
(k)  The recommendation of the hearing officer on the application shall be in writing, specifying the reason(s) for the decision, in accordance with subsection (e) above. The hearing officer shall submit a report to the city council as soon as practicable, but in no event earlier than the end of the thirty-day comment period. 
(l)  The siting approval procedures and criteria provided for in the Act, in this article and the Rules and Procedures for new PCF's shall be the exclusive siting procedures. Local zoning or other local land use requirement shall not be applicable to such siting decisions. 
(Ord. No. 12-O-0030, § 2, 8-20-2012)  
Sec. 14-96. - Decisions. 
(a)  Once the hearing officer has made a recommendation and reduced it to writing, the written recommendation shall be submitted to the city council for its decision as to the ultimate approval or disapproval of the proposed site location. Thirty (30) copies of the record of the public hearing in .pdf or other searchable electronic format shall also be made available to the city council as soon as the transcript becomes available. 
(b)  The city council shall make a decision based on the record from the public hearing and review of the recommendation of the hearing officer. The decision of the city council shall be by resolution in writing, specifying the reasons for the decision, such reasons to be in conformity with Section 39.2(a) of the Act. In granting site location approval, the city council may impose such conditions as may be reasonable and necessary to accomplish the purposes of the Act to the extent that said conditions are not inconsistent with the Act and the regulations promulgated by the Illinois Pollution Control Board. Such decisions shall be available for public inspection at the office of the city clerk and may be copied upon payment of the cost of reproduction. If there is no final action by the city council within one hundred eighty (180) days after the filing of the application for site location approval, the applicant may deem the application approved unless the time for approval has been extended for an additional period of ninety (90) days pursuant to the Act and this article. 
(c)  An applicant may not file an application for site location approval that is substantially the same as a request which was disapproved, pursuant to a finding against the applicant under any criteria in subsections 14-95(e)(1) through (9), above, and of Section 39.2(a) of the Act, within two (2) years. 
(d)  Siting approval obtained pursuant to this article is transferable and may be transferred to a subsequent owner or operator. In the event that siting approval has been transferred to a subsequent owner or operator, that subsequent owner or operator assumes and takes subject to any and all conditions imposed upon the prior owner or operator by the city. However, any such conditions imposed pursuant to this section may be modified by agreement between the subsequent owner or operator and the city. Further, in the event that siting approval obtained pursuant to this section has been transferred to a subsequent owner or operator, that subsequent owner or operator assumes all rights and obligations and takes the facility subject to any and all terms and conditions of any existing host agreement between the prior owner or operator and the city. 
(e)  A local siting approval granted under this section shall expire at the end of two (2) calendar years from the date upon which it was granted, unless the local siting approval granted under this section is for a sanitary landfill operation, in which case the approval shall expire at the end of three (3) calendar years from the date upon which it was granted, and unless within that period the applicant has made application to the agency for a permit to develop the site. In the event that the local siting decision has been appealed, such expiration period shall be deemed to begin on the date upon which the appeal process is concluded. 
(Ord. No. 12-O-0030, § 2, 8-20-2012)  
Sec. 14-97. - Rules and procedures. 
The rules and procedures set forth herein may be amended by resolution of the city council from time to time, provided that any amendment which occurs following the filing date on an application for local site approval must be made in a manner which preserves fundamental fairness. 
(Ord. No. 12-O-0030, § 2, 8-20-2012)  
Sec. 14-98. - Administration of fees and costs. 
(a)  All expenses incurred by the city, as described in section 14-93(2) and otherwise in managing or reviewing of the request for site approval, conducting the public hearing, arriving at the site approval decision, and any appeals from the city council decision shall be paid from the filing fee deposit as provided in section 14-93. The filing fee deposit shall be placed in an account in the name of the city, with rights of withdrawal limited to the city. 
(b)  The city's cost of providing the services of city employees in the receipt, review, processing of and response to the application shall be reimbursed to the city at the rate of twenty-five (25) percent of the direct cost of such professional fees and costs as shall actually be incurred by the city, in the event that the city, in its sole and exclusive discretion, determines that it is necessary or desirable to obtain professional services, including, but not limited to, attorneys, engineers, planners, architects, surveyors, traffic, drainage or other consultants, and/or to incur costs related to any required notices or recordations, in connection with the application for site approval. 
(c)  Upon termination of proceedings (including appeals), a final accounting and summary of all authorized expenditures and reimbursements shall be presented to the city council by the city administrator or his designee. 
(d)  Any portion of the filing fee deposit not required for payment of costs or expenses incurred by the city hereunder shall be returned to the applicant within a reasonable time. Should there be costs and/or expenses in excess of the amount paid by the applicant in the costs deposit, the applicant shall pay any and all additional costs within a reasonable time of presentment of a statement from the city. 
(e)  In order to expedite payment of all bills incurred as a result of administering the hearing process, all bills and questions concerning billing should be directed to the city administrator or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 12-O-0030, § 2, 8-20-2012)  
Sec. 14-99. - Ex-parte communication prohibited. 
In recognition of the quasi-judicial role of the mayor and each member of the city council, and the city attorney, ex-parte communications with the mayor, council members or the city attorney concerning the application are prohibited between the date of filing and the date of the final decision of the city council (or the 180 th day after the date of filing). 
(Ord. No. 12-O-0030, § 2, 8-20-2012)  
Sec. 14-100. - Records. 
(a)  The city clerk shall be responsible for keeping the records of said hearing. The records shall consist of the following: 
(1)  The application and all amendments thereto; 
(2)  Proofs of the required notices; 
(3)  Notices of participation and registration of parties; 
(4)  Written comments filed by the public (either received by the city clerk's office or postmarked between the date of filing and thirty (30) [days] after the close of the hearing); 
(5)  All reports, studies, exhibits, documents or statements received in evidence at the public hearing; 
(6)  The transcript of the public hearing; 
(7)  Any motions filed during the public hearing; 
(8)  All transcripts, when available, or disclosures of meetings, other than the public hearings held pursuant to this article, at which the mayor or a city council member was in attendance and the application was discussed. 
(9)  The hearing officer's proposed findings of fact and recommendations to the city council (including any conditions of approval). 
(10)  The resolution containing the final decision of the city council. 
(b)  The city clerk shall be responsible for certifying all copies of the record of the public hearing. 
(Ord. No. 12-O-0030, § 2, 8-20-2012)  
Chapter 15 - PUBLIC WAYS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Miscellaneous ordinances related to planning, development and redevelopment, App. E. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 15-1. - Defined. 
The public ways of West Chicago are hereby defined as all streets, alleys and sidewalks within the city. 
(Ord. No. 1177, § 1, 10-15-73)  
Sec. 15-2. - Prohibited conduct on public ways. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person or group of persons to collect upon a public way for any unlawful purpose. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person or group of persons to annoy any other person or persons upon any public way. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person or group of persons to block, hinder or delay the passage of any person or persons upon a public way. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person or group of persons to use the public ways for lying, sitting or picnicking thereon. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit any snow, garbage or refuse of any kind, description or nature in any street, alley or public way, and no such refuse shall be so placed that it can be blown about or scattered by the wind. 
(1)  It shall be the duty of the public works personnel, as are designated and assigned by the director of public works, to enforce all laws and regulations, as provided for in this Chapter 15, relating to the city's public ways. Nothing in this section precludes any city officer or official expressly authorized in this chapter from also enforcing the City Code provisions relating to the regulating of the city's public ways. 
(Ord. No. 801, 8-6-62; Ord. No. 1177, § 6, 10-15-73; Ord. No. 13-O-0006, § 3, 2-4-2013) 
Cross reference— Similar provisions, § 11-116.  
Sec. 15-3. - Restrictions on cutting streets for utility connections. 
No open cut of streets, roads or thoroughfares shall be permitted for connection of utilities including gas, electric, water, sanitary sewers and storm sewers when said utilities are located outside of the street improvement excepting where the superintendent of public works in conjunction with the council finds, on the basis of facts presented to them, an extraordinary hardship exists; or that possible loss of the public improvement will result by requiring strict compliance with this section. 
Utility connections which cross an improved street shall be installed by boring and jacking or tunneling as set forth in the building code of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1257, 12-2-74)  
Sec. 15-4. - Standards and procedures for driveway approaches and sidewalks. 
(a)  Maintenance of drive approaches. Every drive approach shall be maintained in good repair by the owner of the property being served. Upon notice from the city to repair a deteriorating drive approach, the owner of the property being served shall cause the approach to be reconstructed or resurfaced within a reasonable period of time, after having first obtained a permit to do so. 
(b)  Entrance culverts. Entrance culverts are required to be constructed under all driveways entering onto any street not improved with curb and gutter. This requirement may be waived by the city engineer on streets having a gradient of less than one per cent at the point of entrance, if, in his opinion, the lack of such a culvert would not interfere with adequate drainage of the street and upstream lands. 
The surface of the drive approach shall be at least one-half (½) of the pipe diameter above the top of the culvert pipe. 
The size of all entrance culverts shall be approved by the city engineer. Entrance culverts shall be in place prior to the issuance of an occupancy permit for any structure built on the parcel to which access is granted, or the applicant for said occupancy permit shall post a two hundred dollar ($200.00) cash bond to insure installation of the entrance culvert. At such time as the entrance culvert is installed in accordance with these specifications, the cash bond shall be released. The restoration of the ditch area adjacent to the construction site to include the removal of all debris and excess spoil shall be considered as part of the culvert installation. 
The maintenance of the culvert shall be the responsibility of the property owners served. This maintenance shall include keeping the culvert pipe open and free of blockage. 
(c)  Location, line and grade of sidewalks and drive approaches. The location of the street edge of the sidewalk shall be five (5) feet from the right-of-way line of the street. However, in the case of interference with parkway trees and/or public utilities, the city engineer may designate alternate locations which shall be relatively straight and free of jogs. The transverse slope of the sidewalk shall be a minimum of one-fourth (¼) inch per foot above the top of the curb, but in no cases lower than center line grade of the abutting street. The maximum elevation of street edge of the sidewalk at the drive approach shall not exceed one and one-half (1½) inches per foot above the street gutter elevation. The maximum gradient of a sidewalk shall not exceed ten (10) percent. Sidewalk shall have expansion joints every fifty (50) feet and between the sidewalk and any other concrete pavement or structure. All sidewalks shall be laid and constructed at the locations and to the lines and grades designated and approved by the city engineer, who shall have the authority to designate alternative locations, lines and grades if the above requirements should result in a substantial hardship to the applicant, or would not be in the best interests of the city. No more than two (2) drive approaches shall be constructed to any building parcel with a minimum spacing between curb cuts of fifty (50) feet for residential approaches and one hundred (100) feet for commercial approaches; except, that automobile service stations located on corner lots shall be permitted a maximum of three (3) entrances, but no more than two (2) for any street, and shall have a minimum spacing between curb cuts of thirty (30) feet. On a corner lot, no drive approach shall be located closer than twenty (20) feet to the right-of-way corner at the property line, and no curb cut shall be permitted to extend into the radius curb between the intersecting streets. No drive approach pavement shall be within five (5) feet horizontally of any existing fire hydrant, traffic signal standard or equipment, or city-maintained lighting standard. All more restrictive state and county requirements for access to their highways shall prevail. 
(d)  Drive approach construction. Each drive approach constructed in any residential district shall comply with the requirements of article XIII of the zoning ordinance of the city applicable to residential driveways. No drive approach shall be constructed with a width greater than twenty-two (22) feet when undivided or may consist of two (2) twenty-four-foot drives when divided by a curb median in commercial or industrial districts. All measures shall be made at the property line or at the beginning of the required flare, whichever is further from the street. For approaches in residential districts, there shall be a maximum flare on each side at the curb cut of four (4) feet. The flare shall commence at a point seven (7) feet from the back of the curb. Commercial and industrial approaches shall have a flare having a maximum radius of thirty-five (35) feet, commencing thirty-five (35) feet from the back of the curb. No drive approach shall extend past the back of the curb or the edge of the street into the pavement so as to change the street grade at the gutter line. No depressions will be permitted on roll-type curbs. Curb and gutter of the barrier type shall be removed and replaced or sawcut such that the back of the curb at the driveway depression is a minimum of one and one-half (1½) inches above the gutter line at all places. The depression shall be the full width of the approach at its street edge, and shall meet the existing curb at a vertical angle not less than one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees. Residential drive approaches shall be constructed of portland cement concrete not less than six (6) inches thick or of two-and-one-half-inch minimum thickness of bituminous concrete on a compacted granular base of not less than six (6) inches thick. Commercial and industrial drive approaches shall be constructed of portland cement concrete not less than seven (7) inches thick or ten-inch minimum thickness of bituminous concrete. The limits of all pavement and concrete construction shall be against sawcut joints. The grade of the drive approach shall be such that it crosses the location of an existing or proposed sidewalk in accordance with the grade set forth for sidewalks. For the purposes of determining grades for drive approaches it shall be presumed that sidewalks are proposed on all streets within the area of planning jurisdiction of the city. Portland cement concrete drive approaches shall be separated from adjacent sidewalks and curbing at the back of the curb by approved expansion-joint material, finished with a light-broom finish, and coated with an approved curing compound immediately after finishing. Reconstruction of existing approaches shall be in conformance with these specifications. Reconstruction shall be defined as the removal and replacement of more than fifty (50) percent of the existing surface. Any curb and gutter falling within the required curb depression area, which does not meet these specifications or is in substantial state of disrepair, shall be removed and replaced as described above, as determined by the city engineer. 
(e)  Construction of drive approach crossing sidewalks. Whenever a drive approach crosses an existing sidewalk, the sidewalk shall be constructed of portland cement concrete not less than six (6) inches thick for residential and seven (7) inches thick for commercial. 
(f)  Sidewalk construction. Residential sidewalks shall be constructed of portland cement concrete and shall be not less than four (4) feet wide and five (5) inches thick, except where sidewalk repairs are being made to existing walks which are of narrower width; such repairs may, at the discretion of the city engineer, match the width of the existing walk. The thickness shall be increased to not less than six (6) inches where driveways cross the sidewalk. The sidewalk shall have scored transverse joints at equal spacings not to exceed five (5) feet or less than four (4) feet spacing. The limits of all sidewalk construction shall be against sawcut joints along the scored transverse joints. Sidewalk construction of more than fifty (50) square feet shall have expansion joint material at its limits. Any fill required under the sidewalk shall be crushed stone or bank-run gravel. Pea gravel shall not be permitted. Such fill shall be mechanically compacted. Any vegetation under the sidewalk shall be removed prior to the placement of the sidewalk or fill. The sidewalk shall be finished with a light broom finish and all exposed surfaces shall be coated with an approved curbing compound immediately after finishing. 
All service and carriage walks constructed within the public right-of-way shall be constructed in accordance with the foregoing specifications for sidewalks with the exception of widths. No service walk shall be constructed immediately adjacent to a drive approach. Areas of impervious pavement, including drive approaches within the public rights-of-way, shall not exceed fifty (50) percent of the public rights-of-way, excluding the public sidewalk except in the central business district. 
(g)  Permits required for sidewalks and drive approaches. It shall be unlawful to construct any new sidewalk, service walk, carriage walk or drive approach; or to resurface, repair, replace or remove any existing sidewalk, service walk, carriage walk or drive approach in excess of fifty (50) square feet in area without first having obtained a permit therefor. It shall be unlawful to place, alter or remove an entrance culvert without first having secured a permit therefor. 
(h)  Permit application. All applications for permits required by subsection (g) shall be on forms furnished for that purpose and shall include complete details of the nature and location of the work to be done, and the name of the person who is to do the actual work. 
(i)  Permit fees. The fees for a permit required by subsection (g) shall be as follows: 
(1)  Sidewalks: 
a.  New sidewalks and/or service and carriage walks on public right-of-way, per square foot of area ..... $0.03 
Minimum ..... 10.00 
b.  Replacement of sidewalks and/or service and carriage walks on public right-of-way ..... No Permit Fee 
(2)  Drive approaches, including curbs: 
a.  New construction, single-family residential on public right-of-way, per square foot of area ..... 0.03 
Minimum ..... 10.00 
b.  New construction other than single-family residential on public right-of-way, per square foot of area ..... 0.05 
Minimum ..... 25.00 
c.  Reconstruction on public right-of-way, per square foot of area ..... 0.015 
Minimum ..... 7.00 
d.  Resurfacing and repair ..... No Permit 
Fee 
e.  Sealing ..... No Permit 
Required 
(j)  Bond required. Each applicant for a permit required by subsection (h) shall file a bond in the amount of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00), with surety to be approved by the city council, conditioned to indemnify the city for any loss or damage resulting from the work undertaken or the manner of doing said work. Bond requirements may be waived by the city council upon application by a homeowner seeking to do the work himself. 
(k)  Inspection required. Prior to placement of any portland cement concrete or bituminous concrete for drive approaches, sidewalks, service walks or carriage walks, an inspection shall be made by the city engineer to insure that proper preparation has been made for the placement of the pavement. Requests for such inspections shall be made to the business office of the city engineer at least twenty-four (24) working hours prior to the time of the requested inspection. Inspections will be made only during normal business hours. 
Drive approaches and sidewalks are required before occupancy of new buildings. All drive approaches and required public sidewalks shall be installed prior to the issuance of an occupancy permit for any structure built on the parcel to which access is to be granted, or the applicant for said occupancy permit shall post a cash bond equal to seven dollars and fifty cents ($7.50) per lineal foot of the sidewalk, and twenty dollars ($20.00) per square yard of the proposed drive approaches to assure the city of the construction of these improvements. 
All sidewalks which have been damaged during the construction of any structure on the adjacent premises, or are hazardous to the public, shall be removed and replaced subject to these requirements. 
(l)  Variations. Variations to this section 15-4 may be proposed by the city council of the city, zoning board of appeals of the city, and by any other person, firm or corporation having a freehold interest, a possessory interest entitled to exclusive possession, a contractual interest which may become a freehold interest, an option to purchase, or any exclusive possessory interest which is specifically enforceable on the land which is described in the application for a variation. A variation to this section shall be initiated and proceeded under pursuant to the provisions of Appendix A, Zoning, Section 4.4 et seq., of the Code of Ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1352, § 1, 10-3-77; Ord. No. 1666, § 1, 6-20-83; Ord. No. 2392, §§ 1—3, 3-4-91; Ord. No. 01-O-0088, §§ 1, 2, 8-20-2001) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1352, § 1, adopted Oct. 3, 1977, specifically amended the Code by adding a § 4-7. For purposes of classification, and at the discretion of the editor, said section has been redesignated § 15-4 as herein set out.  
Sec. 15-5. - Parkway regulation. 
(a)  Definitions: 
Parkway: That portion of the dedicated right-of-way between the curb line or the lateral lines of the roadway and the sidewalk or adjacent property or right-of-way line. 
(b)  Prohibition generally: Nothing shall be planted or placed on any parkway in the city except as herein provided. 
(c)  Authority over parkways: The director of public works or his authorized representative is hereby empowered to inspect, superintend, regulate the planting, preservation, protection and maintenance of items placed or planted on the parkways of the streets of West Chicago. No person shall plant or remove any tree, shrub or any other woody plant or place any item on any city parkway until the director of public works has issued a permit for such planting, removal or placement. 
(d)  Approved trees: Trees to be planted in city parkways shall be selected from the following lists of authorized tree species, and/or other species as approved by the director of public works. 
Botanical Name 	Common Name 
Acer platanoides "Emerald Queen" 	Norway Maple 
Acer platanoides "Crimson King" 	Norway Maple 
Acer rubrum "Armstrong" 	Red Maple 
Acer rubrum "October Glory" 	Red Maple 
Acer rubrum "Red Sunset" 	Red Maple 
Acer saccharum 	Sugar Maple 
Amelanchier 	Serviceberry 
Carpinus caroliniana 	American Hornbeam 
Celtis occidentalis 	Hackberry 
Cercidiphyllum japonicum 	Katsura Tree 
Cercis canadensis 	Eastern Redbud 
Cladrastis lutea 	American Yellowwood 
Cornus kousa 	Kousa Dogwood 
Crataegus lavallei 	Lavelle Hawthorne 
Gleditsia triacanthos inermis "Imperial" 	Thornless Honeylocust 
Gleditsia triacanthos inermis "Majestic" 	Thornless Honeylocust 
Gleditsia triacanthos inermis "Skyline" 	Thornless Honeylocust 
Liquidambar styraciflua 	Sweetgum 
Liriodendron tulipfera 	Tulip Tree 
Malus "Radiant" 	Crabapple 
Malus "Red Splendor" 	Crabapple 
Malus "Snowdrift" 	Crabapple 
Malus "Van Eseltine" 	Crabapple 
Malus zumi "calocarpa" 	Crabapple 
Malus "Lisit" 	Crabapple 
Ostrya virginiana 	Ironwood 
Phellodendron amurense 	Amur Cork Tree 
Quercus acutissima 	Sawtooth Oak 
Quercus bicolor 	Swamp White Oak 
Quercus coccinea 	Scarlet Oak 
Quercus imbriacaria 	Shingle Oak 
Quercus palustris 	Pin Oak 
Quercus palustris "Sovereign" 	Sovereign Pin Oak 
Quercus rubra 	Red Oak 
Sophora japonica 	Chinese Scholar Tree 
Tilia cordata 	European Little Leaf Linden 
Tilia cordata "Chancellor" 	Chancellor Little Leaf Linden 
Tilia cordata "Greenspire" 	Greenspire Little Leaf Linden 
Tilia euchlora "Redmond" 	Redmond Linden 
Tilia tomentosa 	Silver Linden 
Ulmus buisman 	Buisman Elm 
Zelkova serrata "Village Green" 	Village Green Zelkova 
 
(e)  Trees prohibited: 
(1)  The following listed trees shall not be planted on city parkways: 
Botanical Name 	Common Name 
Acer negundo 	Box Elder 
Acer saccharinum 	Silver Maple 
Ailanthus glandulosa 	Tree of Heaven 
Pyrus (genus) 	Pear 
Catalpa (species) 	Catalpa 
Fraxinus (genus) 	Ash 
Ginkgo (genus) 	Ginkgo 
Morus (species) 	Mulberry 
Populus (species) 	Poplars 
Salix (species) 	Willows 
Ulmus americana 	American Elm 
Ulmus pumila 	Siberian Elm 
 
(2)  All crippled, deformed and physically damaged trees, regardless of species, shall not be allowed in the city parkways. The director of public works shall determine if a tree is acceptable for planting in the parkway. 
(3)  All trees infected with an incurable disease that will result in deformation, death or infection of other trees shall not be allowed in city parkways. 
(f)  Reforestation: Trees planted in the right-of-way on any given street shall consist of various genera so as not to create an environment indigenous to the spread of disease or insect infestations. 
(g)  Spacing of trees. All new plantings in parkways shall conform to the following spacing tables: 
(1)  Minimum of forty-five (45) feet, maximum of seventy (70) feet. 
Acer saccharum 	Sugar Maple 
Fraxinus americana "Autumn Purple" 	White Ash 
Fraxinus americana "Rosehill" 	White Ash 
Liquidambar styraciflua 	Sweetgum 
Quercus rubra 	Red Oak 
Tilia buchlora 	Redmond Linden 
 
(2)  Minimum of thirty-five (35) feet, maximum of fifty (50). 
Acer platanoides 	Norway Maple "Emerald Queen" 
Acer platanoides 	Norway Maple "Crimson King" 
Celtis occidentalis 	Hackberry 
Cladrastis lutea 	American Yellowwood 
Fraxinus pennsylvanica 	Marshall Seedless Green Ash 
Fraxinus lanceolata 	Summit Green Ash 
Ginkgo biloba 	Ginkgo 
Gleditsia triacanthos inermis "Imperial" 	Thornless Honeylocust 
Gleditsia triacanthos inermis "Majestic" 	Thornless Honeylocust 
Gleditsia triacanthos intermis "Skyline" 	Thornless Honeylocust 
Liriodendron tulipfera 	Tulip Tree 
Phellodendron Amurense 	Amur Cork Tree 
Quercus palustris "Sovereign" 	Sovereign Pin Oak 
Quercus acutissima 	Sawtooth Oak 
Quercus bicolor 	Swamp White Oak 
Quercus coccinea 	Scarlet Oak 
Quercus imbricaria 	Shingle Oak 
Quercus palustris 	Pin Oak 
Tilia cordata 	Little Leaf Linden 
Tilia cordata "Chancellor" 	Chancellor Little Leaf Linden 
Tilia cordata "Greenspire" 	Greenspire Little Leaf Linden 
Tilia euchlora "Redmond" 	Redmond Linden 
Tilia tomentosa 	Silver Linden 
Ulmus buisman 	Buisman Elm 
Zelkova serrata "Village Green" 	Village Green Zelkova 
 
(3)  Minimum of twenty-five (25) feet, maximum of forty (40) feet. 
Acer rubrum "Armstrong" 	Red Maple 
Acer rubrum "October Glory" 	Red Maple 
Acer rubrum "Red Sunset" 	Red Maple 
Amelanchier 	Serviceberry 
Carpinus caroliniana 	American Hornbeam 
Cercidiphyllum japonicum 	Katsura Tree 
Cercis canadensis 	Eastern Redbud 
Cornus Kousa 	Kousa Dogwood 
Crataegus lavellei 	Lavalle Hawthorne 
Malus (all species) 	Crabapple 
Ostrya virginiana 	Ironwood 
Pyrus calleryana "Bradford" 	Bradford Callery Pear 
Sophora japonica 	Chinese Scholar Tree 
Tilia cordata (all species) 	Little Leaf Linden 
 
(h)  Planting requirements: 
(1)  Trees planted shall have a minimum diameter of two (2) inches, with one (1) single and straight trunk. Trees shall be free from deformity and indication of undesirable growth characteristics. 
(2)  Trees shall be from northern state-inspected nurseries, free from insect and disease growth characteristics. 
(3)  Trees shall be planted in such a way so as not to interfere with underground or overhead utilities or with any other physical property. 
(i)  Spraying and pruning: 
(1)  Spraying of trees in parkways for the prevention and elimination of disease and insect infestation shall be performed to meet the specific requirements of the species of tree and the particular disease or insect infestation which exists or threatens. It shall be the director of public works's responsibility to determine the need and extent of spraying requirements and make recommendations to the city council. 
(2)  Systematic trimming and pruning shall be carried out to accomplish the following: 
a.  Restore physiological balance between the root system and leaf surface area at the time of planting. 
b.  Removal of dead branches, seriously damaged branches, and unbalanced branches and limbs. 
c.  Removal of one (1) leader or branch when forking of the main trunk occurs at a height of less than fifteen (15) feet, or higher if the structural strength or beauty of the tree is impaired by such forking. 
d.  Gradual removal of lower branches to provide a minimum overhead clearance of eight (8) feet over sidewalks and eighteen (18) feet over streets. 
e.  Shaping of young trees so that they will develop a single tall straight trunk, a strong central framework or branch structure and a symmetrical balanced crown. 
(j)  Safeguarding trees: 
(1)  Construction. During any type of construction work, the owner or contractor shall place guards around all nearby trees on the parkway to prevent injury to such trees. 
(2)  No person shall attach or connect any electric or other wire to any tree on a parkway, nor permit any such wire to come in contact with a parkway tree without obtaining a permit from the director of public works. A permit can only be for a temporary time not to exceed one (1) year. 
(3)  No person shall attach any sign, placard, or poster to any tree growing in a parkway. 
(4)  Materials around trees. No person shall place or maintain upon the ground around a parkway tree and surfacing or material which will impede free passage of water and air to the roots without leaving an open space of not less than three (3) feet in width all around the tree. 
(k)  Planting and replacement of trees by city: 
(1)  The city retains the right to plant parkway trees wherever needed in conformance with this chapter. 
(2)  The city will replace all trees removed from the parkway if replacement is recommended by the director of public works. 
(l)  No person shall, without a permit from the director of public works, remove, trim, or interfere with any tree, shrub, or woody plant growing in any parkway in the city. 
(m)  Placement of items on parkways where there is no curb may be done if a permit is approved by the director of public works. 
(1)  Persons wishing to place items on parkways adjoining their property shall make application to the department of public works for a permit. There is no charge for the application or permit. 
(2)  The department of public works shall not issue a permit unless the following standards are met: 
a.  Items must be at least four (4) feet from the edge of the highways; 
b.  Items must be no higher than three (3) feet above the crown of the adjoining highways; 
c.  Items on parkways of lots which abut intersections of highways are prohibited; 
d.  Shrubbery may not be planted; 
e.  Items must not create hazards to persons or vehicles using the highway, drive approaches or sidewalks adjoining the parkways. 
(3)  The department of public works shall review each application according to the above standards and issue a permit or the reasons for denial of a permit in writing within one (1) month from the application. 
a.  The permit shall state with specificity the items to be planted or placed, the location of the parkway, any limitations on size or type of items, and the applicant's name and address. 
b.  Permits and denials of each permit shall be mailed directly to the applicant. 
(n)  Removal of unlawful items: The city shall enforce this section and remove any item unlawful placed or planted on any parkway within the city. Except in situations where the item on a parkway is creating an immediate hazard to the public, the city shall notify the owner of the property adjoining the parkway of the unlawful presence of the item. If, after twenty (20) days, the owner has not removed the item, the city shall cause the item to be removed at the owner's expense. 
(o)  Grandfathered trees: Any existing Ginkgo planted prior to the effective date of this section, shall be considered grandfathered and all male trees of the species will be allowed to remain. Female species will be allowed to remain, provided that the property owner puts forth effort to collect and remove the fallen fruit in a timely manner each year in order to limit the nuisance it is known to cause. Pyrus (genus) pear trees planted prior to the effective date of this section, shall be considered grandfathered and will be allowed to remain, provided that the property owner puts forth effort to collect and remove the fallen fruit in a timely manner each year in order to limit the nuisance it is known to cause. Fraxinus (genus) ash planted prior to the effective date of this section, shall be considered grandfathered and will be allowed to remain provided they are in compliance with chapter 10, nuisances, article VI, infested, diseased, dead, and/or dying trees, of the City Code. 
(Ord. No. 1557, § 1, 12-21-81; Ord. No. 1605, § 1, 9-7-82; Ord. No. 15-O-0005, §§ 1—5, 2-16-2015)  
ARTICLE II. - ADOPT-A-HIGHWAY PROGRAM 
 
Sec. 15-6. - Established. 
(a)  There is hereby established an Adopt-A-Highway Program of and for the city, pursuant to the Illinois Adopt-A-Highway Act, 605 ILCS 120/1 et seq., and said Act is hereby adopted by reference and incorporated into this article as if fully set forth herein. 
(b)  The director of public works shall administer the Adopt-A-Highway Program, and shall serve as its director, as that term is defined in the Illinois Adopt-A-Highway Act. 
(Ord. No. 2904, § 2, 6-5-95)  
Sec. 15-7. - Operation of program. 
(a)  The Adopt-A-Highway Program of the city shall operate in accordance with the procedures and requirements of the Adopt-A-Highway Act, as the same may be amended from time to time, and the procedures and requirements of this section. 
(b)  Each group desiring to adopt one (1) or more sections of street right-of-way under the Adopt-A-Highway Program shall submit an application for same on forms supplied by the director of public works. The director of public works shall review such applications and shall forward his recommendations to the city council. 
(c)  Upon receipt of the recommendations of the director of public works, the city council shall consider the same and either approve or deny the application. In the event that an application is approved by the city council, the city council shall also authorize the execution of an agreement providing for the group's participation in the Adopt-A-Highway Program, which agreement shall be in a form acceptable to the corporation council. Said form of agreement shall include all of the provisions required by the Adopt-A-Highway Act, and such other provisions, not inconsistent therewith, as the city council deems appropriate. 
(d)  The following procedures and requirements, in addition to the procedures and requirements set forth in the Adopt-A-Highway Act, shall apply to the Adopt-A-Highway Program of the city: 
(1)  No person shall participate in any litter collection activities pursuant to the Adopt-A-Highway Program unless and until the group has obtained and submitted to the city a release with respect to such person's participation, executed by such person or, if such person is under eighteen (18) years of age, the parent or guardian of such person, such release to be in a form acceptable to the corporation counsel. 
(2)  Each group shall schedule all litter collection activities with the director of public works not less than seven (7) days prior to such activities and shall at that time submit any participant releases not previously submitted and/or new releases for any participants who have attained the age of eighteen (18) years and for whom releases executed by a parent or guardian were previously submitted to the city. 
(3)  No group shall schedule any litter collection activities prior to the month of April, nor after the month of November, in any year. 
(4)  No group shall undertake any litter collection activities before dawn or after dusk on any day or during any period of inclement weather. 
(5)  No group shall undertake any litter collection activities without first having posted temporary warning signs to inform motorists that work is being conducted along the adopted section(s) of street right-of-way, which signs, must be supplied by the city. 
(6)  Safety vests, gloves, and litter pick up equipment must be supplied by the adopting organization. The city will supply garbage bags and will remove the garbage collected in bags from the public right-of-way of the road section cleaned. 
(Ord. No. 2904, § 2, 6-5-95; Ord. No. 10-O-0050, § 1, 5-17-2010)  
Sec. 15-8. - Street rights-of-way included in program. 
The following street rights-of-way, or sections of street rights-of-way, shall be included in the Adopt-A-Highway Program and shall be eligible for adoption by a group: 
(1)  Main Street, Route 59 to Prince Crossing Road. 
(2)  Main Street, Route 59 to Wilson Avenue. 
(3)  Main Street, Wilson Avenue to Chicago Street. 
(4)  Main Street, Chicago Street to Center Street. 
(5)  Main Street, Center Street to Washington Street. 
(6)  Turner Court, Main Street to Washington Street. 
(7)  Washington Street, Route 59 to Prince Crossing Road. 
(8)  Washington Street, Route 59 to Oakwood Avenue. 
(9)  Washington Street, Oakwood Avenue to Main Street. 
(10)  Washington Street, Main Street to Aurora Street. 
(11)  Washington Street. Aurora Street to Town Road. 
(12)  Washington Street, Town Road to Route 38. 
(13)  Joliet Street, Route 38 to Forest Avenue. 
(14)  Joliet Street, Forest Avenue to Conde Street. 
(15)  Joliet Street, Conde Street to Geneva Street. 
(16)  Wilson Avenue, North of Union Pacific Railroad. 
(17)  Wilson Avenue, South of Union Pacific Railroad. 
(18)  Route 59, Diversey Parkway to Route 64. 
(19)  Route 59, Route 64 to Arbor Avenue. 
(20)  Route 59, Arbor Avenue to Ray Street. 
(21)  Route 59, Ray Avenue to Washington Street. 
(22)  Route 59, Washington Street to Conde Street. 
(23)  Route 59, Conde Street to Forest Avenue. 
(24)  Route 59, Forest Avenue to Route 38. 
(25)  Route 38, Prince Crossing to Route 59. 
(26)  Route 38, Route 59 to Bishop Avenue. 
(27)  Route 38, Bishop Avenue to Joliet Street. 
(28)  Route 38, Joliet Street to Town Road. 
(29)  Route 38, Town Road to Wegner Drive. 
(30)  Route 38, Wegner Drive to Washington Street. 
(31)  Route 38, Washington Street to Kress Road. 
(32)  Route 38, Kress Road to Kautz Road. 
(33)  Route 64, Prince Crossing Road to Timber Lane Drive. 
(34)  Route 64, Timber Lane Drive to Route 59. 
(35)  Route 64, Route 59 to Atlantic Drive. 
(36)  Route 64, Atlantic Drive to Powis Road. 
(37)  Route 64, Powis Road to Kiel Road. 
(38)  Hawthorne Lane, Prince Crossing Road to Route 59. 
(39)  Hawthorne Lane, Route 59 to Arbor Avenue. 
(40)  Hawthorne Lane, Arbor Avenue to Willow Creek Road. 
(41)  Hawthorne Lane, Willow Creek Road to Woodside Drive. 
(42)  Hawthorne Lane, Woodside Drive to Harvester Road. 
(43)  Hawthorne Lane, Harvester Road to Powis Road. 
(44)  Hawthorne Lane, Powis Road to Kress Road. 
(45)  Smith Road, Camden Drive to Powis Road. 
(Ord. No. 2904, § 2, 6-5-95; Ord. No. 05-O-0062, § 2, 8-1-2005; Ord. No. 08-O-0013, § 1, 2-18-2008; Ord. No. 10-O-0050, §§ 2—4, 5-17-2010)  
ARTICLE III. - CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE RIGHTS-OF-WAY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 07-O-0094, § 2, adopted October 15, 2007, repealed former Art. III, §§ 15-9—15-16, which pertained to placement of telecommunications and utility facilities. Said ordinance also enacted provisions designated as a new Art. III to read as herein set out. The provisions of Art. IV have been renumbered to accommodate the new Art. III. The user's attention is directed to the note at Art. IV as well as the Code Comparative Table. 
 
Sec. 15-9. - Purpose and scope. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this article is to establish policies and procedures for constructing facilities on rights-of-way within the city's jurisdiction, which will provide public benefit consistent with the preservation of the integrity, safe usage, and visual qualities of the city rights-of-way and the city as a whole. 
(b)  Intent. In enacting this article, the city intends to exercise its authority over the rights-of-way in the city and, in particular, the use of the public ways and property by utilities, by establishing uniform standards to address issues presented by utility facilities, including without limitation: 
(1)  Prevent interference with the use of streets, sidewalks, alleys, parkways and other public ways and places; 
(2)  Prevent the creation of visual and physical obstructions and other conditions that are hazardous to vehicular and pedestrian traffic; 
(3)  Prevent interference with the facilities and operations of the city's utilities and of other utilities lawfully located in rights-of-way or public property; 
(4)  Protect against environmental damage, including damage to trees, from the installation of utility facilities; 
(5)  Protect against increased stormwater run-off due to structures and materials that increase impermeable surfaces; 
(6)  Preserve the character of the neighborhoods in which facilities are installed; 
(7)  Preserve open space, particularly the tree-lined parkways that characterize the city's residential neighborhoods; 
(8)  Prevent visual blight from the proliferation of facilities in the rights-of-way; and 
(9)  Assure the continued safe use and enjoyment of private properties adjacent to utility facilities locations. 
(c)  Facilities subject to this article. This article applies to all facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the rights-of-way within the jurisdiction of the city. A facility lawfully established prior to the effective date of this article may continue to be maintained, repaired and operated by the utility as presently constructed and located, except as may be otherwise provided in any applicable franchise, license or similar agreement. 
(d)  Franchises, licenses, or similar agreements. The city, in its discretion and as limited by law, may require utilities to enter into a franchise, license or similar agreement for the privilege of locating their facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the city rights-of-way. Utilities that are not required by law to enter into such an agreement may request that the city enter into such an agreement. In such an agreement, the city may provide for terms and conditions inconsistent with this article. 
(1)  In the event such an agreement is sought, the utility must file an application with the city which shall include the following information: 
a.  The identity of the franchise applicant, including all affiliates of the applicant. 
b.  A description of the services that are or will be offered or provided by the franchise applicant over its existing or proposed facilities. 
c.  A description of the transmission medium that will be used by the franchisee to offer or provide such services. 
d.  Preliminary engineering plans, specifications and a network map of the facilities to be located within the city, all in sufficient detail to identify: 
1.  The location and route requested for applicant's proposed facilities. 
2.  The location of all overhead and underground public utility, telecommunication, cable, water, sewer drainage and other facilities in the public way along the proposed route. 
3.  The location(s), if any, for interconnection with the facilities of other carriers' providers. 
4.  The specific trees, structures, improvements, facilities and obstructions, if any, that the applicant proposes to temporarily or permanently remove or relocate. 
e.  If the applicant is proposing to install overhead facilities, evidence that surplus space is available for locating its facilities on existing utility poles along the proposed route. 
f.  If applicant is proposing an underground installation in existing ducts, conduits or other underground facilities within the public ways, information in sufficient detail to identify: 
1.  The excess capacity currently available in such facilities before installation of applicant's facilities; 
2.  The excess capacity, if any, that will exist in such facilities after installation of applicant's facilities; 
g.  If the applicant is proposing an underground installation within new ducts, conduits or other underground facilities to be constructed within the public ways: 
1.  The location proposed for the new ducts, conduits or other underground facilities; 
2.  The excess capacity that will exist in such ducts, conduits or other underground facilities after installation; 
h.  A preliminary construction schedule and completion dates; 
i.  A preliminary traffic control plan in accordance with the IDOT Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. 
j.  Financial statements prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles demonstrating the applicant's financial ability to construct, operate, maintain, relocate and remove the facilities. 
k.  Information in sufficient detail to establish the applicant's technical qualifications, experience and expertise regarding the facilities and services described in the application. 
l.  Information to establish that the applicant has obtained all other governmental approvals and permits to construct and operate the facilities and to offer or provide the telecommunications and/or utility services. 
m.  If the applicant intends to provide cable service, video dial tone service or other video programming service, sufficient information to determine whether such service is subject to cable franchising. 
n.  An accurate map showing the location of any existing telecommunications and/or utility facilities in the city that applicant intends to use or lease; 
o.  A description of the services or facilities that the applicant will offer or make available to the city and other public, educational and governmental institutions; 
p.  A description of applicant's access and service extension policies; 
q.  The area or areas of the city the applicant desires to serve and a schedule for build-out to the entire franchise area; 
r.  All fees, deposits or charges required pursuant to section 15-14 of this Code. 
s.  Such other and further information as may be requested by the city administrator. 
(2)  Determination by the city: Within one hundred fifty (150) days after receiving a complete application for a franchise agreement, the corporate authorities shall issue a written determination granting, granting with modifications and/or conditions, or denying the application in whole or in part, applying the following standards. If the application is denied, the written determination shall include the reasons for denial: 
a.  The financial and technical ability of the applicant. 
b.  The legal ability of the applicant. 
c.  The capacity of the public ways to accommodate the applicant's proposed facilities. 
d.  The capacity of the public ways, to accommodate additional utility and telecommunications facilities if the franchise is granted. 
e.  The damage or disruption, if any, of public or private facilities, improvements, service, travel or landscaping if the franchise is granted. 
f.  The public interest in minimizing the cost and disruption of construction within the public ways. 
g.  The service that applicant will provide to the community and region. 
h.  The effect, if any, on public health, safety and welfare if the franchise requested is granted. 
i.  The availability of alternate routes and/or locations for the proposed facilities. 
j.  Applicable federal and state laws, regulations and policies. 
k.  Such other factors as may demonstrate that the grant to use the public ways will serve the community interest. 
(3)  Agreement. No franchise shall be granted hereunder unless the applicant and the city have executed a written agreement setting forth the particular terms and provisions under which the franchise to occupy and use public ways of the city will be granted, in a form acceptable to the corporation counsel. 
(4)  Nonexclusive grant. No franchise granted under this section shall confer any exclusive right, privilege, license or franchise to occupy or use the public ways of the city for any purposes. 
(5)  Term of grant. Unless otherwise specified in a franchise agreement, a franchise granted under this section shall be valid for a term of ten (10) years. 
(6)  Rights granted. No franchise granted under this section shall convey any right, title or interest in the public ways, but shall be deemed a franchise only to use and occupy the public ways for the limited purposes and term stated in the grant. Further, no franchise shall be construed as any warranty of title. 
(7)  Franchise territory. A franchise granted under this section shall be limited to the specific geographic area of the city to be served by the franchisee, and the specific public ways necessary to serve such areas. 
(8)  Location of facilities. Unless otherwise specified in a franchise agreement, all facilities shall be constructed, installed and located in accordance with the following terms and conditions: 
a.  A franchisee with permission to install overhead facilities shall install its facilities on pole attachments to existing utility poles only, and then only if surplus space is available. 
b.  Whenever any existing electric utilities or telecommunications facilities are located underground within a public way of the city, a franchisee with permission to occupy the same public way shall also locate its facilities underground. 
c.  Whenever any new or existing electric utilities or telecommunications facilities are located or relocated underground within a public way of the city, a franchisee that currently occupies the same public way shall relocate its facilities underground within a reasonable period of time, which shall not be later than the end of the grant term. Absent extraordinary circumstances or undue hardship as determined by the city director of public works, such relocations shall be made concurrently to minimize the disruption of the public ways. 
(9)  Construction permits. All franchisees are required to obtain construction permits as provided in herein. 
(10)  Compensation to city. Each franchise granted under this section is subject to the city's right, which is expressly reserved, to annually fix a fair and reasonable compensation to be paid for the franchise rights granted to the franchisee; provided, nothing in this section shall prohibit the city and a franchisee from agreeing to the compensation to be paid. 
(11)  Nondiscrimination. A franchisee shall make its services available to any customer within its franchise area who shall request such service, without discrimination as to the terms, conditions, rates or charges for the franchisee's services; provided, however, that nothing in this section shall prohibit a franchisee from making any reasonable classifications among differently situated customers. 
(12)  Service to the city. A franchisee shall make its services available to the city at its most favorable rate for similarly situated users, unless otherwise provided in the franchise agreement. 
(13)  Amendment of grant. 
a.  A new franchise application and grant or amendment shall be required of any franchisee that desires to extend its franchise territory or to locate its facilities in public ways of the city which are not included in a franchise previously granted under this section. 
b.  If the city orders a franchisee to locate or relocate its facilities in public ways not included in a previously granted franchise, the city shall grant a franchise amendment without further application. 
(14)  Renewal applications. A franchisee that desires to renew its franchise under this section shall, not more than two hundred forty (240) days nor less than one hundred fifty (150) days before expiration of the current franchise, file an application with the city for renewal of its franchise which shall include the following information: 
a.  The information required pursuant to subsection (b) hereof. 
b.  Any information required pursuant to the franchise agreement between the city and the franchisee. 
(15)  Renewal determinations. Within one hundred fifty (150) days after receiving a complete application, the corporate authorities shall issue a written determination granting, granting with modifications and/or conditions, or denying the renewal application in whole or in part, applying the following standards. If the renewal application is denied, the written determination shall include the reasons for denial: 
a.  The financial and technical ability of the applicant. 
b.  The legal ability of the applicant. 
c.  The continuing capacity of the public ways to accommodate the applicant's existing facilities. 
d.  The applicant's compliance with the requirements of this article and the franchise agreement. 
e.  Applicable federal, state and local laws, rules and policies. 
f.  Such other factors as may demonstrate that the continued grant to use the public ways will serve the community interest. 
(16)  Obligation to cure as a condition of renewal. No franchise shall be renewed until any ongoing violations or defaults in the franchisee's performance of the franchise agreement, or of the requirements of this article, have been cured, or a plan detailing the corrective action to be taken by the franchisee has been approved by the city. 
(e)  Effect of franchises, licenses, or similar agreements. 
(1)  Utilities other than telecommunications providers. In the event that a utility other than a telecommunications provider has a franchise, license or similar agreement with the city, such franchise, license or similar agreement shall govern and control during the term of such agreement and any lawful renewal or extension thereof. 
(2)  Telecommunications providers. In the event of any conflict with, or inconsistency between, the provisions of this article and the provisions of any franchise, license or similar agreement between the city and any telecommunications provider, the provisions of such franchise, license or similar agreement shall govern and control during the term of such agreement and any lawful renewal or extension thereof. 
(f)  Conflicts with other code provisions. This article supersedes all or parts of all other Code provisions adopted prior hereto that are in conflict herewith, to the extent of such conflict. 
(g)  Conflicts with state and federal laws. In the event that applicable federal or state laws or regulations conflict with the requirements of this article, the utility shall comply with the requirements of this article to the maximum extent possible without violating federal or state laws or regulations. 
(h)  Sound engineering judgment. The city shall use sound engineering judgment when administering this chapter and may vary the standards, conditions, and requirements expressed in this article when the city so determines. Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the ability of the city to regulate its rights-of-way for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 07-O-0094, § 2, 10-15-2007)  
Sec. 15-10. - Definitions. 
As used in this article and unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the words and terms listed shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this article. Any term not defined herein shall have the meaning ascribed to it in 92 Ill. Adm. Code § 530.30, unless the context clearly requires otherwise. 
AASHTO means American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials. 
ANSI means American National Standards Institute. 
Applicant means a person applying for a permit under this article. 
ASTM means American Society for Testing and Materials. 
Backfill means the methods or materials for replacing excavated material in a trench or pit. 
Bore or boring means to excavate an underground cylindrical cavity for the insertion of a pipe or electrical conductor. 
Cable operator means that term as defined in 47 U.S.C. 522(5). 
Cable service means that term as defined in 47 U.S.C. 522(6). 
Cable system means that term as defined in 47 U.S.C. 522(7). 
Carrier pipe means the pipe enclosing the liquid, gas or slurry to be transported. 
Casing means a structural protective enclosure for transmittal devices such as: carrier pipes, electrical conductors, and fiber optic devices. 
City means the City of West Chicago 
Clear zone means the total roadside border area, starting at the edge of the pavement, available for safe use by errant vehicles. This area may consist of a shoulder, a recoverable slope, a non-recoverable slope, and a clear run-out area. The desired width is dependent upon the traffic volumes and speeds, and on the roadside geometry. Distances are specified in the AASHTO Roadside Design Guide. 
Coating means protective wrapping or mastic cover applied to buried pipe for protection against external corrosion. 
Code means the Municipal Code of the City of West Chicago. 
Conductor means wire carrying electrical current. 
Conduit means a casing or encasement for wires or cables. 
Construction or construct means the installation, repair, maintenance, placement, alteration, enlargement, demolition, modification or abandonment in place of facilities. 
Corporate authorities means the mayor and city council of the city. 
Cover means the depth of earth or backfill over buried utility pipe or conductor. 
Crossing facility means a facility that crosses one (1) or more right-of-way lines of a right-of-way. 
Director of public works means the city director of public works or his or her designee. 
Disrupt the right-of-way means for the purposes of this article, any work that obstructs the right-of-way or causes a material adverse effect on the use of the right-of-way for its intended use. Such work may include, without limitation, the following: excavating or other cutting; placement (whether temporary or permanent) of materials, equipment, devices, or structures; damage to vegetation; and compaction or loosening of the soil, and shall not include the parking of vehicles or equipment in a manner that does not materially obstruct the flow of traffic on a highway. 
Emergency means any immediate maintenance to the facility required for the safety of the public using or in the vicinity of the right-of-way or immediate maintenance required for the health and safety of the general public served by the utility. 
Encasement means provision of a protective casing. 
Equipment means materials, tools, implements, supplies, and/or other items used to facilitate construction of facilities. 
Excavation means the making of a hole or cavity by removing material, or laying bare by digging. 
Extra heavy pipe means pipe meeting ASTM standards for this pipe designation. 
Facility means all structures, devices, objects, and materials (including, but not limited to, track and rails, wires, ducts, fiber optic cable, antennas, vaults, boxes, equipment enclosures, cabinets, pedestals, poles, conduits, grates, covers, pipes, cables, and appurtenances thereto) located on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within rights-of-way under this article. For purposes of this article, the term facility shall not include any facility owned or operated by the city. 
FCC or Federal Communications Commission means the federal administrative agency, or lawful successor, authorized to regulate and oversee telecommunications carriers, services and providers on a national level. 
Freestanding facility means a facility that is not a crossing facility or a parallel facility, such as an antenna, transformer, pump, or meter station. 
Frontage road means roadway, usually parallel, providing access to land adjacent to the highway where it is precluded by control of access to a highway. 
Hazardous materials means any substance or material which, due to its quantity, form, concentration, location, or other characteristics, is determined by the director of public works to pose an unreasonable and imminent risk to the life, health or safety of persons or property or to the ecological balance of the environment, including, but not limited to explosives, radioactive materials, petroleum or petroleum products or gases, poisons, etiology (biological) agents, flammables, corrosives or any substance determined to be hazardous or toxic under any federal or state law, statute or regulation. 
Highway Code means the Illinois Highway Code, 605 ILCS 5/1-101 et seq., as amended from time to time. 
Highway means a specific type of right-of-way used for vehicular traffic including rural or urban roads or streets. Highway includes all highway land and improvements, including roadways, ditches and embankments, bridges, drainage structures, signs, guardrails, protective structures and appurtenances necessary or convenient for vehicle traffic. 
Holder means a person or entity that has received authorization to offer or provide cable or video service from the ICC pursuant to the Illinois Cable and Video Competition Law, 220 ILCS 5/21-401. 
IDOT means Illinois Department of Transportation. 
ICC means Illinois Commerce Commission. 
Jacking means pushing a pipe horizontally under a roadway by mechanical means with or without boring. 
Jetting means pushing a pipe through the earth using water under pressure to create a cavity ahead of the pipe. 
Joint use means the use of pole lines, trenches or other facilities by two (2) or more utilities. 
J.U.L.I.E. means the joint utility locating information for excavators utility notification program. 
Major intersection means the intersection of two (2) or more major arterial highways. 
Occupancy means the presence of facilities on, over or under right-of-way. 
Other ways means the highways, streets, alleys, utility easement, or other rights-of-way within the city, but under the jurisdiction and control of a governmental entity other than the city. 
Overhead facilities means utility poles, utilities facilities, and telecommunications facilities located above the surface of the ground, including the underground supports and foundations of such facilities. 
Parallel facility means a facility that is generally parallel or longitudinal to the centerline of a right-of-way. 
Parkway means any portion of the right-of-way not improved by street or sidewalk. 
Pavement cut means the removal of an area of pavement for access to facility or for the construction of a facility. 
Permittee means that entity to which a permit has been issued pursuant to this article. 
Practicable means that which is performable, feasible or possible, rather than that which is simply convenient. 
Pressure means the internal force acting radially against the walls of a carrier pipe expressed in pounds per square inch gauge (psig). 
Petroleum products pipelines means pipelines carrying crude or refined liquid petroleum products including, but not limited to, gasoline, distillates, propane, butane, or coal-slurry. 
Prompt means that which is done within a period of time specified by the city. If no time period is specified, the period shall be thirty (30) days. 
Public entity means a legal entity that constitutes or is part of the government, whether at local, state or federal level. 
Public street means any highway, street, alley or other public right-of-way for motor vehicle travel under the jurisdiction and control of the city which has been acquired, established, dedicated or devoted to highway purposes not inconsistent with utility and/or telecommunications facilities. 
Public way means includes all public streets and utility easements, now or hereafter owned by the city, but only the extent of the city's right, title, interest or authority to grant a license or a franchise to occupy and use such streets and easements for utility and/or telecommunications facilities. 
Restoration means the repair of a right-of-way, highway, roadway, or other area disrupted by the construction of a facility. 
Right-of-way or rights-of-way means any street, alley, other land or waterway, dedicated or commonly used for pedestrian or vehicular traffic or other similar purposes, including utility easements, in which the city has the right and authority to authorize, regulate or permit the location of facilities other than those of the city. Right-of-way or rights-of-way shall not include any real or personal city property that is not specifically described in the previous two (2) sentences and shall not include city buildings, fixtures and other structures or improvements, regardless of whether they are situated in the right-of-way. 
Roadway means that part of the highway that includes the pavement and shoulders. 
Sale of telecommunications at retail means the transmitting, supplying, or furnishing of telecommunications and all services rendered in connection therewith for a consideration, other than between a parent corporation and its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, when the gross charge made by one (1) such corporation to another such corporation is not greater than the gross charge paid to the retailer for their use or consumption and not for sale. 
Security fund means that amount of security required pursuant to section 15-18. 
Shoulder means a width of roadway, adjacent to the pavement, providing lateral support to the pavement edge and providing an area for emergency vehicular stops and storage of snow removed from the pavement. 
Sound engineering judgment means a decision(s) consistent with generally accepted engineering principles, practices and experience. 
Telecommunications means this term includes, but is not limited to, messages or information transmitted through use of local, toll and wide area telephone service, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter service, computer exchange service, private line services, mobile radio services, cellular mobile telecommunications services, stationary two-way radio, paging service and any other form of mobile or portable one-way or two-way communications, and any other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar means, between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite, or similar facilities. Private line means a dedicated non-traffic sensitive service for a single customer that entitles the customer to exclusive or priority use of a communications channel, or a group of such channels, from one (1) or more specified locations to one (1) or more other specified locations. 
Telecommunications shall not include value added services in which computer processing applications are used to act on the form, content, code and protocol of the information for purposes other than transmission. Telecommunications shall not include purchase of telecommunications by a telecommunications service provider for use as a component part of the service provided by such provider to the ultimate retail consumer who originates or terminates the end-to-end communications. Telecommunications shall not include the provision of cable services through a cable system as defined in the Cable Communications Act of 1984 (47 U.S.C. Articles 521 and following), as now or hereafter amended, or cable or other programming services subject to an open video system fee payable to the city through an open video system as defined in the Rules of the Federal Communications Commission (47 C.F.R. § 76.1500 and following), as now or hereafter amended. 
Telecommunications provider means any person that installs, owns, operates or controls facilities in the right-of-way used or designed to be used to transmit telecommunications in any form. 
Telecommunications retailer means and includes every person engaged in making sales of telecommunications at retail as defined herein. 
Trench means a relatively narrow open excavation for the installation of an underground facility. 
Utility means the individual or entity owning or operating any facility as defined in this article. 
Vent means a pipe to allow the dissipation into the atmosphere of gases or vapors from an underground casing. 
Video service means that term as defined in Article 21-201(v) of the Illinois Cable and Video Competition Law of 2007, 220 ILCS 21-201(v). 
Water lines means pipelines carrying raw or potable water. 
Wet boring means boring using water under pressure at the cutting auger to soften the earth and to provide a sluice for the excavated material. 
(Ord. No. 07-O-0094, § 2, 10-15-2007)  
Sec. 15-11. - Annual registration required. 
Every utility that occupies right-of-way within the city shall register on January 1 of each year with the director of public works, providing the utility's name, address and regular business telephone and telecopy numbers, the name of one (1) or more contact persons who can act on behalf of the utility in connection with emergencies involving the utility's facilities in the right-of-way and a twenty-four-hour telephone number for each such person, and evidence of insurance as required in section 15-16 of this article, in the form of a certificate of insurance with endorsements. 
(Ord. No. 07-O-0094, § 2, 10-15-2007)  
Sec. 15-12. - Permit required; applications and fees. 
(a)  Permit required. No person shall construct (as defined in this article) any facility on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within any city right-of-way which (1) changes the location of the facility, (2) adds a new facility, (3) disrupts the right-of-way (as defined in this article), or (4) materially increases the amount of area or space occupied by the facility on, over, above, along, under across or within the right-of-way, without first filing an application with the director of public works and obtaining a permit from the city therefor, except as otherwise provided in this article. No permit shall be required for installation and maintenance of service connections to customers' premises where there will be no disruption of the right-of-way. 
(b)  Permit application. All applications for permits pursuant to this article shall be filed on a form provided by the city and shall be filed in such number of duplicate copies as the city may designate. The applicant may designate those portions of its application materials that it reasonably believes contain proprietary or confidential information as "proprietary" or "confidential" by clearly marking each page of such materials accordingly. 
(c)  Minimum general application requirements. The application shall be made by the utility or its duly authorized representative and shall contain, at a minimum, the following: 
(1)  The utility's name and address and telephone and telecopy numbers; 
(2)  The applicant's name and address, if different than the utility, its telephone, telecopy numbers, e-mail address, and its interest in the work; 
(3)  The names, addresses and telephone and telecopy numbers and e-mail addresses of all professional consultants, if any, advising the applicant with respect to the application; 
(4)  A general description of the proposed work and the purposes and intent of the facility and the uses to which the facility will be put. The scope and detail of such description shall be appropriate to the nature and character of the work to be performed, with special emphasis on those matters likely to be affected or impacted by the work proposed; 
(5)  Evidence that the utility has placed on file with the city: 
a.  A written traffic control plan demonstrating the protective measures and devices that will be employed consistent with the Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, to prevent injury or damage to persons or property and to minimize disruptions to efficient pedestrian and vehicular traffic; and 
b.  An emergency contingency plan which shall specify the nature of potential emergencies, including, without limitation, construction and hazardous materials emergencies, and the intended response by the applicant. The intended response shall include notification to the city and shall promote protection of the safety and convenience of the public. Compliance with ICC regulations for emergency contingency plans constitutes compliance with this section unless the city finds that additional information or assurances are needed; 
(6)  Drawings, plans and specifications showing the work proposed (as drawn to scale (one (1) inches equals twenty (20) feet), showing all existing and proposed improvements (i.e., pavement, curb and gutter, sidewalk, landscaping, parkway trees, utilities, street lights, etc.) as surveyed, including the certification of an Illinois Licensed Professional Engineer that such drawings, plans, and specifications comply with applicable codes, rules, and regulations. Note that on all plan sheets, pipe diameters, material, slope, rim and invert elevations of all city owned utilities (i.e., culverts, manholes, structures, sanitary sewer, storm sewer, watermain, etc.) must be identified, specifically those utilities that cross the proposed utility. 
(7)  Evidence of insurance as required in section 15-16; 
(8)  Evidence of posting of the security fund as required in section 15-18; 
(9)  Any request for a variance from one (1) or more provisions of this article (see section 15-28) and 
(10)  Such additional information as may be reasonably required by the city, including but not limited to the following: 
a.  A detail for any and all proposed concrete pad(s). 
b.  A detail and dimensions of any and all proposed equipment cabinet(s) to be installed. 
c.  The method in which proposed improvements shall be concealed and/or aesthetically improved with landscaping. For this purpose, please submit a landscape plan to the city for review and approval. 
d.  Supplemental application requirements for specific types of utilities. In addition to the requirements of subsection c. of this section, the permit application shall include the following items, as applicable to the specific utility that is the subject of the permit application: 
1.  In the case of the installation of a new electric power, communications, telecommunications, cable television service, video service or natural gas distribution system, evidence that any "certificate of public convenience and necessity" or other regulatory authorization that the applicant is required by law to obtain, or that the applicant has elected to obtain, has been issued by the ICC or other jurisdictional authority; 
2.  In the case of natural gas systems, state the proposed pipe size, design, construction class, and operating pressures; 
3.  In the case of water lines, indicate that all requirements of the Illinois environmental protection agency, division of public water supplies, and the City of West Chicago have been satisfied; 
4.  In the case of sewer line installations, indicate that the land and water pollution requirements of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, Division of Water Pollution Control and the City of West Chicago and any other applicable jurisdiction, have been satisfied; or 
5.  In the case of petroleum products pipelines, state the type or types of petroleum products, pipe size, maximum working pressure, and the design standard to be followed. 
e.  Applicant's duty to update information. Throughout the entire permit application review period and the construction period authorized by the permit, any amendments to information contained in a permit application shall be submitted by the utility in writing to the city within thirty (30) days after the change necessitating the amendment, if the revision occurs during the application review period, or prior to commencing any revised work, if it occurs during the construction period, 
f.  Application fees. Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license or similar agreement, all applications for permits pursuant to this article shall be accompanied by a fee as prescribed in Appendix G. No application fee is required to be paid by any electricity utility that is paying the municipal electricity infrastructure maintenance fee pursuant to the Electricity Infrastructure Maintenance Fee Act. 
(Ord. No. 07-O-0094, § 2, 10-15-2007; Ord. No. 11-O-0007, § 41, 5-16-2011)  
Sec. 15-13. - Action on permit applications. 
(a)  City review of permit applications. Completed permit applications, containing all required documentation, shall be examined by the director of public works within a reasonable time after filing. If the application does not conform to the requirements of applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules, and regulations, the director of public works shall reject such application in writing, stating the reasons therefor. If the director of public works is satisfied that the proposed work conforms to the requirements of this chapter and applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules, and regulations, the director of public works shall issue a permit therefor as soon as practicable. In all instances, it shall be the duty of the applicant to demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the director of public works, that the construction proposed under the application shall be in full compliance with the requirements of this chapter. 
(b)  Additional city review of applications of telecommunications retailers. A separate procedure exists for reviewing applications from telecommunications retailers wishing to work in the municipal right-of-way. For this purpose, the applicant must specify whether the application is being made under this section. In that event, the edure is as follows: 
(1)  Pursuant to Article 4 of the Telephone Company Act, 220 ILCS 65/4, a telecommunications retailer shall notify the city that it intends to commence work governed by this article for facilities for the provision of telecommunications services. Such notice shall consist of plans, specifications, and other documentation sufficient to demonstrate the purpose and intent of the facilities, and shall be provided by the telecommunications retailer to the city not less than ten (10) days prior to the commencement of work requiring no excavation and not less than thirty (30) days prior to the commencement of work requiring excavation. The director of public works shall specify the portion of the right-of-way upon which the facility may be placed, used and constructed. 
(2)  In the event that the director of public works fails to provide such specification of location to the telecommunications retailer within either (i) ten (10) days after service of notice to the city by the telecommunications retailer in the case of work not involving excavation or (ii) twenty-five (25) days after service of notice by the telecommunications retailer in the case of work involving excavation, the telecommunications retailer may commence work without obtaining a permit under this article. 
(3)  Upon the provision of such specification by the city, where a permit is required for work, the telecommunications retailer shall submit to the city an application for a permit and any and all plans, specifications and documentation regarding the facility to be constructed. Such application shall be subject to the requirements of subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  Additional city review of applications of holders of state authorization under the Cable and Video Competition Law of 2007. Applications by a utility that is a holder of a state-issued authorization under the Cable and Video Competition Law of 2007 shall be deemed granted forty-five (45) days after submission to the city, unless otherwise acted upon by the city, provided the holder has complied with applicable city codes, ordinances, and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 07-O-0094, § 2, 10-15-2007)  
Sec. 15-14. - Effect of permit. 
(a)  Authority granted; no property right or other interest created. A permit from the city authorizes a permittee to undertake only certain activities in accordance with this article on city rights-of-way, and does not create a property right or grant authority to the permittee to impinge upon the rights of others who may have an interest in the rights-of-way. 
(b)  Duration. No permit issued under this article shall be valid for a period longer than six (6) months unless construction is actually begun within that period and is thereafter diligently pursued to completion. 
(c)  Pre-construction meeting required. No construction shall begin pursuant to a permit issued under this article prior to attendance by the permittee and all major contractors and subcontractors who will perform any work under the permit at a pre-construction meeting. The pre-construction meeting shall be held at a date, time and place designated by the city with such city representatives in attendance as the city deems necessary. The meeting shall be for the purpose of reviewing the work under the permit, and reviewing special considerations necessary in the areas where work will occur, including, without limitation, presence or absence of other utility facilities in the area and their locations, procedures to avoid disruption of other utilities, use of rights-of-way by the public during construction, and access and egress by adjacent property owners. 
(d)  Compliance with all laws required. The issuance of a permit by the city does not excuse the permittee from complying with other requirements of the city and applicable statutes, laws, ordinances, rules, and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 07-O-0094, § 2, 10-15-2007)  
Sec. 15-15. - Revised permit drawings. 
The city requires the provision of "as built" drawings at the completion of the work done pursuant to permit. If the "as built" does not deviate from the drawings submitted for purposes of the permit, the applicant may so certify to the city, and "as built" drawings may be waived. However, in the event the actual locations of any facilities deviate in any material respect from the locations identified in the plans, drawings and specifications submitted with the permit application, the revised drawings ("as built") shall be submitted to the city within ninety (90) days after the completion of the permitted work. The drawings or plans shall specifically identify where the locations of the actual facilities deviate from the locations approved in the permit, to the extent of such deviation. If any deviation from the permit also deviates from the requirements of this city, it shall be treated as a request for variance in accordance with section 15-28 of this article. If the city denies the request for a variance, then the permittee shall either remove the facility from the right-of-way or modify the facility so that it conforms to the permit and submit revised drawings or plans therefor. 
(Ord. No. 07-O-0094, § 2, 10-15-2007)  
Sec. 15-16. - Insurance. 
(a)  Required coverages and limits. Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license, or similar agreement, each utility occupying right-of-way or constructing any facility in the right-of-way shall secure and maintain the following liability insurance policies insuring the utility as named insured and naming the city, and its elected and appointed officers, officials, agents, and employees as additional insureds on the policies listed in paragraphs (1) and (2) below: 
(1)  Commercial general liability insurance, including premises-operations, explosion, collapse, and underground hazard (commonly referred to as "X," "C," and "U" coverages) and products-completed operations coverage with limits not less than: 
a.  Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for bodily injury or death to each person; 
b.  Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for property damage resulting from any one accident; and 
c.  Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for all other types of liability; 
(2)  Automobile liability for owned, non-owned and hired vehicles with a combined single limit of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for personal injury and property damage for each accident; 
(3)  Worker's compensation with statutory limits; and 
(4)  Employer's liability insurance with limits of not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per employee and per accident. 
If the utility is not providing such insurance to protect the contractors and subcontractors performing the work, then such contractors and subcontractors shall comply with this section. 
(b)  Excess or umbrella policies. The coverages required by this section may be in any combination of primary, excess, and umbrella policies. Any excess or umbrella policy must provide excess coverage over underlying insurance on a following-form basis such that when any loss covered by the primary policy exceeds the limits under the primary policy, the excess or umbrella policy becomes effective to cover such loss. 
(c)  Copies required. The utility shall provide copies of any of the policies required by this section to the city within ten (10) days following receipt of a written request therefor from the city. 
(d)  Maintenance and renewal of required coverages. The insurance policies required by this section shall contain the following endorsement: 
"It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be canceled nor the intention not to renew be stated until thirty (30) days after receipt by the city, by registered mail or certified mail, return receipt requested, of a written notice addressed to the city administrator of such intent to cancel or not to renew." 
Within ten (10) days after receipt by the city of said notice, and in no event later than ten (10) days prior to said cancellation, the utility shall obtain and furnish to the city evidence of replacement insurance policies meeting the requirements of this section. 
(e)  Self-insurance. A utility may self-insure all or a portion of the insurance coverage and limit requirements required by subsection (a) of this section. A utility that self-insures is not required, to the extent of such self-insurance, to comply with the requirement for the naming of additional insureds under subsection a), or the requirements of subsection (b), (c) and (d) of this section. A utility that elects to self-insure shall provide to the city evidence sufficient to demonstrate its financial ability to self-insure the insurance coverage and limit requirements required under subsection (a) of this section, such as evidence that the utility is a "private self insurer" under the Workers Compensation Act. 
(f)  Effect of insurance and self-insurance on utility's liability. The legal liability of the utility to the city and any person for any of the matters that are the subject of the insurance policies or self-insurance required by this section shall not be limited by such insurance policies or self-insurance or by the recovery of any amounts thereunder. 
(g)  Insurance companies. All insurance provided pursuant to this section shall be effected under valid and enforceable policies, issued by insurers legally able to conduct business with the licensee in the State of Illinois. 
(Ord. No. 07-O-0094, § 2, 10-15-2007)  
Sec. 15-17. - Indemnification. 
By occupying or constructing facilities in the right-of-way, a utility shall be deemed to agree to defend, indemnify and hold the city and its elected and appointed officials and officers, employees, agents and representatives harmless from and against any and all injuries, claims, demands, judgments, damages, losses and expenses, including reasonable attorney's fees and costs of suit or defense, arising out of, resulting from or alleged to arise out of or result from the negligent, careless or wrongful acts, omissions, failures to act or misconduct of the utility or its affiliates, officers, employees, agents, contractors or subcontractors in the construction of facilities or occupancy of the rights-of-way, and in providing or offering service over the facilities, whether such acts or omissions are authorized, allowed or prohibited by this article or by a franchise, license, or similar agreement; provided, however, that the utility's indemnity obligations hereunder shall not apply to any injuries, claims, demands, judgments, damages, losses or expenses arising out of or resulting from the negligence, misconduct or breach of this article by the city, its officials, officers, employees, agents or representatives. 
(Ord. No. 07-O-0094, § 2, 10-15-2007)  
Sec. 15-18. - Security. 
(a)  Purpose. The permittee shall establish a security fund in a form and in an amount as set forth in this section. The security fund shall be continuously maintained in accordance with this section at the permittee's sole cost and expense until the completion of the work authorized under the permit. The security fund shall serve as security for: 
(1)  The faithful performance by the permittee of all the requirements of this article; 
(2)  Any expenditure, damage, or loss incurred by the city occasioned by the permittee's failure to comply with any codes, rules, regulations, orders, permits and other directives of the city issued pursuant to this article; and 
(3)  The payment by permittee of all liens and all damages, claims, costs, or expenses that the city may pay or incur by reason of any action or non-performance by permittee in violation of this article including, without limitation, any damage to public property or restoration work the permittee is required by this article to perform that the city must perform itself or have completed as a consequence solely of the permittee's failure to perform or complete, and all other payments due the city from the permittee pursuant to this article or any other applicable law. 
(b)  Form. The permittee shall provide the security fund to the city in the form, at the permittee's election, of cash, a surety bond in a form acceptable to the city, or an unconditional letter of credit in a form acceptable to the city. Any surety bond or letter of credit provided pursuant to this subsection shall, at a minimum: 
(1)  Provide that it will not be canceled without prior ninety-day notice to the city and the permittee; 
(2)  Not require the consent of the permittee prior to the collection by the city of any amounts covered by it; and 
(3)  Shall provide a location convenient to the city and within the State of Illinois at which it can be drawn. 
(c)  Amount. The dollar amount of the security fund shall be sufficient to provide for the reasonably estimated cost to restore the right-of-way to at least as good a condition as that existing prior to the construction under the permit, as determined by the director of public works, and may also include reasonable, directly related costs that the city estimates are likely to be incurred if the permittee fails to perform such restoration. Where the construction of facilities proposed under the permit will be performed in phases in multiple locations in the city, with each phase consisting of construction of facilities in one (1) location or a related group of locations, and where construction in another phase will not be undertaken prior to substantial completion of restoration in the previous phase or phases, the director of public works may, in the exercise of sound discretion, allow the permittee to post a single amount of security which shall be applicable to each phase of the construction under the permit. The amount of the security fund for phased construction shall be equal to the greatest amount that would have been required under the provisions of this subsection (c) for any single phase. 
(d)  Withdrawals. The city, upon fourteen (14) days' advance written notice clearly stating the reason for, and its intention to exercise withdrawal rights under this subsection, may withdraw an amount from the security fund, provided that the permittee has not reimbursed the city for such amount within the fourteen (14) day notice period. Withdrawals may be made if the permittee: 
(1)  Fails to make any payment required to be made by the permittee hereunder; 
(2)  Fails to pay any liens relating to the facilities that are due and unpaid; 
(3)  Fails to reimburse the city for any damages, claims, costs or expenses which the city has been compelled to pay or incur by reason of any action or non-performance by the permittee; or 
(4)  Fails to comply with any provision of this article that the city determines can be remedied by an expenditure of an amount in the security fund. 
(e)  Replenishment. Within fourteen (14) days after receipt of written notice from the city that any amount has been withdrawn from the security fund, the permittee shall restore the security fund to the amount specified in subsection (c) of this section. 
(f)  Interest. The permittee may request that any and all interest accrued on the amount in the security fund be returned to the permittee by the city, upon written request for said withdrawal to the city, provided that any such withdrawal does not reduce the security fund below the minimum balance required in subsection (c) of this section. 
(g)  Closing and return of security fund. Upon completion of the work authorized under the permit, the permittee shall be entitled to the return of the security fund, or such portion thereof as remains on deposit, within a reasonable time after account is taken for all offsets necessary to compensate the city for failure by the permittee to comply with any provisions of this article or other applicable law. In the event of any revocation of the permit, the security fund, and any and all accrued interest therein, shall become the property of the city to the extent necessary to cover any reasonable costs, loss or damage incurred by the city as a result of said revocation, provided that any amounts in excess of said costs, loss or damage shall be refunded to the permittee. 
(h)  Rights not limited. The rights reserved to the city with respect to the security fund are in addition to all other rights of the city, whether reserved by this article or otherwise authorized by law, and no action, proceeding or exercise of right with respect to said security fund shall affect any other right the city may have. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the city shall not be entitled to a double monetary recovery with respect to any of its rights which may be infringed or otherwise violated. 
(Ord. No. 07-O-0094, § 2, 10-15-2007)  
Sec. 15-19. - Permit suspension and revocation. 
(a)  City right to revoke permit. The city may revoke or suspend a permit issued pursuant to this article for one (1) or more of the following reasons: 
(1)  Fraudulent, false, misrepresenting, or materially incomplete statements in the permit application; 
(2)  Non-compliance with this article; 
(3)  Permittee's physical presence or presence of permittee's facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the rights-of-way presents a direct or imminent threat to the public health, safety, or welfare; or 
(4)  Permittee's failure to construct the facilities substantially in accordance with the permit and approved plans. 
(b)  Notice of revocation or suspension. The city shall send written notice of its intent to revoke or suspend a permit issued pursuant to this article stating the reason or reasons for the revocation or suspension and the alternatives available to permittee under this section 15-18. 
(c)  Permittee alternatives upon receipt of notice of revocation or suspension. upon receipt of a written notice of revocation or suspension from the city, the permittee shall have the following options: 
(1)  Immediately provide the city with evidence that no cause exists for the revocation or suspension; 
(2)  Immediately correct, to the satisfaction of the city, the deficiencies stated in the written notice, providing written proof of such correction to the city within five (5) working days after receipt of the written notice of revocation; or 
(3)  Immediately remove the facilities located on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the rights-of-way and restore the rights-of-way to the satisfaction of the city providing written proof of such removal to the city within ten (10) days after receipt of the written notice of revocation. 
The city may, in its discretion, for good cause shown, extend the time periods provided in this subsection. 
(d)  Stop work order. In addition to the issuance of a notice of revocation or suspension, the city may issue a stop work order immediately upon discovery of any of the reasons for revocation set forth within subsection (a) of this section. 
(e)  Failure or refusal of the permittee to comply. If the permittee fails to comply with the provisions of subsection c) of this section, the city or its designee may, at the option of the city: (1) correct the deficiencies; (2) upon not less than twenty (20) days notice to the permittee, remove the subject facilities or equipment; or (3) after not less than thirty (30) days notice to the permittee of failure to cure the non-compliance, deem them abandoned and property of the city. The permittee shall be liable in all events to the city for all costs of removal. 
(Ord. No. 07-O-0094, § 2, 10-15-2007)  
Sec. 15-20. - Change of ownership or owner's identity or legal status. 
(a)  Notification of change. A utility shall notify the city no less than thirty (30) days prior to the transfer of ownership of any facility in the right-of-way or change in identity of the utility. The new owner of the utility or the facility shall have all the obligations and privileges enjoyed by the former owner under the permit, if any, and applicable laws, ordinances, rules and regulations, including this article, with respect to the work and facilities in the right-of-way. 
(b)  Amended permit. A new owner shall request that any current permit be amended to show current ownership. If the new owner fails to have a new or amended permit issued in its name, the new owner shall be presumed to have accepted, and agreed to be bound by, the terms and conditions of the permit if the new owner uses the facility or allows it to remain on the city's right-of-way. 
(c)  Insurance and bonding. All required insurance coverage or bonding must be changed to reflect the name of the new owner upon transfer. 
(Ord. No. 07-O-0094, § 2, 10-15-2007)  
Sec. 15-21. - General construction standards. 
(a)  Standards and principles. All construction in the right-of-way shall be consistent with applicable ordinances, codes, laws rules and regulations, and commonly recognized and accepted traffic control and construction principles, sound engineering judgment and, where applicable, the principles and standards set forth in the following IDOT publications, as amended from time to time: 
(1)  Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction; 
(2)  Supplemental Specifications and Recurring Special Provisions; 
(3)  Highway Design Manual; 
(4)  Highway Standards Manual; 
(5)  Standard Specifications for Traffic Control Items; 
(6)  Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (92 Ill. Adm. Code § 545); 
(7)  Flagger's Handbook; 
(8)  Work Site Protection Manual for Daylight Maintenance Operations; and 
(9)  National Electrical Safety Code. 
(b)  Interpretation of municipal standards and principles. If a discrepancy exists between or among differing principles and standards required by this article, the director of public works shall determine, in the exercise of sound engineering judgment, which principles apply and such decision shall be final. If requested, the director of public works shall state which standard or principle will apply to the construction, maintenance, or operation of a facility in the future. 
(Ord. No. 07-O-0094, § 2, 10-15-2007)  
Sec. 15-22. - Traffic control. 
As provided in section 15-9, the city will require that each application for permit be accompanied by a written traffic control plan. 
(1)  Minimum requirements. The city's minimum requirements for traffic protection are contained in IDOT's Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices and this Code. 
(2)  Warning signs, protective devices, and flaggers. The utility is responsible for providing and installing warning signs, protective devices and flaggers, when necessary, meeting applicable federal, state, and local requirements for protection of the public and the utility's workers when performing any work on the rights-of-way. 
(3)  Interference with traffic. All work shall be phased so that there is minimum interference with pedestrian and vehicular traffic. 
(4)  Notice when access is blocked. At least forty-eight (48) hours prior to beginning work that will partially or completely block access to any residence, business or institution, the utility shall notify the city, and the resident, business or institution of the approximate beginning time and duration of such work; provided, however, that in cases involving emergency repairs pursuant to section 15-27 of this article, the utility shall provide such notice as is practicable under the circumstances. 
(5)  Compliance. The utility shall take immediate action to correct any deficiencies in traffic protection requirements that are brought to the utility's attention by the city. 
(Ord. No. 07-O-0094, § 2, 10-15-2007)  
Sec. 15-23. - Location of facilities. 
(a)  General requirements. In addition to location requirements applicable to specific types of utility facilities, all utility facilities, regardless of type, shall be subject to the general location requirements of this subsection. 
(1)  No interference with city facilities. No utility facilities shall be placed in any location if the director of public works determines that the proposed location will require the relocation or displacement of any of the city utility facilities or will otherwise interfere with the operation or maintenance of any of the city utility facilities. 
(2)  Minimum interference and impact. The proposed location shall cause only the minimum possible interference with the use of the right-of-way and shall cause only the minimum possible impact upon, and interference with the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin said right-of-way. 
(3)  No interference with travel. No utility facility shall be placed in any location that interferes with the usual travel on such right-of-way. 
(4)  No limitations on visibility. No utility facility shall be placed in any location so as to limit visibility of or by users of the right-of-way. 
(5)  Size of utility facilities. The proposed installation shall use the smallest suitable vaults, boxes, equipment enclosures, power pedestals, and/or cabinets then in use by the facility owner, regardless of location, for the particular application. 
(6)  Concealment of improvement. The proposed improvements must be concealed and/or aesthetically improved with landscaping. 
(7)  Horizontal clearance. A minimum five-foot horizontal clearance from all existing underground utilities must be maintained. 
(8)  Distance from existing utility. A minimum five (5) feet from any city owned and maintained utility must be maintained. 
(9)  Crossing utilities. At any location where the utility will cross a city owned and maintained utility, the utility shall be installed a minimum of thirty-six (36) inches above the city utility or a minimum of eighteen (18) inches below said city utility. 
(b)  Parallel facilities located within highways. The city is not approving any new overhead facilities. Notwithstanding this prohibition, in the event of required replacement or updating of existing facilities, or in the event alternatives are not available: 
(1)  Overhead parallel facilities. An overhead parallel facility may be located within the right-of-way lines of a highway only if: 
a.  Lines are located as near as practicable to the right-of-way line and as nearly parallel to the right-of-way line as reasonable pole alignment will permit; 
b.  Where pavement is curbed, poles are as remote as practicable from the curb with a minimum distance of three (3) feet behind the face of the curb, where available; 
c.  Where pavement is uncurbed, poles are as remote from pavement edge as practicable with minimum distance of four (4) feet outside the outer shoulder line of the roadway and are not within the clear zone; 
d.  No pole is located in the ditch line of a highway; and 
e.  Any ground-mounted appurtenance is located within one (1) foot of the right-of-way line or as near as possible to the right-of-way line. 
(2)  Underground parallel facilities. An underground parallel facility may be located within the right-of-way lines of a highway only if: 
a.  The facility is located as near the right-of-way line as practicable and not more than eight (8) feet from and parallel to the right-of-way line; 
b.  A new facility may be located under the paved portion of a highway only if other locations are impracticable or inconsistent with sound engineering judgment (e.g., a new cable may be installed in existing conduit without disrupting the pavement); and 
c.  In the case of an underground power or communications line, the facility shall be located as near the right-of-way line as practicable and not more than five (5) feet from the right-of-way line and any above-grounded appurtenance shall be located within one (1) foot of the right-of-way line or as near as practicable. 
d.  City requirements relative to appropriate line spacing are met. 
(c)  Facilities crossing highways. The city does not allow open trenching. Rather, all utilities are to be installed by directional bore method, unless this option is not available. As set forth further herein, a separate casing or carrier pipe for the proposed utility must be used for all road crossings. The casing pipe shall extend a minimum of five (5) feet beyond the edge of paved surfaces. 
Additionally: 
(1)  No future disruption. The construction and design of crossing facilities installed between the ditch lines or curb lines of city highways may require the incorporation of materials and protections (such as encasement or additional cover) to avoid settlement or future repairs to the roadbed resulting from the installation of such crossing facilities. 
(2)  Cattle passes, culverts, or drainage facilities. Crossing facilities shall not be located in cattle passes, culverts, or drainage facilities. 
(3)  90 degree crossing required. Crossing facilities shall cross at or as near to a ninety (90) degree angle to the centerline as practicable. 
(4)  Overhead power or communication facility. If currently existing, and in need of replacement or repair, an overhead power or communication facility may cross a highway only if: 
a.  It has a minimum vertical line clearance as required by ICC's rules entitled, "Construction of Electric Power and Communication Lines" (83 Ill. Adm. Code 305); 
b.  Poles are located within one (1) foot of the right-of-way line of the highway and outside of the clear zone; and 
c.  Overhead crossings at major intersections are avoided. 
(5)  Underground power or communication facility. An underground power or communication facility may cross a highway only if: 
a.  The design materials and construction methods will provide maximum maintenance-free service life; and 
b.  Capacity for the utility's foreseeable future expansion needs is provided in the initial installation. 
(6)  Markers. The city may require the utility to provide a marker at each right-of-way line where an underground facility other than a power or communication facility crosses a highway. Each marker shall identify the type of facility, the utility, and an emergency phone number. Markers may also be eliminated as provided in current federal regulations. (49 C.F.R. § 192.707 (1989)). 
(d)  Facilities to be located within particular rights-of-way. The city may require that facilities be located within particular rights-of-way that are not highways, rather than within particular highways. 
(e)  Freestanding facilities. 
(1)  The city may restrict the location and size of any freestanding facility located within a right-of-way. 
(2)  The city may require any freestanding facility located within a right-of-way to be screened from view. 
(f)  Facilities installed above ground. Above ground facilities may be installed only if: 
(1)  New underground installation is not technically feasible; and 
(2)  The proposed installation will be made at a location, and will employ suitable design and materials, to provide the greatest protection of aesthetic qualities of the area being traversed without adversely affecting safety. Suitable designs include, but are not limited to, self-supporting armless, single-pole construction with vertical configuration of conductors and cable. Existing utility poles and light standards shall be used wherever practicable; the installation of additional utility poles is prohibited unless within the limits of existing overhead facilities. 
(g)  Facility attachments to bridges or roadway structures. 
(1)  Facilities may be installed as attachments to bridges or roadway structures only where the utility has demonstrated that all other means of accommodating the facility are not practicable. Other means shall include, but are not limited to, underground, underwater, independent poles, cable supports and tower supports, all of which are completely separated from the bridge or roadway structure. Facilities transmitting commodities that are volatile, flammable, corrosive, or energized, especially those under significant pressure or potential, present high degrees of risk and such installations are not permitted. 
(2)  A utility shall include in its request to accommodate a facility installation on a bridge or roadway structure supporting data demonstrating the impracticability of alternate routing. Approval or disapproval of an application for facility attachment to a bridge or roadway structure will be based upon the following considerations: 
a.  The type, volume, pressure or voltage of the commodity to be transmitted and an evaluation of the resulting risk to persons and property in the event of damage to or failure of the facility; 
b.  The type, length, value, and relative importance of the highway structure in the transportation system; 
c.  The alternative routings available to the utility and their comparative practicability; 
d.  The proposed method of attachment; 
e.  The ability of the structure to bear the increased load of the proposed facility; 
f.  The degree of interference with bridge maintenance and painting; 
g.  The effect on the visual quality of the structure; and 
h.  The public benefit expected from the utility service as compared to the risk involved. 
(h)  Appearance standards. 
(1)  The city may prohibit the installation of facilities in particular locations in order to preserve visual quality. 
(2)  A facility may be constructed only if its construction does not require extensive removal or alteration of trees or terrain features visible to the right-of-way user or to adjacent residents and property owners, and if it does not impair the aesthetic quality of the lands being traversed. 
(Ord. No. 07-O-0094, § 2, 10-15-2007)  
Sec. 15-24. - Construction methods and materials. 
(a)  Standards and requirements for particular types of construction methods. 
(1)  Boring or jacking. 
a.  Pits and shoring. Boring or jacking under rights-of-way shall be accomplished from pits located at a minimum distance specified by the director of public works from the edge of the pavement. Pits for boring or jacking shall be excavated no more than forty-eight (48) hours in advance of boring or jacking operations and backfilled within forty-eight (48) hours after boring or jacking operations are completed. While pits are open, they shall be clearly marked and protected by barricades and fencing. Shoring shall be designed, erected, supported, braced, and maintained so that it will safely support all vertical and lateral loads that may be imposed upon it during the boring or jacking operation. 
b.  Wet boring or jetting. Wet boring or jetting shall not be permitted under the roadway. 
c.  Borings with diameters greater than six (6) inches. Borings over six (6) inches in diameter shall be accomplished with an auger and following pipe, and the diameter of the auger shall not exceed the outside diameter of the following pipe by more than one (1) inch. 
d.  Borings with diameters six (6) inches or less. Borings of six (6) inches or less in diameter may be accomplished by either jacking, guided with auger, or auger and following pipe method. 
e.  Tree preservation. Any facility located within the drip line of any tree designated by the city to be preserved or protected shall be bored under or around the root system. 
(2)  Trenching. Trenching shall be avoided when at all possible. If needed, trenching for facility installation, repair, or maintenance on rights-of-way shall be done in accord with the applicable portions of Article 603 of IDOT's "Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction." 
a.  Length. The length of open trench shall be kept to the practicable minimum consistent with requirements for pipe-line testing. Only one-half (½) of any intersection may have an open trench at any time unless special permission is obtained from the director of public works. 
b.  Open trench and excavated material. Open trench and windrowed excavated material shall be protected as required by this Code and by Chapter 6 of the Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. Where practicable, the excavated material shall be deposited between the roadway and the trench as added protection. Excavated material shall not be allowed to remain on the paved portion of the roadway. Where right-of-way width does not allow for windrowing excavated material off the paved portion of the roadway, excavated material shall be hauled to an off-road location. 
c.  Drip line of trees. The utility shall not trench within the drip line of any tree designated by the city to be preserved. 
(3)  Backfilling. 
a.  Any pit, trench, or excavation created during the installation of facilities shall be backfilled for its full width, depth, and length using methods and materials in accordance with IDOT's "Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction." When excavated material is hauled away or is unsuitable for backfill, suitable granular backfill shall be used. 
b.  For a period of three (3) years from the date construction of a facility is completed, the utility shall be responsible to remove and restore any backfilled area that has settled due to construction of the facility. If so ordered by the director of public works, the utility, at its expense, shall remove any pavement and backfill material to the top of the installed facility, place and properly compact new backfill material, and restore new pavement, sidewalk, curbs, and driveways to the proper grades, as determined by the director of public works. 
(4)  Pavement cuts. Pavement cuts shall be prohibited, unless it presents the only option. Pavement cuts for facility installation or repair shall be permitted on a highway only if that portion of the highway is closed to traffic. If a variance to the limitation set forth in this paragraph (4) is permitted under section 15-28, the following requirements shall apply: 
a.  Any excavation under pavements shall be backfilled and compacted as soon as practicable with granular material of CA-6 or CA-10 gradation, as designated by the director of public works. 
b.  Restoration of pavement, in kind, shall be accomplished as soon as practicable, and temporary repair with bituminous mixture shall be provided immediately. Any subsequent failure of either the temporary repair or the restoration shall be rebuilt upon notification by the city. 
c.  All saw cuts shall be full depth. 
d.  For all rights-of-way, permits shall not be issued unless such work is determined to be an emergency repair or other work considered necessary and unforeseen before the time of the reconstruction or unless a pavement cut is necessary for a J.U.L.I.E. locate. 
(5)  Encasement. 
a.  Casing pipe shall be designed to withstand the load of the highway and any other superimposed loads. The casing shall be continuous either by one-piece fabrication or by welding or jointed installation approved by the city. 
b.  The venting, if any, of any encasement shall extend within one (1) foot of the right-of-way line. No above-ground vent pipes shall be located in the area established as clear zone for that particular section of the highway. 
c.  In the case of water main or service crossing, encasement shall be furnished between bore pits unless continuous pipe or city approved jointed pipe is used under the roadway. Casing may be omitted only if pipe is installed prior to highway construction and carrier pipe is continuous or mechanical joints are of a type approved by the city. Bell and spigot type pipe shall be encased regardless of installation method. 
d.  In the case of gas pipelines of sixty (60) psig or less, encasement may be eliminated. 
e.  In the case of gas pipelines or petroleum products pipelines with installations of more than sixty (60) psig, encasement may be eliminated only if: (1) extra heavy pipe is used that precludes future maintenance or repair and (2) cathodic protection of the pipe is provided; 
f.  If encasement is eliminated for a gas or petroleum products pipeline, the facility shall be located so as to provide that construction does not disrupt the right-of-way. 
(6)  Minimum cover of underground facilities. Cover shall be provided and maintained at least in the amount specified herein and in the following table for minimum cover for the type of facility: 
a.  At any location where the utility will cross a city owned and maintained utility, the utility shall be installed a minimum of thirty-six (36) inches above the city utility or a minimum of eighteen (18) inches below said city utility. 
b.  As follows: 
TYPE OF FACILITY 	MINIMUM COVER 
Electric Lines 
Communication, Cable or Video Service Lines 	30 Inches 
18 to 24 Inches (as determined by City) 
Gas or Petroleum Products 	30 Inches 
Water Line 	Sufficient Cover to Provide Freeze Protection 
Sanitary Sewer, Storm Sewer, or Drainage Line 	Sufficient Cover to Provide Freeze Protection 
 
(b)  Standards and requirements for particular types of facilities. 
(1)  Electric power or communication lines. 
a.  Code compliance. Electric power or communications facilities within city rights-of-way shall be constructed, operated, and maintained in conformity with the provisions of 83 Ill. Adm. Code Part 305 (formerly General Order 160 of the Illinois Commerce Commission) entitled "Rules for Construction of Electric Power and Communications Lines," and the National Electrical Safety Code. 
b.  Overhead facilities. New overhead facilities are prohibited. However, if same do exist, the following standards shall apply: Overhead power or communication facilities shall use single pole construction and, where practicable, joint use of poles shall be used. Utilities shall make every reasonable effort to design the installation so guys and braces will not be needed. Variances may be allowed if there is no feasible alternative and if guy wires are equipped with guy guards for maximum visibility. 
c.  Underground facilities. (1) cable may be installed by trenching or plowing, provided that special consideration is given to boring in order to minimize damage when crossing improved entrances and side roads. (2) If a crossing is installed by boring or jacking, encasement shall be provided between jacking or bore pits. Encasement may be eliminated only if: (a) the crossing is installed by the use of "moles," "whip augers," or other approved method which compress the earth to make the opening for cable installation or (b) the installation is by the open trench method which is only permitted prior to roadway construction. (3) Cable shall be grounded in accordance with the National Electrical Safety Code. 
d.  Burial of drops. All temporary service drops placed between November 1 of the prior year and March 15 of the current year, also known as snowdrops, shall be buried by May 31 of the current year, weather permitting, unless otherwise permitted by the city. Weather permitting, utilities shall bury all temporary drops, excluding snowdrops, within ten (10) business days after placement. 
(2)  Underground facilities other than electric power or communication lines. Underground facilities other than electric power or communication lines may be installed by: 
a.  The use of "moles," "whip augers," or other approved methods which compress the earth to move the opening for the pipe; 
b.  Jacking or boring with vented encasement provided between the ditch lines or toes of slopes of the highway; 
c.  Open trench with vented encasement between ultimate ditch lines or toes of slopes, but only if prior to roadway construction; or 
d.  Tunneling with vented encasement, but only if installation is not possible by other means. 
(3)  Gas transmission, distribution and service. Gas pipelines within rights-of-way shall be constructed, maintained, and operated in a city approved manner and in conformance with the Federal Code of the Office of Pipeline Safety Operations, Department of Transportation, Part 192 means Transportation of Natural and Other Gas by Pipeline: Minimum Federal Safety Standards (49 CFR §192), IDOT's "Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction," and all other applicable laws, rules, and regulations. 
(4)  Petroleum products pipelines. Petroleum products pipelines within rights-of-way shall conform to the applicable Articles of ANSI Standard Code for Pressure Piping. (Liquid Petroleum Transportation Piping Systems ANSI-B 31.4). 
(5)  Waterlines, sanitary sewer lines, storm water sewer lines or drainage lines. Water lines, sanitary sewer lines, storm sewer lines, and drainage lines within rights-of-way shall meet or exceed the recommendations of the current "Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois" and/or the requirements of the city. 
(6)  Ground mounted appurtenances. Ground mounted appurtenances to overhead or underground facilities, when permitted within a right-of-way, shall be provided with a vegetation-free area extending one (1) foot (305 mm) in width beyond the appurtenance in all directions. The vegetation-free area may be provided by an extension of the mounting pad, or by heavy duty plastic or similar material approved by the director of public works. With the approval of the director of public works, shrubbery surrounding the appurtenance may be used in place of vegetation-free area. The housing for ground-mounted appurtenances shall be painted a neutral color to blend with the surroundings. 
(c)  Materials. 
(1)  General standards. The materials used in constructing facilities within rights-of-way shall be those meeting the accepted standards of the appropriate industry, the applicable portions of IDOT's "Standards Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction," the requirements of the Illinois Commerce Commission, or the standards established by other official regulatory agencies for the appropriate industry. 
(2)  Material storage on right-of-way. No material shall be stored on the right-of-way without the prior written approval of the director of public works. When such storage is permitted, all pipe, conduit, wire, poles, cross arms, or other materials shall be distributed along the right-of-way prior to and during installation in a manner to minimize hazards to the public or an obstacle to right-of-way maintenance or damage to the right-of-way and other property. If material is to be stored on right-of-way, prior approval must be obtained from the city. 
(3)  Hazardous materials. The plans submitted by the utility to the city shall identify any hazardous materials that may be involved in the construction of the new facilities or removal of any existing facilities. 
(d)  Operational restrictions. 
(1)  Construction operations on rights-of-way may, at the discretion of the city, be required to be discontinued when such operations would create hazards to traffic or the public health, safety, and welfare. Such operations may also be required to be discontinued or restricted when conditions are such that construction would result in extensive damage to the right-of-way or other property. 
(2)  These restrictions may be waived by the director of public works when emergency work is required to restore vital utility services. 
(3)  Unless otherwise permitted by the city, the hours of construction are those set forth in this Code. 
(e)  Location of existing facilities. Any utility proposing to construct facilities in the city shall contact J.U.L.I.E. and ascertain the presence and location of existing above-ground and underground facilities within the rights-of-way to be occupied by its proposed facilities. The city will make its permit records available to a utility for the purpose of identifying possible facilities. When notified of an excavation or when requested by the city or by J.U.L.I.E., a utility shall locate and physically mark its underground facilities within forty-eight (48) hours, excluding weekends and holidays, in accordance with the Illinois Underground Facilities Damage Prevention Act (220 ILCS 50/1 et seq.) 
(Ord. No. 07-O-0094, § 2, 10-15-2007)  
Sec. 15-25. - Vegetation control. 
(a)  Electric utilities means compliance with state laws and regulations. An electric utility shall conduct all tree-trimming and vegetation control activities in the right-of-way in accordance with applicable Illinois laws and regulations, and additionally, with such local franchise or other agreement with the city as permitted by law. 
(b)  Other utilities means tree trimming permit required. Tree trimming that is done by any other utility with facilities in the right-of-way and that is not performed pursuant to applicable Illinois laws and regulations specifically governing same, shall not be considered a normal maintenance operation, but shall require the application for, and the issuance of, a permit, in addition to any other permit required under this article. 
(1)  Application for tree trimming permit. Applications for tree trimming permits shall include assurance that the work will be accomplished by competent workers with supervision who are experienced in accepted tree pruning practices. Tree trimming permits shall designate an expiration date in the interest of assuring that the work will be expeditiously accomplished. 
(2)  Damage to trees. Poor pruning practices resulting in damaged or misshapen trees will not be tolerated and shall be grounds for cancellation of the tree trimming permit and for assessment of damages. The city will require compensation for trees extensively damaged and for trees removed without authorization. The formula developed by the International Society of Arboriculture will be used as a basis for determining the compensation for damaged trees or unauthorized removal of trees. The city may require the removal and replacement of trees if trimming or radical pruning would leave them in an unacceptable condition. 
(c)  Specimen trees or trees of special significance. The city may require that special measures be taken to preserve specimen trees or trees of special significance. The required measures may consist of higher poles, side arm extensions, covered wire or other means. 
(d)  Chemical use. 
(1)  Except as provided in the following paragraph, no utility shall spray, inject or pour any chemicals on or near any trees, shrubs or vegetation in the city for any purpose, including the control of growth, insects or disease. 
(2)  Spraying of any type of brush-killing chemicals will not be permitted on rights-of-way unless the utility demonstrates to the satisfaction of the director of public works that such spraying is the only practicable method of vegetation control. 
(Ord. No. 07-O-0094, § 2, 10-15-2007)  
Sec. 15-26. - Removal, relocation, or modifications of utility facilities. 
(a)  Notice. Within ninety (90) days following written notice from the city, a utility shall, at its own expense, protect, support, temporarily or permanently disconnect, remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any utility facilities within the rights-of-way whenever the corporate authorities have determined that such removal, relocation, change or alteration, is reasonably necessary for the construction, repair, maintenance, or installation of any city improvement in or upon, or the operations of the city in or upon, the rights-of-way. 
(b)  Removal of unauthorized facilities. Within thirty (30) days following written notice from the city, any utility that owns, controls, or maintains any unauthorized facility or related appurtenances within the rights-of-way shall, at its own expense, remove all or any part of such facilities or appurtenances from the rights-of-way. A facility is unauthorized and subject to removal in the following circumstances: 
(1)  Upon expiration or termination of the permittee's license or franchise, unless otherwise permitted by applicable law; 
(2)  If the facility was constructed or installed without the prior grant of a license or franchise, if required; 
(3)  If the facility was constructed or installed without prior issuance of a required permit in violation of this article; or 
(4)  If the facility was constructed or installed at a location not permitted by the permittee's license or franchise. 
(c)  Emergency removal or relocation of facilities. The city retains the right and privilege to cut or move any facilities located within the rights-of-way of the city, as the city may determine to be necessary, appropriate or useful in response to any public health or safety emergency. If circumstances permit, the municipality shall attempt to notify the utility, if known, prior to cutting or removing a facility and shall notify the utility, if known, after cutting or removing a facility. 
(d)  Abandonment of facilities. Upon abandonment of a facility within the rights-of-way of the city, the utility shall notify the city within ninety (90) days. Following receipt of such notice the city may direct the utility to remove all or any portion of the facility if the director of public works determines that such removal will be in the best interest of the public health, safety and welfare. In the event that the city does not direct the utility that abandoned the facility to remove it, by giving notice of abandonment to the city, the abandoning utility shall be deemed to consent to the alteration or removal of all or any portion of the facility by another utility or person. 
(Ord. No. 07-O-0094, § 2, 10-15-2007)  
Sec. 15-27. - Clean-up and restoration. 
The utility shall remove all excess material and restore all turf and terrain and other property within ten (10) days after any portion of the rights-of-way are disturbed, damaged or destroyed due to construction or maintenance by the utility, all to the satisfaction of the city. This includes restoration of entrances and side roads. Restoration of roadway surfaces shall be made using materials and methods approved by the director of public works. Such cleanup and repair may be required to consist of backfilling, regrading, reseeding, resodding, or any other requirement to restore the right-of-way to a condition substantially equivalent to that which existed prior to the commencement of the project. The time period provided in this section may be extended by the director of public works for good cause shown. 
(Ord. No. 07-O-0094, § 2, 10-15-2007)  
Sec. 15-28. - Maintenance and emergency maintenance. 
(a)  General. Facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within rights-of-way are to be maintained by or for the utility in a manner satisfactory to the city and at the utility's expense. 
(b)  Emergency maintenance procedures. Emergencies may justify non-compliance with normal procedures for securing a permit: 
(1)  If an emergency creates a hazard on the traveled portion of the right-of-way, the utility shall take immediate steps to provide all necessary protection for traffic on the highway or the public on the right-of-way including the use of signs, lights, barricades or flaggers. If a hazard does not exist on the traveled way, but the nature of the emergency is such as to require the parking on the shoulder of equipment required in repair operations, adequate signs and lights shall be provided. Parking on the shoulder in such an emergency will only be permitted when no other means of access to the facility is available. 
(2)  In an emergency, the utility shall, as soon as possible, notify the director of public works or his or her duly authorized agent of the emergency, informing him or her as to what steps have been taken for protection of the traveling public and what will be required to make the necessary repairs. If the nature of the emergency is such as to interfere with the free movement of traffic, the city police shall be notified immediately. 
(3)  In an emergency, the utility shall use all means at hand to complete repairs as rapidly as practicable and with the least inconvenience to the traveling public. 
(c)  Emergency repairs. The utility must file in writing with the city a description of the repairs undertaken in the right-of-way within forty-eight (48) hours after an emergency repair. 
(Ord. No. 07-O-0094, § 2, 10-15-2007)  
Sec. 15-29. - Variances. 
(a)  Request for variance. A utility requesting a variance from one (1) or more of the provisions of this article must do so in writing to the director of public works as a part of the permit application. The request shall identify each provision of this article from which a variance is requested and the reasons why a variance should be granted. 
(b)  Authority to grant variances. The director of public works shall decide whether a variance is authorized for each provision of this article identified in the variance request on an individual basis. 
(c)  Conditions for granting of variance. The director of public works may authorize a variance only if the utility requesting the variance has demonstrated that: 
(1)  One (1) or more conditions not under the control of the utility (such as terrain features or an irregular right-of-way line) create a special hardship that would make enforcement of the provision unreasonable, given the public purposes to be achieved by the provision; and 
(2)  All other designs, methods, materials, locations or facilities that would conform with the provision from which a variance is requested are impracticable in relation to the requested approach. 
(d)  Additional conditions for granting of a variance. As a condition for authorizing a variance, the director of public works may require the utility requesting the variance to meet reasonable standards and conditions that may or may not be expressly contained within this article but which carries out the purposes of this article. 
(e)  Right to appeal. Any utility aggrieved by any order, requirement, decision or determination, including denial of a variance, made by the director of public works under the provisions of this shall have the right to appeal to the city council, or such other board or commission as it may designate. The application for appeal shall be submitted in writing to the city clerk within thirty (30) days after the date of such order, requirement, decision or determination. The city council shall commence its consideration of the appeal at the city council's next regularly scheduled meeting occurring at least seven (7) days after the filing of the appeal. The city council shall timely decide the appeal. 
(Ord. No. 07-O-0094, § 2, 10-15-2007)  
Sec. 15-30. - Penalties. 
Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with any of the provisions of this article shall be subject to fine in accordance with the penalty provisions of this Code. There may be times when the city will incur delay or other costs, including third party claims, because the utility will not or cannot perform its duties under its permit and this article. Unless the utility shows that another allocation of the cost of undertaking the requested action is appropriate, the utility shall bear the city's costs of damages and its costs of installing, maintaining, modifying, relocating, or removing the facility that is the subject of the permit. No other administrative agency or commission may review or overrule a permit related cost apportionment of the city. Sanctions may be imposed upon a utility that does not pay the costs apportioned to it. 
(Ord. No. 07-O-0094, § 2, 10-15-2007)  
Sec. 15-31. - Enforcement. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed as limiting any additional or further remedies that the city may have for enforcement of this article. 
(Ord. No. 07-O-0094, § 2, 10-15-2007)  
Sec. 15-32. - Severability. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this article is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof. 
(Ord. No. 07-O-0094, § 2, 10-15-2007)  
Secs. 15-33—15-49. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - TELECOMMUNICATIONS MUNICIPAL INFRASTRUCTURE MAINTENANCE FEE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— In order to facilitate inclusion of Ord. No. 07-O-0094 as a new Art. III, the provisions of Art. IV, have been renumbered from §§ 15-20—15-27 to §§ 15-50—15-57, at the discretion of the editor. See also the editor's note at Art. III. 
 
Sec. 15-50. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
Gross charges means the amount paid to a telecommunications retailer for the act or privilege of originating or receiving telecommunications within the city, and for all services rendered in connection therewith, valued in money whether paid in money or otherwise, including cash, credits, services, and property of every kind or nature, and shall be determined without any deduction on account of the cost of such telecommunications, the cost of the materials used, labor or service costs, or any other expense whatsoever. In case credit is extended, the amount thereof shall be included only as and when paid. "Gross charges" for private line service shall include charges imposed at each channel point within the city, charges for the channel mileage between each channel point within the city, and charges for that portion of the interstate inter-office channel provided within the city. However, "gross charges" shall not include: 
(1)  Any amounts added to purchaser's bill because of a charge made under: (i) the fee imposed by this article, (ii) additional charges added to a purchaser's bill under section 9-221 or 9-222 of the Public Utilities Act, (iii) amounts collected under section 8-11-2017 of the Illinois Municipal Code, (iv) the tax imposed by the Telecommunications Excise Tax, (v) 911 surcharges, or (vi) the tax imposed by section 4251 of the Internal Revenue Code; 
(2)  Charges for a sent collect telecommunication received outside the city; 
(3)  Charges for leased time on equipment or charges for the storage of data or information or subsequent retrieval or the processing of data or information intended to change its form or content. Such equipment includes, but is not limited to, the use of calculators, computers, data processing equipment, tabulating equipment, or accounting equipment and also includes the usage of computers under a time-sharing agreement; 
(4)  Charges for customer equipment, including such equipment that is leased or rented by the customer from any source, wherein such charges are disaggregated and separately identified from other charges; 
(5)  Charges to business enterprises certified under section 9-222.1 of the Public Utilities Act to the extent of such exemption and during the period of time specified by the city; 
(6)  Charges for telecommunications and all services and equipment provided in connection therewith between a parent corporation and its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, and only to the extent that the charges between the parent corporation and wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries represent expense allocation between the corporations and not the generation of profit other than a regulatory required profit for the corporation rendering such services; 
(7)  Bad debts ("bad debt" means any portion of a debt that is related to a sale at retail for which gross charges are not otherwise deductible or excludable that has become worthless or uncollectible, as determined under applicable federal income tax standards; if the portion of the debt deemed to be bad is subsequently paid, the retailer shall report and pay the tax on that portion during the reporting period in which the payment is made); 
(8)  Charges paid by inserting coins in coin-operated telecommunications devices; or 
(9)  Charges for telecommunications and all services and equipment provided to the city. 
Public right-of-way means any municipal street, alley, water or public right-of-way dedicated or commonly used for utility purposes, including utility easements wherein the city has acquired the right and authority to locate or permit the location of utilities consistent with telecommunications facilities. "Public right-of-way" shall not include any real or personal city property that is not specifically described in the previous sentence and shall not include city buildings and other structures or improvements, regardless of whether they are installed in the public right-of-way. 
Retailer maintaining a place of business in this state, or any like term, means and includes any retailer having or maintaining within the State of Illinois, directly or by a subsidiary, an office, distribution facilities, transmission facilities, sales office, warehouse, or other place of business, or any agent or other representative operating within this state under the authority of the retailer or its subsidiary, irrespective of whether such place of business or agent or other representative is located here permanently or temporarily, or whether such retailer or subsidiary is licensed to do business in this state. 
Sale of telecommunication at retail means the transmitting, supplying, or furnishing of telecommunications and all services rendered in connection therewith for a consideration, other than between a parent corporation and its wholly owned subsidiaries, or between wholly owned subsidiaries when the gross charge made by one such corporation to another such corporation is not greater than the gross charge paid to the retailer for this use or consumption and not for sale. 
Service address means the location of telecommunications equipment from which telecommunication services are originated or at which telecommunication services are received. If this is not a defined location, as in the case of wireless telecommunications, paging systems, maritime systems, air-to-ground systems and the like, "service address" shall mean the location of the customer's primary use of the telecommunications equipment as defined by the location in Illinois where bills are sent. 
Telecommunications includes, but is not limited to, messages or information transmitted through use of local, toll and wide area telephone service, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter service, computer exchange services, private line services, specialized mobile radio services, or any other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar means, between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite, or similar facilities. Unless the context clearly requires otherwise, "telecommunications" shall also include wireless telecommunications as hereinafter defined. "Telecommunications" shall not include value added services in which computer processing applications are used to act on the form, content, code and protocol of the information for purposes other than transmission. "Telecommunications" shall not include purchase of telecommunications by a telecommunication service provider for use as a component part of the service provided by him or her to the ultimate retail consumer who originates or terminates the end-to-end communications. Retailer access charges, right of access charges, charges for use of intercompany facilities, and all telecommunications resold in the subsequent provision and used as a component of, or integrated into, end-to-end telecommunication service shall not be included in the gross charges as sales for resale. "Telecommunications" shall not include the provision of cable services through a cable system as defined in the Cable Communications Act of 1984 (47 U.S.C. Sections 521 and following) as now or hereafter amended or cable or other programming services subject to an open video system fee payable to the city through an open video system as defined in the Rules of the Federal Communications Commission (47 C.D.F. 76.1550 and following) as now or hereafter amended. 
Telecommunications provider means (1) any telecommunications retailer; and (2) any person that is not a telecommunications retailer that installs, owns, operates or controls equipment in the public right-of-way that is used or designed to be used to transmit telecommunications in any form. 
Telecommunications retailer (or "retailer" or "carrier") means and includes every person engaged in the business of making sales of telecommunications at retail as defined in this section. The city may, in its discretion, upon application, authorize the collection of the fee hereby imposed by any retailer not maintaining a place of business within this state, who, to the satisfaction of the city, furnishes adequate security to ensure collection and payment of the fee. When so authorized, it shall be the duty of such retailer to pay the fee upon all of the gross charges for telecommunications in the same manner and subject to the same requirements as a retailer maintaining a place of business within this state. 
Wireless telecommunications includes cellular mobile telephone services, personal wireless services as defined in section 704(C) of the Telecommunications Act of 1996 (Public Law No. 104-104), 42 U.S.C. section 332(c)(7), as now or hereafter amended, including all commercial mobile radio services, and paging services. 
(Ord. No. 4117, § 1, 8-17-1998)  
Sec. 15-51. - Registration of telecommunications providers. 
(a)  Every telecommunications provider as defined by this article shall register with the city within thirty (30) days after the effective date of this article or becoming a telecommunications provider, whichever is later, on a form to be provided by the city, provided, however, that any telecommunications retailer that has filed a return pursuant to section 15-53(c) of this Code shall be deemed to have registered in accordance with this section. 
(b)  Every telecommunications provider who has registered with the city pursuant to this section has an affirmative duty to submit an amended registration form or current return as required by section 15-53(c), as the case may be, to the city within thirty (30) days from the date of the occurrence of any changes in the information as provided by the telecommunications provider in the registration form or most recent return on file with the city. 
(Ord. No. 4117, § 1, 8-17-1998)  
Sec. 15-52. - Telecommunications municipal infrastructure maintenance fee. 
(a)  A city telecommunications municipal infrastructure maintenance fee (hereinafter referred to as the infrastructure maintenance fee) is hereby imposed upon all telecommunications retailers in the amount of one (1) percent of all gross charges charged by the telecommunications retailer to service addresses within the city for telecommunications originating or received in the city. 
(b)  Upon the effective date of the infrastructure maintenance fee imposed under this article, the infrastructure maintenance fee authorized hereunder shall be the only fee or compensation for the use of all public rights-of-way within the city by telecommunications retailers. Imposition of the infrastructure maintenance fee provided under this article does not, however, serve as a limitation on the levying of any taxes or imposition of any fees otherwise authorized by law. 
(c)  The infrastructure maintenance fee imposed by this section shall be collected, enforced, and administered as set forth in section 15-53 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 4117, § 1, 8-17-1998)  
Sec. 15-53. - Collection, enforcement, and administration of telecommunications municipal infrastructure maintenance fee. 
(a)  A telecommunications retailer shall charge to and collect from each customer an additional charge in an amount equal to the infrastructure maintenance fee attributable to that customer's service address. 
(b)  Unless otherwise approved by the city administrator, the infrastructure maintenance fee shall be remitted by the telecommunications retailer to the city not later than the last day of the month subsequent to the month in which the bill is issued to the customer; provided, however, that the telecommunications retailer may retain an amount not to exceed two (2) percent of the infrastructure maintenance fee collected by it to reimburse itself for expenses incurred in accounting for and remitting the fee. 
(c)  Remittance of the infrastructure maintenance fee to the city shall be accompanied by a return, in a form to be prescribed by the city administrator, which shall contain such information as the city administrator may reasonably require. 
(d)  Any infrastructure maintenance fee required to be collected pursuant to this article and any such infrastructure maintenance fee collected by such telecommunications retailer shall constitute a debt owed by the telecommunications retailer to the city. 
(e)  If it shall appear that any amount of infrastructure maintenance fee has been paid and was not due under the provisions of this article, whether as a result of a mistake of fact or an error of law, then such amount shall be credited against any infrastructure maintenance fee due, or to become due, under this article, from the telecommunications retailer who made the erroneous payment; provided, however, the city may request, and telecommunications retailer shall provide, written substantiation for such credit. However, no claim for such credit may be made more than six (6) months after the date of the erroneous payment. 
(f)  The city shall have the right, in its discretion, to audit the books and records of all telecommunications retailers subject to this article to determine whether the telecommunications retailer has properly accounted to the city for the infrastructure maintenance fee. Any underpayment of the amount of the infrastructure maintenance fee due to the city by the telecommunications retailer shall be paid to the city plus five (5) percent of the total amount of the underpayment determined in an audit, plus any costs incurred by the city in conducting the audit, in an amount not to exceed the total amount of the underpayment determined in said audit. Said sum shall be paid to the city within twenty-one (21) days after the date of issuance of an invoice for same. 
(g)  The city administrator, or his or her designee, may promulgate such further or additional regulations concerning the administration and enforcement of this article, consistent with its provisions, as may be required from time to time and shall notify all telecommunications retailers that are registered pursuant to section 15-51 of this Code of such regulations. 
(Ord. No. 4117, § 1, 8-17-1998)  
Sec. 15-54. - Compliance with other laws. 
Nothing in this article shall excuse any person or entity from obligations imposed under any law, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Generally applicable taxes; and 
(2)  Standards for construction on, over, under, or within, use of or repair of the public rights-of-way, including standards relating to free-standing towers and other structures upon the public rights-of-way, as provided; and 
(3)  Any liability imposed for the failure to comply with such generally applicable taxes or standards governing construction on, over, under, or within, use or repair of the public rights-of-way; and 
(4)  Compliance with any ordinance or provision of this Code concerning uses or structures not located on, over, under or within the public right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 4117, § 1, 8-17-1998)  
Sec. 15-55. - Existing franchises and licenses. 
Any franchise, license, or similar agreements between telecommunications retailers and the city entered into before the effective date of this article regarding the use of public rights-of-way shall remain valid according to and for their stated terms except for any fees, charges or other compensation to the extent waived. 
(Ord. No. 4117, § 1, 8-17-1998)  
Sec. 15-56. - Penalties. 
Any telecommunications provider who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with any of the provisions of this article shall be subject to fine in accordance with the general penalty provisions of section 1-8 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 4117, § 1, 8-17-1998)  
Sec. 15-57. - Enforcement. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed as limiting any additional or further remedies that the city may have for enforcement of this article. 
(Ord. No. 4117, § 1, 8-17-1998)  
Secs. 15-58, 15-59. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - SITING OF SMALL ANTENNA/TOWER IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY 
 
Sec. 15-60. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this article, the following terms will have the following meanings: 
Alternative antenna structure: An existing pole or other structure within the public right-of-way that can be used to support an antenna and is not a utility pole or a city-owned infrastructure. 
Antenna: Communications equipment that transmits or receives electromagnetic radio signals used in the provision of any type of wireless communications services. 
Applicant: Any person or entity submitting an application to install personal wireless telecommunication facilities or structures to support the facilities within a public right-of-way. 
City-owned infrastructure: Infrastructure in public right-of-way within the boundaries of the city, including, but not limited to, streetlights, traffic signals, towers, structures, or buildings owned, operated or maintained by the city. 
Distributed antenna system (DAS): A type of personal wireless telecommunication facility consisting of a network of spatially separated antenna nodes connected to a common source via a transport medium that provides wireless service within a geographic area. Generally serves multiple carriers. 
Landscape screening: The installation at grade of plantings, shrubbery, bushes or other foliage intended to screen the base of a personal wireless telecommunication facility from public view. 
Monopole: A structure composed of a single spire, pole or tower designed and constructed with antennas or related equipment and that is not a utility pole, an alternative antenna structure, or a city-owned infrastructure. 
Owner: Any person or entity responsible for installing, maintaining, operating, replacing, or removing personal wireless telecommunication facilities or structures to support the facilities within a public right-of-way. 
Personal wireless telecommunication antenna: An antenna that is part of a personal wireless telecommunications facility. 
Personal wireless telecommunication equipment: Equipment, exclusive of an antenna, that is part of a personal wireless telecommunications facility. 
Personal wireless telecommunications facility: An antenna, equipment, and related improvements used, or designed to be used, to provide wireless transmission of voice, data video streams, images, or other information including, but not limited to, cellular phone service, personal communication service, paging, and Wi-Fi antenna service. 
Small cell facilities: A personal wireless telecommunications facility consisting of an antenna and related equipment either installed singly or as part of a network to provide coverage or enhance capacity in a limited defined area. Generally single-service provider installation. 
Tower: Any structure that is designed and constructed with antennas, including self-supporting lattice towers, guy towers, or monopole towers, and that is not a utility pole, an alternative antenna structure, or a city-owned infrastructure. 
Except as otherwise provided for by this article, the requirements for a tower and associated antenna facilities shall be those required in this article. 
Utility pole: An upright pole designed and used to support electric cables, telephone cables, telecommunication cables, cable service cables, which are used to provide lighting, traffic control, signage, or a similar function. 
Variance or variation: A grant of relief by the city administrator or his/her designee. 
Wi-Fi antenna: An antenna used to support Wi-Fi broadband Internet access service based on the IEEE 802.11 standard that typically uses unlicensed spectrum to enable communication between devices. 
(Ord. No. 17-O-0013, § 2, 8-7-2017)  
Sec. 15-61. - Standards and regulations. 
Personal wireless telecommunication facilities will be permitted to be placed in right-of-way within the jurisdiction of the city as attachments to existing utility poles, alternative antenna structures, or city-owned infrastructure subject to the following regulations: 
(a)  Number limitation and co-location. The city administrator or his/her designee may regulate the number of personal wireless telecommunications facilities allowed on each utility pole or unit of city-owned infrastructure. No more than one (1) personal wireless telecommunications facility will be permitted on city-owned infrastructure. No more than two (2) personal wireless telecommunications facilities will be permitted on utility poles or alternative antenna structures of ninety (90) feet or less. No more than three (3) personal wireless telecommunications facilities will be permitted on utility poles or alternative antenna structures in excess of ninety (90) feet and less than one hundred twenty (120) feet. This article does not preclude or prohibit co-location of personal wireless telecommunication facilities on towers or monopoles that meet the requirements as set forth elsewhere in this article or as required by federal law. 
(b)  Separation and clearance requirements. Personal wireless telecommunication facilities may be attached to a utility pole, alternative antenna structure, monopole, or city-owned infrastructure only where such pole, structure or infrastructure is located no closer than a distance equal to one hundred (100) percent of the height of such facility to any residential building and no closer than three hundred (300) feet from any other personal wireless telecommunication facility. A separation or lesser clearance may be allowed by the city administrator or his/her designee as an administrative variance to this article when the applicant establishes that the lesser separation or clearance is necessary to close a significant coverage or capacity gap in the applicant's services or to otherwise provide adequate services to customers, and the proposed antenna or facility is the least intrusive means to do so within the right-of-way. 
(c)  Schools and educational facilities. Personal wireless telecommunication facilities shall be prohibited within the public rights-of-way, or on any city-owned infrastructure, adjacent to a school or educational facility. No personal wireless telecommunication facilities may be located closer than five hundred (500) feet from any property owned by a school district or educational facility. 
(d)  City-owned infrastructure. Personal wireless telecommunication facilities can only be mounted to city-owned infrastructure including, but not limited to, streetlights, traffic signals, monopoles, towers or buildings, if authorized by a license or other agreement between the owner and the city. 
(e)  New towers. No new monopole or other tower designed and constructed with personal wireless telecommunication facilities in excess of sixty (60) feet is permitted to be installed on right-of-way within the jurisdiction of the city unless the city council finds, based on clear and convincing evidence provided by the applicant, that locating the personal wireless telecommunications facilities on the right-of-way is necessary to close a significant coverage or capacity gap in the applicant's services or to otherwise provide adequate services to customers, and the proposed new monopole or other tower within the right-of-way is the least intrusive means to do so. 
(f)  Attachment limitations. No personal wireless telecommunication antenna or facility within the right-of-way will be attached to a utility pole, alternative antenna structure, monopole, tower, or city-owned infrastructure unless all of the following conditions are satisfied: 
(1)  Surface area of antenna. The personal wireless telecommunication antenna, including antenna panels, whip antennas or dish-shaped antennas, cannot have a surface area of more than seven (7) cubic feet in volume. 
(2)  Size of above-ground personal wireless telecommunication facility. The total combined volume of all above-ground equipment and appurtenances comprising a personal wireless telecommunication facility, exclusive of the antenna itself, cannot exceed thirty-two (32) cubic feet. 
(3)  Personal wireless telecommunication equipment. The owner of a personal wireless telecommunication facility shall locate the base of the equipment or appurtenances at a height of no lower than eight (8) feet above grade. 
(4)  Personal wireless telecommunication services equipment mounted at grade. In the event that the owner of a personal wireless telecommunication facility proposes to install a facility where equipment or appurtenances are to be installed at grade, screening shall be installed to minimize the visibility of the facility on all sides, in accordance with section 15-61(g) below. Personal wireless telecommunication facilities shall be installed at least ten (10) feet from city-owned utilities, twenty (20) feet from any driveway or driveway apron, and a minimum of eleven (11) feet from a roadway. The personal wireless telecommunication facility cannot obstruct the view of the motoring public and create an unsafe driving condition. 
(5)  Height. The top of the highest point of the antenna cannot extend more than seven (7) feet above the highest point of the utility pole, alternative antenna support structure, monopole, tower or city-owned infrastructure. If necessary, the replacement or new utility pole, alternative support structure or city-owned infrastructure located within the public right-of-way may be no more than ten (10) to seventy (70) feet higher than existing poles adjacent to the replacement or new pole or structure, or no more than ninety (90) feet in height overall, whichever is less. 
(6)  Color. A personal wireless telecommunication facility, including all related equipment and appurtenances, shall be of a color approved by the city. Any wiring shall be covered with an appropriate cover. 
(7)  Antenna panel covering. A personal wireless telecommunication antenna may include a radome, cap or other antenna panel covering or shield, to the extent such covering would not result in a larger or more noticeable facility and, if proposed, such covering shall be of a color that blends with the color of the pole, structure, monopole, tower or infrastructure on which it is mounted. 
(8)  Wiring and cabling. Wires and cables connecting the antenna to the remainder of the facility shall be installed in accordance with the electrical code currently in effect. No wiring and cabling serving the facility will be allowed to interfere with any wiring or cabling installed by a cable television or video service operator, electric utility or telephone utility. Personal wireless telecommunication facilities shall not be allowed to obtain electrical power from a source directly associated with or provided for a city-owned infrastructure. 
(9)  Grounding. The personal wireless telecommunication facility shall be grounded in accordance with the requirements of the electrical code currently in effect in the city. 
(10)  Guy wires. No guy or other support wires shall be installed in connection with a new personal wireless telecommunication facility installation. 
(11)  Structural integrity. The personal wireless telecommunication facility, including the antenna, pole extension and all related equipment shall be designed to withstand a wind force and ice loads in accordance with applicable standards established in Chapter 25 of the National Electric Safety Code for utility poles, Rule 250-B and 250-C standards governing wind, ice, and loading forces on utility poles, in the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) in TIA/EIA Section 222-G established by the Telecommunications Industry Association (TIA) and the Electronics Industry Association (EIA) for steel wireless support structures and the applicable industry standard for other existing structures. An extension to a city-owned infrastructure, utility pole, monopole, tower, or alternative antenna structure utilized for the purpose of connecting a personal wireless telecommunications antenna and its related personal wireless telecommunications equipment must be securely bound to the city-owned infrastructure, utility pole, monopole, tower, or alternative antenna structure in accordance with applicable engineering standards for the design and attachment of such extensions. For any facility attached to city-owned infrastructure or, in the discretion of the city, for a utility pole, monopole, tower, or alternative antenna structure, the owner of the facility shall provide the city with a structural evaluation of each specific location containing a recommendation that the proposed installation passes the standards described above. The evaluation shall be prepared by a professional structural engineer licensed in the state. 
(g)  Signage. Other than signs required by federal law or regulations or identification and location markings, installation of signs on a personal wireless telecommunication facility is prohibited. 
(h)  Screening. If screening is required under subsection (e)(4) above, it shall be natural landscaping material subject to the approval of the city and shall comply with all regulations of the city. Appropriate landscaping shall be located and maintained by the owner and shall provide the maximum achievable screening, as determined by the city, from view of adjoining properties and public or private streets. Notwithstanding the foregoing, no such screening is required to extend more than nine (9) feet in height. Landscape screening when permitted in the right-of-way shall be provided with a clearance of three (3) feet in all directions from the facility and a minimum of eight (8) feet from a roadway. The color of housing for ground-mounted equipment shall blend with the surroundings as approved by the city. For a covered structure, the maximum reasonably achievable screening shall be provided between such facility and the view from adjoining properties and public or private streets, as determined appropriate by the city. In lieu of the owner installing the screening, the city, at its sole discretion, may accept a fee from the owner of the facility for the acquisition, installation, or maintenance of landscaping material by the city. 
(i)  Permission to use utility pole or alterative antenna structure. The owner of a personal wireless telecommunication facility shall submit to the city written copies of the approval from the owner of a utility pole, monopole, tower, or an alternative antenna structure, to mount the personal wireless telecommunication facility on that specific pole, tower, or structure, prior to issuance of the city permit. 
(j)  Licenses and permits. The owner of a personal wireless telecommunication facility shall verify to the city that it has received all concurrent licenses and permits required by other agencies and governments with jurisdiction over the design, construction, location and operation of said facility have been obtained and will be maintained within the corporate limits of the city. 
(k)  Abandonment and removal. Any personal wireless telecommunication facility located within the corporate limits of the city that is not operated for a continuous period of twelve (12) months, shall be considered abandoned and the owner of the facility shall remove same within ninety (90) days of receipt of written notice from the city notifying the owner of such abandonment. Such notice shall be sent by certified or registered mail, return-receipt-requested, by the city to such owner at the last known address of such owner. In the case of personal wireless telecommunication facilities attached to city owned infrastructure, if such facility is not removed within ninety (90) days of such notice, the city may remove or cause the removal of such facility through the terms of the applicable license agreement or through whatever actions are provided by law for removal and cost recovery. 
(Ord. No. 17-O-0013, § 2, 8-7-2017)  
Sec. 15-62. - Permits and application fees and procedures. 
Permits for placement of personal wireless telecommunication facilities in right-of-way within the city are required. Except as otherwise provided for by in this article, the procedures for, the application for, approval of, and revocation of such a permit shall be in compliance with city permit application requirements in article III of this chapter. Any applications shall demonstrate compliance with the requirements of this chapter. Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license, or similar agreement, or federal, state or local law, all applications for permits pursuant to this section shall be accompanied by fee as prescribed in appendix G. The application fee will reimburse the city for regulatory and administrative costs with respect to the work being performed. 
(Ord. No. 17-O-0013, § 2, 8-7-2017)  
Sec. 15-63. - Variance. 
(a)  Request for variance. An applicant or owner requesting a variance from one (1) or more of the provisions of this article must do so in writing to the city administrator as part of the permit application. The request shall identify each provision of this article from which a variance is requested and the reasons why a variance should be granted. 
(b)  Authority to grant variances. the city administrator shall decide whether a variance is authorized for each provision of this article identified in the variance request on an individual basis. 
(c)  Conditions for granting of variance. The city administrator may authorize a variance only if the applicant or owner requesting the variance has demonstrated that: 
(1)  One (1) or more conditions not under the control of the applicant or owner (such as terrain features or an irregular right-of-way line) create a special hardship that would make enforcement of the provision unreasonable, given the public purposes to be achieved by the provision; and 
(2)  All other designs, methods, materials, locations or facilities that would conform with the provision form which a variance is requested are impracticable in relation to the requested approach. 
(d)  Additional conditions for granting of a variance. As a condition for authorizing a variance, the city administrator may require the applicant or owner requesting the variance to meet reasonable standards and conditions that may or may not be expressly contained within this article but which carries out the purposes of this article. 
(e)  Right to appeal. Any applicant or owner aggrieved by any order, requirement, decision or determination, including denial of a variance, made by the city administrator under the provisions of this article shall have the right to appeal to the city council, or such other board or commission as it may designate. The application for appeal shall be submitted in writing to the city clerk within thirty (30) days after the date of such order, requirement, decision or determination. The city council shall commence its consideration of the appeal at the city council's next regularly scheduled meeting occurring at least seven (7) days after the filing of the appeal. The city council shall timely decide the appeal. 
(Ord. No. 17-O-0013, § 2, 8-7-2017)  
Sec. 15-64. - Conflict of laws. 
Where the conditions imposed by any provisions of this article regarding the siting and installation of personal wireless telecommunication facilities are more restrictive than comparable conditions imposed elsewhere in any other local law, ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation, the regulations of this article will govern. 
(Ord. No. 17-O-0013, § 2, 8-7-2017)  
Sec. 15-65. - Enforcement. 
If any provision of this article or application thereof to any person or circumstance is ruled unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of this article that can be given effect without the invalid application or provision, and each invalid provision or invalid application of this article is severable. 
(Ord. No. 17-O-0013, § 2, 8-7-2017)  
Chapter 16 - TAXES  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 16-1—16-15. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - HOME RULE MUNICIPAL RETAILERS' OCCUPATION TAX, HOME RULE MUNICIPAL SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX, AND CERTAIN USE TAXES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 07-O-0080, § 2, adopted September 17, 2007, amended Art. II, in its entirety, to read as herein set out. Prior to inclusion of said ordinance, Art. II pertained to municipal retailers' occupation, service and use taxes. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
 
Sec. 16-16. - Home rule municipal retailers' occupation tax. 
A tax is imposed on all persons engaged in the City of West Chicago in the business of selling tangible personal property at retail, other than an item of tangible personal property titled or registered with an agency of the State of Illinois, at the rate of one (1.00) percent of the gross receipts from such sales made in the course of such business, in accordance with 65 ILCS 5/8-11-1 of the Illinois Municipal Code or as that section is hereafter amended. 
(Ord. No. 07-O-0080, § 2, 9-17-2007; Ord. No. 08-O-0019, § 1, 3-17-2008; Ord. No. 18-O-0037, § 1, 7-2-2018)  
Sec. 16-17. - Home rule municipal service occupation tax. 
A tax is imposed upon all persons engaged in the City of West Chicago in the business of making sales of service at the rate of one (1.00) percent of the selling price of all tangible personal property transferred by such servicemen either in the form of tangible personal property or in the form of real estate as an incident to a sale of service, in accordance with 65 ILCS 5/8-11-5 of the Illinois Municipal Code or as that section is hereafter amended. 
(Ord. No. 07-O-0080, § 2, 9-17-2007; Ord. No. 08-O-0019, § 2, 3-17-2008; Ord. No. 18-O-0037, § 2, 7-2-2018)  
Sec. 16-18. - Exemptions. 
The home rule municipal retailers' occupation tax and the home rule municipal service occupation tax shall not be imposed on the following: 
(1)  The sales of food for human consumption that is to be consumed off the premises where it is sold (other than alcoholic beverages, soft drinks and food that has been prepared for immediate consumption); 
(2)  Prescription and nonprescription medicines, drugs, medical appliances and insulin, urine testing materials, syringes and needles used by diabetics; and 
(3)  Item of tangible personal property titled or registered with an agency of the State of Illinois. 
(Ord. No. 07-O-0080, § 2, 9-17-2007)  
Sec. 16-19. - Enforcement. 
The Illinois Department of Revenue has full power to administer and enforce the home rule municipal retailers' occupation tax and the home rule municipal service occupation tax and to collect all taxes and penalties due hereunder, to dispose of taxes and penalties so collected in the manner provided by law, and to take all other actions which may be authorized by law. 
(Ord. No. 07-O-0080, § 2, 9-17-2007)  
Sec. 16-20. - Reimbursement. 
Persons subject to the home rule municipal retailers' occupation tax and the home rule municipal service occupation tax imposed by this article may reimburse themselves for their seller's or servicemen's tax liability by separately stating that tax as an additional charge, which charge may be stated in combination, in a single amount, with state tax which sellers are required to collect under the Use Tax Act, pursuant to such bracket schedules as the Illinois Department of Revenue may prescribe. 
(Ord. No. 07-O-0080, § 2, 9-17-2007)  
Sec. 16-21. - Miscellaneous. 
For the purpose of determining the local governmental unit whose tax is applicable, a retail sale by a producer of coal or other mineral mined in Illinois is a sale at retail at the place where the coal or other mineral mined in Illinois is extracted from the earth. 
(Ord. No. 07-O-0080, § 2, 9-17-2007)  
Sec. 16-22. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 08-O-0027, § 1, adopted April 21, 2008, repealed § 16-22, which pertained to municipal retailers' occupation tax imposed and derived from Ord. No. 08-O-0019, § 3, adopted March 17, 2008. See also the Code Comparative Table.  
Secs. 16-23—16-29. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - HOTEL TAX[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 1901, § 1, adopted Oct. 6, 1986, specifically amended the Code by adding thereto a new § 16-30. At the discretion of the editor the substantive provisions of the ordinance were redesignated as §§ 16-30—16-34, comprising a new Art. III, Hotel Tax. 
 
Sec. 16-30. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section: 
Hotel means any building or buildings in which the public may, for a consideration, obtain living quarters, sleeping or housekeeping accommodations. The term includes inns, motels, tourist homes or courts, lodging houses, rooming houses and apartment houses. 
Occupancy means the use or possession, the right to use or possession, of any room or rooms in a hotel for any purpose, or the right to the use or possession of the furnishings or to the services and accommodations accompanying the use and possession of the room or rooms. 
Operator means any person operating a hotel. 
Permanent residence means any person who occupies or has the right to occupy any room or rooms in a hotel for at least thirty (30) consecutive days. 
Person means any natural individual, firm, partnership association, joint stock company, joint venture, public or private corporation or a receiver, executor, trustee, guardian or other representative appointed by order of any court. 
Rent or rental means the consideration received for occupancy, valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits and property or services of any kind or nature. 
Room or rooms means any living quarters, sleeping or housekeeping accommodations. 
(Ord. No. 1901, § 1, 10-6-86)  
Sec. 16-31. - Imposed. 
There is hereby imposed a tax upon all persons engaged in the City of West Chicago in the business of renting, leasing or letting rooms in a hotel at a rate of five (5) percent of the gross rental receipts from such renting, leasing or letting, excluding, however, from gross rental receipts, the proceeds of such renting, leasing or letting to a permanent resident of that hotel. 
(Ord. No. 1901, § 1, 10-6-86; Ord. No. 08-O-007, § 1, 2-4-2008, eff. 5-1-2008)  
Sec. 16-32. - Reimbursement for tax liability. 
The amounts collected by this hotel tax, by the City of West Chicago, shall be expended by the city solely to promote tourism and conventions within the city or otherwise to attract nonresident overnight visitors to the city. 
(Ord. No. 1901, § 1, 10-6-86)  
Sec. 16-33. - Expenditures of tax collected by city. 
The amounts collected by this hotel tax, by the City of West Chicago, shall be expended by the city solely to promote tourism and conventions within the city or otherwise to attract nonresident overnight visitors to the city. Special events are added to the list of permitted expenditures for hotel tax receipts. 
(Ord. No. 1901, § 1, 10-6-86; Ord. No. 08-O-007, § 2, 2-4-2008)  
Sec. 16-34. - Administration and enforcement; collection. 
The city administrator is hereby charged with the responsibility of administering and enforcing the tax and to provide reasonable means and procedures for the collection of the tax for persons subject to this tax. 
(Ord. No. 1901, § 1, 10-6-86) 
Cross reference— Amended Ord. No. 1933, adopted May 4, 1987, amended Ch. 16 by adding thereto a new Art. III, §§ 16-30—16-39. Inasmuch as there already existed an Art. III, §§ 16-30—16-34, the editor has redesignated the provisions of the ordinance as Art. IV, §§ 16-40—16-49.  
Secs. 16-35—16-39. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - UTILITY TAX 
 
Sec. 16-40. - Imposed. 
A tax is imposed on all persons engaged in the following occupations or privileges: 
(a)  Persons engaged in the business of transmitting messages by means of electricity, at the rate of five (5) percent of the gross receipts from such business originating within the corporate limits of the city. The tax provided for in this subsection shall be ineffective and shall not be imposed during such time as the tax imposed by section 16-50 of this Code is in effect. In addition, if the tax provided for in subsection (a)(2) of section 16-50 of this Code is declared unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, but the tax provided for in subsection (a)(1) of section 16-50 of this Code remains in full force and effect, the tax provided for in section 16-40(a) of this Code shall not be imposed. 
(b)  Persons engaged in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing, or selling electricity for use or consumption within the corporate limits of West Chicago, and not for resale, at the rate of five (5) percent of the gross receipts therefrom; provided, however, that said tax shall not be imposed with respect to distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling electricity where the privilege of using or consuming said electricity is subject to the tax imposed under subsection (d) hereof. 
(c)  [Rates:] 
(1)  Persons engaged in the privilege of using or consuming electricity acquired in a purchase at retail and used or consumed within the corporate limits of the city at the following rates, calculated on a monthly basis for each purchaser: 
a.  For the first 2,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month; 0.555 cents per kilowatt-hour; 
b.  For the next 48,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month; 0.384 cents per kilowatt-hour; 
c.  For the next 50,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month; 0.383 cents per kilowatt-hour; 
d.  For the next 400,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month; 0.323 cents per kilowatt-hour; 
e.  For the next 500,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month; 0.238 cents per kilowatt-hour; 
f.  For the next 2,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month; 0.237 cents per kilowatt-hour; 
g.  For the next 2,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month; 0.005 cents per kilowatt-hour; 
h.  For the next 5,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month; 0.004 cents per kilowatt-hour; 
i.  For the next 10,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month; 0.003 cents per kilowatt-hour; and 
j.  For all electricity used or consumed in excess of 20,000,000 kilowatt-hours in a month; 0.002 cents per kilowatt-hour. 
(2)  Subject to the provisions of subsection (d)(5) hereof, regarding the delivery of electricity to resellers, the tax imposed under this subsection (d) shall be collected from purchasers by the person maintaining a place of business in this state who delivers electricity to such purchasers. This tax shall constitute a debt of the purchaser to the person who delivers the electricity to the purchaser and is recoverable at the same time and in the same manner as the original charge for delivering the electricity. 
(3)  Any tax required to be collected by this subsection (d), and any tax in fact collected, shall constitute a debt owed to the city by the person delivering the electricity, provided, that the person delivering the electricity shall be allowed credit for such tax related to deliveries of electricity the charges for which are written off as uncollectible, and provided further, that if such charges are thereafter collected, the delivering supplier shall be obligated to remit such tax. 
(4)  Persons delivering electricity shall collect the tax from the purchaser by adding such tax to the gross charge for delivering the electricity. Persons delivering electricity shall also be authorized to add to such gross charge an amount equal to three (3) percent of the tax they collect to reimburse them for their expenses incurred in keeping records, billing customers, preparing and filing returns, remitting the tax and supplying data to the city upon request. For purposes of this subsection (d), any partial payment of a billed amount not specifically identified by the purchaser shall be deemed to be for the delivery of electricity. 
(5)  Electricity that is delivered to a person in this city shall be considered to be for use and consumption by that person unless the person receiving the electricity has an active resale number issued by the city and furnishes that number to the person who delivers the electricity, and certifies to that person that the sale is either entirely or partially nontaxable as a sale for resale. 
a.  If a person who receives electricity in the city claims to be an authorized reseller of electricity, that person shall apply to the city for a resale number. The applicant shall state facts showing why it is not liable for the tax imposed by this subsection (d) on any purchases of electricity and shall furnish such additional information as the city may reasonably require. 
b.  Upon approval of the application, the city shall assign a resale number to the applicant and shall certify the number to the applicant. 
c.  The city may cancel the resale number of any person if the person fails to pay any tax payable under this subsection (d) for electricity used or consumed by the person; if the number was obtained through misrepresentation; and/or if the number is no longer necessary because the person has discontinued making resales. 
d.  If a reseller has acquired electricity partly for use or consumption and partly for resale, the reseller shall pay the tax imposed pursuant to this subsection (d) directly to the city as to the amount of electricity that the reseller uses or consumes, and shall collect and remit said tax as to the amount of electricity delivered by the reseller to a purchaser. 
e.  Any person who delivers electricity to a reseller having an active resale number and complying with all other conditions of this section shall be excused from collecting and remitting the tax on any portion of the electricity delivered to the reseller, provided that the person reports to the city the total amount of electricity delivered to the reseller, and such other information that the city may reasonably require. 
(Ord. No. 1933, 5-4-87; Ord. No. 4112, § 1, 7-6-98; Ord. No. 4114, § 1, 7-20-98; Ord. No. 4150, § 1, 1-18-99; Ord. No. 4398, §§ 1, 2, 2-19-2001; Ord. No. 04-O-0094, § 1, 9-7-2004)  
Sec. 16-41. - Exceptions; savings clause. 
No tax is imposed by this ordinance with respect to any transaction in interstate commerce or otherwise to the extent to which such business may not, under the constitution and statutes of the United States, be made subject to taxation by this state or any political subdivision thereof; nor shall any persons engaged in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling gas, or electricity, or engaged in the business of transmitting messages be subject to taxation under the provisions of this ordinance for such transactions as are or may become subject to taxation under the provisions of the "Municipal Retailers' Occupation Tax Act" authorized by section 8-11-1 of the Illinois Municipal Code. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this article is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court or [of] competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining provisions hereof. 
(Ord. No. 1933, 5-4-87; Ord. No. 4112, § 2, 7-6-98)  
Sec. 16-42. - Utility tax additional. 
Such tax shall be in addition to the payment of money, or value of products or services furnished to this municipality by the taxpayer as compensation for the use of its streets, alleys, or other public places, or installation and maintenance therein, thereon or thereunder of poles, wires, pipes or other equipment used in the operation of the taxpayers' business. 
(Ord. No. 1933, 5-4-87)  
Sec. 16-43. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article the following definitions shall apply: 
Gross receipts means the consideration received for the transmission of messages, or for distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling gas or electricity for use or consumption and not for resale, as the case may be; and for all services rendered in connection therewith valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including case, credit, services and property of every kind and material and for all services rendered therewith; and shall be determined without any deduction on account of the cost of transmitting said messages without any deduction on account of the cost of the service, product or commodity supplied, the cost of materials used, labor or service costs, or any other expenses whatsoever. 
The term "gross receipts" shall not include any charges added to customer's bills pursuant to the provisions of sections 9-221 or 9-222 of the Illinois Public Utilities Act or any other separately stated charge added to the customers' bills in respect of any tax or other governmental imposition. 
Person means any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association, joint stock company, joint adventure, corporation, municipal corporation or political subdivision of this state, or a receiver, trustee, conservator or other representative appointed by order of any court. 
Person maintaining a place of business in this state means any person having or maintaining within this state, directly or by subsidiary or other affiliate, an office, generation facility, distribution facility, transmission facility, sales office or other place of business, or any employee, agent, or other representative operating within this state under the authority of the person or its subsidiary or other affiliate, irrespective of whether such place of business or agent or other representative is located in this state permanently or temporarily, or whether such person, subsidiary or other affiliate is licensed or qualified to do business in this state. 
Purchase at retail means any acquisition of electricity by a purchaser for purpose of use or consumption, and not for resale, but shall not include the use of electricity by a public utility, as defined in section 8-11-2 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-2), directly in the generation, production, transmission, delivery or sale of electricity. 
Purchaser means any person who uses or consumes, within the corporate limits of the city, electricity acquired in a purchase at retail. 
Tax collector means the person delivering electricity to the purchaser. 
Taxpayer means persons (as defined above) engaged in those activities listed in section 16-30 to this chapter. 
Transmitting messages, in addition to the usual and popular meaning of person to person communication, shall include the furnishing, for a consideration, of services or facilities (whether owned or leased), or both, to persons in connection with the transmission of messages where such persons do not, in turn, receive any consideration in connection therewith, but shall not include such furnishing of services or facilities to persons for the transmission of messages to the extent that any such services or facilities for the transmission of messages are furnished for a consideration, by such persons to other persons, for the transmission of messages. 
(Ord. No. 1933, 5-4-87; Ord. No. 1991, § 1, 9-8-87; Ord. No. 4112, § 3, 7-6-98)  
Sec. 16-44. - Effective date of article; basis for tax. 
The tax shall take effect after publication and the tax provided for herein shall be based on the gross receipts, as herein defined, actually paid to the taxpayer for services billed on or after the first day of July, 1987. The tax under section 16-40(d) of this article shall be imposed with respect to the use or consumption of electricity by residential customers beginning with the first bill issued to such customers on or after September 1, 1998; and with respect to the use or consumption of electricity by nonresidential customers beginning with the first bill issued to such customers for delivery services in accordance with section 16-104 of the Public Utilities Act (220 ILCS 5/16-104), or the first bill issued to such customers on or after January 1, 2001, whichever issuance occurs sooner. 
(Ord. No. 1933, 5-4-87; Ord. No. 4112, § 4, 7-6-98);  
Sec. 16-45. - Tax return required, payment of tax. 
(a)  On or before the last day of each and every month, each taxpayer and/or tax collector, shall make a return to the city administrator, or the city administrator's designee, for the calendar month preceding the month in which the return is to be made, stating: 
(1)  The name of the taxpayer or tax collector; 
(2)  The principal place of business of the taxpayer or tax collector; 
(3)  The gross receipts of the taxpayer; except with respect to the tax imposed under section 16-40(d), in which case the return shall state the number of kilowatt-hours, within each of the categories set forth therein, sold by the tax collector to the taxpayers, and in the event that the taxpayer is required to pay the tax imposed under section 16-40(d) directly to the city, the number of kilowatt-hours within each of said categories used or consumed by the taxpayer; 
(4)  The amount of tax; and 
(5)  Such other reasonable information as the city administrator may require. 
(b)  At the time of filing said return, the taxpayer or the tax collector, as the case may be, shall pay to the city the amount of the tax imposed pursuant to this article; provided, however, that a taxpayer being taxed on the basis of gross receipts may elect to report and pay an amount of tax based upon the total billings subject to the tax during the period for which the return is made, exclusive of any amounts previously billed, with prompt adjustments of later payments based upon any differences between such billings and the taxable gross receipts. 
(c)  Every taxpayer and/or tax collector required to pay the tax imposed by this article shall keep accurate books and records of its business or activities, including contemporaneous books and records denoting the transactions that gave rise, or may have given rise, to any tax liability under this article. Said books and records shall be subject to and available for inspection by the city and/or its designated agents at all times during the business hours of the taxpayer and/or tax collector. 
(Ord. No. 1933, 5-4-87; Ord. No. 4112, § 5, 7-6-98)  
Sec. 16-46. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Former § 16-46 was deleted by § 1 of Ord. No. 2268, adopted Mar. 12, 1990. The deleted provision's pertained to the termination of Ord. No. 1933 and derived from Ord. No. 1933, adopted May 4, 1987.  
Sec. 16-47. - Erroneous payments; time limit on filing claim. 
If it shall appear that an amount of tax has been paid which was not due under the provisions of this article, whether as the result of a mistake of fact or an error of law, then such amount shall be credited against any tax due, or to become due, under this article, from the taxpayer who made the erroneous payment; provided that no amounts erroneously paid more than three (3) years prior to the filing of a claim therefore shall be so credited. 
(Ord. No. 1933, 5-4-87)  
Sec. 16-48. - Action to recover tax due; time limit. 
No action to recover any amount of tax due under the provisions of this article shall be commenced more than three (3) years after the due date of such amount. 
(Ord. No. 1933, 5-4-87)  
Sec. 16-49. - Failure to make return; violation of article; penalty. 
Any taxpayer who fails to make a return, or who makes a fraudulent return, or who willfully violates any other provision of this article is guilty of an ordinance violation and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) and, in addition, shall be liable in a civil action for the amount of tax due. Nothing in this article shall be construed as limiting any additional or further remedies that the city may have relating to the enforcement of this article, or the collection of the amount of any tax due hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 1933, 5-4-87; Ord. No. 4112, § 6, 7-6-98)  
ARTICLE V. - MUNICIPAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS TAX 
 
Sec. 16-50. - Tax imposed. 
(a)  A tax is hereby imposed upon: 
(1)  The act or privilege of originating in the city or receiving in the city intrastate telecommunications by a person at a rate of five (5) percent of the gross charge for such telecommunications purchased at retail from a retailer by such person; and 
(2)  The act or privilege of originating in the city or receiving in the city interstate telecommunications by a person at a rate of five (5) percent of the gross charge for such telecommunications purchased at retail from a retailer by such person. To prevent actual multi-state taxation of the act or privilege that is subject to taxation under this subsection, any taxpayer, upon proof that the taxpayer has paid a tax in another state on the same event, shall be allowed a credit against the tax authorized by this subsection to the extent of the amount of such tax properly due and paid in another state which was not previously allowed as a credit against any other state or local tax in Illinois. 
(b)  Carrier access charges, right of access charges, charges for use of inter-company facilities, and all telecommunications resold in the subsequent provision used as a component of, or integrated into, end-to-end telecommunications service shall be nontaxable under this article as sales for resale. 
(c)  The tax imposed by this article is not imposed on any act or privilege to the extent that such act or privilege may not, under the Constitution or statutes of the United States, be made the subject of taxation by the city. 
(d)  The tax imposed by this article shall be known as the "municipal telecommunications tax" and is imposed in addition to all other taxes imposed by the city, the State of Illinois or any other municipal corporation or political subdivision thereof. 
(Ord. No. 4150, § 2, 1-18-99)  
Sec. 16-51. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following definitions shall apply: 
Amount paid means the amount charged to the taxpayer's service address in the city regardless of where such amount is billed or paid. 
Gross charge means the amount paid for the act or privilege of originating or receiving telecommunications in the city and for all services rendered in connection therewith, valued in money, whether paid in money or otherwise, including cash, credits, services and property of every kind or nature, and shall be determined without any deduction on account of the cost of such telecommunications, the cost of the materials used, labor or service costs or any other expense whatsoever. In case credit is extended, the amount thereof shall be included only as and when paid. However, "gross charge" shall not include: 
(1)  Any amounts added to a purchaser's bill because of a charge made pursuant to: (i) the tax imposed by this article, (ii) additional charges added to a purchaser's bill pursuant to section 9-222 of the Illinois Public Utilities Act, (iii) the tax imposed by the Illinois Telecommunications Excise Tax Act, or (iv) the tax imposed by section 4251 of the Internal Revenue Code; 
(2)  Charges for a sent collect telecommunication received outside of the city; 
(3)  Charges for leased time on equipment or charges for the storage of data or information or subsequent retrieval or the processing of data or information intended to change its form or content. Such equipment includes, but is not limited to, the use of calculators, computers, data processing equipment, tabulating equipment or accounting equipment and also includes the usage of computers under a time-sharing agreement; 
(4)  Charges for customer equipment, including such equipment that is leased or rented by the customer from any source, wherein such charges are disaggregated and separately identified from other charges; 
(5)  Charges to business enterprises certified under section 9-222.1 of the Illinois Public Utilities Act to the extent of such exemption and during the period of time specified by the Illinois Department of Commerce and Community Affairs; 
(6)  Charges for telecommunications and all services and equipment provided in connection therewith between a parent corporation and its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries when the tax imposed under this article has already been paid to a retailer and only to the extent that the charges between the parent corporation and wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries represent expense allocation between the corporations and not the generation of profit for the corporation rendering such service; 
(7)  Bad debts ("bad debt" means any portion of a debt that is related to a sale at retail for which gross charges are not otherwise deductible or excludable that has become worthless or uncollectible, as determined under applicable federal income tax standards; if the portion of the debt deemed to be bad is subsequently paid, the retailer shall report and pay the tax on that portion during the reporting period in which the payment is made); or 
(8)  Charges paid by inserting coins in coin-operated telecommunications devices. 
(9)  Amounts paid by telecommunications retailers under the Illinois Telecommunications Municipal Infrastructure Maintenance Fee Act. 
Interstate telecommunications means all telecommunications that either originate or terminate outside this state. 
Interstate telecommunications means all telecommunications that originate and terminate within this State. 
Person means any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association, joint stock company, joint venture, corporation, or a receiver, trustee, guardian or other representative appointed by order of any court, the federal and state governments, including state universities created by statute, or any city, town, county or other political subdivision of this state. 
Purchase at retail means the acquisition, consumption or use of telecommunications through a sale at retail. 
Retailer means every person engaged in the business of making sales at retail as defined this article. 
Retailer maintaining a place of business in this state, or any like term, means and includes any retailer having or maintaining within this state, directly or by a subsidiary, an office, distribution facilities, transmission facilities, sales office, warehouse or other place of business, or any agent or other representative operating within this state under the authority of the retailer or its subsidiary, irrespective of whether such place of business or agent or other representative is located here permanently or temporarily, or whether such retailer or subsidiary is licensed to do business in this state. 
Sale at retail means the transmitting, supplying or furnishing of telecommunications and all services rendered in connection therewith for a consideration, to persons other than the federal and state governments, and state universities created by statute and other than between a parent corporation and its wholly owned subsidiaries, or between wholly owned subsidiaries, when the tax has already been paid to a retailer and the gross charge made by one such corporation to another such corporation is not greater than the gross charge paid to the retailer for their use or consumption and not for resale. 
Service address means the location of telecommunications equipment from which telecommunications services are originated or at which telecommunications services are received by a taxpayer. If this is not a defined location, as in the case of mobile phones, paging systems, maritime systems, air-to-ground systems and the like, "service address" shall mean the location of a taxpayer's primary use of the telecommunications equipment as defined by telephone number, authorization code, or location in Illinois where bills are sent. 
Taxpayer means a person who individually or through his agents, employees or permittees engages in the act or privilege of originating in the city or receiving in the city telecommunications and who incurs a tax liability under this article. 
Telecommunications, in addition to the usual and popular meaning, includes, but is not limited to, messages or information transmitted through use of local, toll and wide area telephone service, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter service, computer exchange services, cellular mobile telecommunications service, specialized mobile radio services, paging service, or any other form of mobile and portable one-way or two-way communications, or any other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar means, between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite or similar facilities. The definition of "telecommunications" shall not include value added services in which computer processing applications are used to act on the form, content, code and protocol of the information for purposes other than transmission. "Telecommunications" shall not include purchase of telecommunications by a telecommunications service provider for use as a component part of the service provided by him to the ultimate retail consumer who originates or terminates the taxable end-to-end communications. 
(Ord. No. 4150, § 2, 1-18-99)  
Sec. 16-52. - Collection of tax by retailers. 
(a)  [Generally.] 
(1)  The tax authorized by this article shall be collected from the taxpayer by a retailer maintaining a place of business in Illinois and making or effectuating a sale at retail and shall be remitted by such retailer to the city. 
(2)  Any tax required to be collected pursuant to this article and any such tax collected by such retailer shall constitute a debt owed by the retailer to the city. 
(3)  Retailers shall collect the tax from the taxpayer by adding the tax to the gross charge for the act or privilege of originating or receiving telecommunications when sold for use in the manner prescribed by this article. 
(4)  The tax authorized by this article shall constitute a debt of the purchaser to the retailer who provides such taxable services until paid and, if unpaid, is recoverable at law in the same manner as the original charge for such taxable service. 
(5)  If the retailer fails to collect the tax from a taxpayer, then the taxpayer shall pay the tax directly to the city as provided in this article. 
(b)  The city shall, upon application, authorize the collection of the tax imposed by this article by any retailer not maintaining a place of business in Illinois who, to the satisfaction of the director of finance, furnishes adequate security to insure collection and payment of the tax. Such retailer shall be issued, without charge, a permit to collect the tax imposed by this article. When so authorized, it shall be the duty of the retailer to collect the tax upon all of the gross charges for telecommunications originated or received in the city in the same manner, and subject to the same requirements, as a retailer maintaining a place of business in Illinois. 
(c)  The tax authorized by this article shall, when collected, be stated as a distinct item separate and apart from the gross charge for telecommunications. 
(Ord. No. 4150, § 2, 1-18-99)  
Sec. 16-53. - Registration. 
(a)  Every retailer maintaining a place of business in Illinois on the effective date of this article shall register with the city within thirty (30) days after that date. 
(b)  Every person becoming a retailer maintaining a place of business in Illinois after the effective date of this article shall register with the city within thirty (30) days after commencing that business. 
(Ord. No. 4150, § 2, 1-18-99)  
Sec. 16-54. - Filing returns and remittance by retailers. 
On or before the last day of each calendar month, every retailer maintaining a place of business in Illinois and every retailer authorized by the director of finance to collect the tax imposed by this article shall file with the city a tax return and remit all applicable tax for the preceding calendar month. The return shall be filed on a form prescribed by the director of finance, containing such information as the director of finance may reasonably require. 
(Ord. No. 4150, § 2, 1-18-99)  
Sec. 16-55. - Filing returns, payments by taxpayers. 
(a)  If a retailer fails to collect the tax authorized by this article from a taxpayer, then the taxpayer shall pay the tax directly to the city. 
(b)  On or before the last day of each calendar month, every taxpayer that has not paid the tax imposed by this article to a retailer shall file with the city a tax return and pay the tax upon the gross charges the taxpayer paid to the retailer during the preceding calendar month. The return shall be filed on a form prescribed by the director of finance, containing such information as the director of finance may reasonably require. 
(c)  When a taxpayer pays the tax imposed by this article directly to the city, the city, at the request of the taxpayer, shall issue an appropriate receipt to the taxpayer showing the amount of tax paid. 
(Ord. No. 4150, § 2, 1-18-99)  
Sec. 16-56. - Resale numbers. 
(a)  If a person who originates or receives telecommunications in the city claims to be a reseller of telecommunications, that person shall apply to the city for a resale number. The applicant shall state facts showing why it is not liable for the tax imposed by this article on any purchases of telecommunications and shall furnish such additional information as the city reasonably requires. 
(b)  Upon approval of the application, the city shall assign a resale number to the applicant and shall certify the number to the applicant. 
(c)  The city may cancel the resale number of any person if the number: 
(1)  Was obtained through misrepresentation; 
(2)  Is used to originate or receive telecommunications tax-free when such telecommunications are not for resale; or 
(3)  Is no longer necessary because the person has discontinued making resales. 
(4)  The act or privilege of originating or receiving telecommunications in the city shall not be made tax-free on the ground of being a sale for resale unless the person has an active resale number issued by the city and furnishes that number to the retailer in connection with certifying to the retailer that a sale is nontaxable as a sale for resale. 
(Ord. No. 4150, § 2, 1-18-99)  
Sec. 16-57. - Maintaining books and records. 
Every retailer maintaining a place of business in Illinois, every retailer authorized by the city to collect the tax imposed by this article, and every taxpayer shall keep accurate books and records of its business or activity, including original source documents and books of entry denoting the transaction that gave rise, or may have given rise, to any tax liability or exemption. All such books and records shall be kept in the English language and, at all times during business hours of the day, shall be subject to and available for inspection by the city. 
(Ord. No. 4150, § 2, 1-18-99)  
Sec. 16-58. - Forms. 
The director of finance is authorized to adopt or promulgate such forms as may be appropriate and which pertain to the administration of this article. 
(Ord. No. 4150, § 2, 1-18-99)  
Sec. 16-59. - Severability and status of 65 ILCS 5/8-11-17. 
(a)  If any provision of this article or the application thereof is held unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, such occurrence shall not affect other provisions of this article, or their application, that can be given effect without the unconstitutional or invalid provision or its application. Each unconstitutional or invalid provision, or application of such provision, is severable, unless otherwise provided by this article. In particular, if subsection (a)(2) of section 16-50 of this Code is declared unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, the tax imposed under subsection (a)(1) of section 16-50 of this Code shall remain in full force and effect. 
(b)  If 65 ILCS 5/8-11-17 is repealed, or becomes ineffective for any reason, the tax imposed on persons described in section 16-40(a) of this Code, declared ineffective in favor of this article, by section 2 of the ordinance enacting this article, shall be deemed to be in full force and effect as of the date 65 ILCS 5/8-11-17 is repealed or becomes ineffective. 
(Ord. No. 4150, § 2, 1-18-99)  
ARTICLE VI. - AMUSEMENT TAX 
 
Sec. 16-60. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply. 
Amusement shall mean any and all participatory, spectator and exhibitive entertainments, including but not limited to the following activities: any theatrical; dramatic, musical or spectator performance; motion picture shows and concerts; carnivals, amusement park rides, and circuses; athletic contests, sports or games; golf activities, including but not limited to greens fees and driving range fees, as well as the equipment rental associated with such; bowling (lineage only, not including locker and shoe rental); and video movies, video and/or pinball games (excluding coin operated devices). 
Gross receipts shall mean all fees or charges received in the form of fees or charges for admission to any facility and/or use or rental of any facility or equipment (unless otherwise specified in this article) for the purpose of witnessing, participating in, or utilizing any amusement, regardless of whether such fees or charges are characterized as admission fees, membership fees, use charges, rental or service charges. Gross receipts shall be exclusive of any tax imposed by the United States Government, the State of Illinois, or any other governmental unit. A fee or charge which entitles the patrons in any amusement operated within the corporate limits of the city to bona fide services in addition to, or unrelated to the witnessing or participating in the amusement, shall not be subject to the tax provided for in this chapter, except however: 
(1)  Where a fee or charge is comprised of identified components, packages or tiers, the tax provided for herein shall be imposed on any such components, packages or tiers solely for admission to any facility and/or the use of any facility or equipment for the purpose of witnessing or participating in any amusement; and, 
(2)  Where a single fee or charge for admission to any facility and/or the use of any facility or equipment for the purpose of witnessing or participating in any amusement also entitles the patron of the amusement to the incidental use of parking, restaurant, bar, refreshment, locker room, changing room, washroom and/or shower facilities or services, the tax provide for herein shall be imposed on such fee or charge, in connection with the predominant activity of such facility which is an amusement. 
Person shall include any individual, firm, partnership, associate, joint stock company, joint venture corporation, a receiver, trustee, conservator or other representative designated or appointed by any order of any court but shall not include school districts, park districts, library districts, fire protection districts or any duly recognized not-for-profit corporations. 
Video movie means videotape, videodisc or any other similarly formatted copy of a motion picture film, television show, or other similar exhibition, generally offered for sale or rental to customers. 
(Ord. No. 03-O-0117, § 1, 1-5-2004; Ord. No. 07-O-0105, § 5, 12-7-2007, eff. 1-1-2008; Ord. No. 09-O-0034, § 1, 6-15-2009; Ord. No. 09-O-0044, § 1, 7-20-2009)  
Sec. 16-61. - Tax amount. 
A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the operation of amusements, as defined herein, and upon persons operating places of amusement within the corporate limits of the city, in an amount equal to two (2) percent of the gross receipts, as defined herein. 
(Ord. No. 03-O-0117, § 1, 1-5-2004; Ord. No. 09-O-0034, § 2, 6-15-2009; Ord. No. 09-O-0044, § 1, 7-20-2009)  
Sec. 16-62. - Time of payment. 
The tax imposed herein shall be due and payable on the twenty-fifth day of the month following the preceding calendar month during which the gross receipts were received. The tax shall be paid and collected by the administrative services director on forms provided by the city. 
(Ord. No. 03-O-0117, § 1, 1-5-2004; Ord. No. 09-O-0044, § 1, 7-20-2009)  
Sec. 16-63. - Books and records; sale or transfer of amusement; notice; maintenance of records; final audit. 
Each person required to pay the tax provided for hereunder shall either personally or through his authorized agents, maintain complete books and records covering the operations of the amusement so taxed, indicating therein all receipts from the operation of said business, as herein defined. Such books and records shall be maintained on the premises wherein the amusement is so located and shall be subject to inspection by the city or its authorized agents at all reasonable times. 
Upon completion of any final audit, the books and records so maintained may be removed from the corporate limits of the city prior to the expiration of the six-month period provided for herein above with the prior written approval of the administrative services director. Said books and records, however, shall be maintained for a period of three (3) calendar years. 
(Ord. No. 03-O-0117, § 1, 1-5-2004; Ord. No. 09-O-0044, § 1, 7-20-2009)  
Sec. 16-64. - Reports. 
On or before the twenty-fifth day of each month, each person liable for the payment of a tax hereunder shall file with the administrative services director a written report in such form as the administrative services director may from time to time provide, stating the gross receipts collected during the preceding month in the form of fees or charges as herein defined. 
(Ord. No. 03-O-0117, § 1, 1-5-2004; Ord. No. 09-O-0044, § 1, 7-20-2009)  
Sec. 16-65. - Penalty. 
Any person who shall fail or refuse to pay any required tax or who shall fail to complete or allow the inspection of any books and records required herein, or who shall fail to file the written report of the gross receipts collected during the preceding month, or who shall willfully and knowingly maintain false books or falsely report the gross receipts taxed hereunder or shall otherwise violate any terms of this chapter shall be liable for the penalty and fines provided for in chapter 16 of the City Code. In addition, if any violation is not corrected within ten (10) days after written notice from the administrative services director, the person responsible for the operation of the amusement or operating the place(s) of amusement in violation hereof will be prohibited from operating the same for a period of thirty (30) days or, until the violation is corrected. In addition, the city may bring legal action to compel an accounting for, and payment of, all taxes required to be paid over pursuant to this section or for any other violation of this section of the City Code. The city, in addition to the recovery of the taxes due hereunder, shall be entitled to recover interest on the delinquent taxes at a rate of one-and-a-half (1.50) percent per month and the legal fees incurred in connection with the enforcement of this Code provision. 
In addition to any other relief granted by the courts, any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be subject to a fine per section 1-8, general penalty, of this Code. 
For purposes of this subsection, and in determining the appropriate amount due hereunder: 
a.  A separate offense shall be determined to have been committed each day during which or on which the violation occurs or continues. 
b.  All violations of any provision of this article that are committed by the same person, or any firm controlled by such person, shall be counted, regardless of whether or not the violations occur at the same location. 
c.  Any finding or plea of guilty or no contest upon a citation shall be deemed a violation. 
(Ord. No. 03-O-0117, § 1, 1-5-2004; Ord. No. 07-O-0017, § 6, 4-16-2007; Ord. No. 09-O-0044, § 1, 7-20-2009)  
Secs. 16-66—16-74. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - MUNICIPAL GAS USE TAX 
 
Sec. 16-75. - Short title. 
The tax imposed by this article shall be known as the "Municipal Gas Use Tax" and is imposed in addition to all other taxes imposed by the City of West Chicago, the State of Illinois, or any other municipal corporation or political subdivision thereof. 
(Ord. No. 04-O-0094, § 3, 9-7-2004)  
Sec. 16-76. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply: 
Person means any individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association, joint stock company, joint venture, corporation, limited liability company, municipal corporation or political subdivision of this state, or a receiver, trustee, conservator or other representative appointed by order or any court. 
Public utility means a public utility as defined in section 3-105 of the Public Utilities Act. 
Public Utilities Act means the Public Utility Act as amended, (220 ILCS 5/1-101 et seq. (1996)). 
Retail purchaser means any person who purchases gas in a sale at retail. 
Sale at retail means any sale of gas by a retailer to a person for use or consumption, and not for resale. For this purpose, the term "retailer" means any person engaged in the business of distribution, supplying, furnishing or selling gas. 
(Ord. No. 04-O-0094, § 3, 9-7-2004)  
Sec. 16-77. - Tax. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided by this article, a tax is imposed on the privilege of using or consuming gas in the city that is purchased in a sale at retail at the rate of (1) two and one-half cents ($0.025) per therm with respect to all bills issued on or after November 1, 2004 through and including September 30, 2018 and (2) three and one-half cents ($0.035) per therm with respect to all bills issued on or after October 1, 2018; provided, however, that any amounts due or payable for any tax periods ending prior to October 1, 2018 are nevertheless to remain payable as if the rate had not been increased for bills issued on or after October 1, 2018. 
(b)  The ultimate incidence of and liability for payment of the tax is on the retail purchaser, and nothing in this article shall be construed to impose a tax on the occupation of distributing, supplying, furnishing, selling or transporting gas. 
(c)  The retail purchaser shall pay the tax, measured by therms of gas delivered to the retail purchaser's premises, to the public utility designated to collect the tax pursuant to section 16-78 of this article on or before the payment due date of the public utility's bill first reflecting the tax, or directly to the city clerk on or before the 15th day of the second month following the month in which the gas is delivered to the retail purchaser if no public utility has been designated to collect the tax pursuant to section 16-78 or if the gas is delivered by a person other than a public utility so designated. 
(d)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to impose a tax upon any person, business or activity which, under the constitutions of the United States or State of Illinois, may not be made the subject of taxation by the city. 
(e)  A person who purchases gas for resale and therefore does not pay the tax imposed by this article with respect to the use or consumption of the gas, but who later uses or consumes part or all of the gas, shall pay the tax directly to the city clerk on or before the 15th day of the second month following the month in which the gas is used or consumed. 
(f)  The tax shall apply to gas for which the delivery to the retail purchaser is billed by a public utility on or after November 1, 2004. 
(g)  If it shall appear that an amount of tax has been paid which was not due under the provisions of this article, whether as a result of mistake of fact or an error of law, then such amount shall be (i) credited against any tax due, or to become due, under this article from the taxpayer who made the erroneous payment or (ii) subject to a refund if no such tax is due or to become due; provided that no amounts erroneously paid more than three (3) years prior to the filing of a claim therefore shall be so credited or refunded. 
(h)  No action to recover any amount of tax due under the provisions of this article shall be commenced more than three (3) years after the due date of such amount. 
(i)  Reserved. 
(Ord. No. 04-O-0094, § 3, 9-7-2004; Ord. No. 04-O-0127, § 2, 11-1-2004; Ord. No. 06-O-0012, §§ 1, 2, 2-6-2006; Ord. No. 18-O-0043, § 1, 7-16-2018)  
Sec. 16-78. - Collection of tax. 
The director of administrative services is authorized to enter into a contract for collection of the tax imposed by this article with any public utility providing gas service in the city. The contract shall include and substantially conform with the following provisions: 
(1)  The public utility will collect the tax from retail purchasers as an independent contractor; 
(2)  The public utility will remit collected taxes to the city clerk no more often than once each month; 
(3)  The public utility will be entitled to withhold from tax collections a service fee equal to three (3) percent of the amounts collected and timely remitted to the city clerk; 
(4)  The public utility shall not be responsible to the city for any tax not actually collected from a retail purchaser; and 
(5)  Such additional terms as the parties may agree upon. 
(Ord. No. 04-O-0094, § 3, 9-7-2004; Ord. No. 18-O-0043, § 2, 7-16-2018)  
Sec. 16-79. - Books and records. 
Ever taxpayer shall keep accurate books and records, including original source documents and books of entry, denoting the activities or transactions that gave rise, or may have given rise to any tax liability or exemption under this article. All such books and records shall, at all times during business hours, be subject to and available for inspection by the city. 
(Ord. No. 04-O-0094, § 3, 9-7-2004)  
ARTICLE VIII. - MUNICIPAL MOTOR FUEL TAX 
 
Sec. 16-80. - Definitions. 
Unless the context otherwise requires, the following terms as used in this article shall be construed according to the definitions given below: 
Motor fuel shall mean all volatile and inflammable liquids produced, blended or compounded for the purpose of, or which are suitable or practicable for, operating motor vehicles. 
Motor fuel retailer shall mean any person, firm or corporation that sells motor fuel. 
Person shall mean any individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association, joint stock company, joint venture, corporation, limited liability company, municipal corporation or political subdivision of this state, or a receiver, trustee, conservator or other representative appointed by order of any court. 
(Ord. No. 18-O-0032, § 1, 6-18-2018)  
Sec. 16-81. - Imposition of tax. 
Effective as of and commencing on September 1, 2018, a tax, in addition to any and all other taxes, is imposed upon the purchase of motor fuel at retail within the City of West Chicago at the rate of three cents ($0.03) per gallon or fraction thereof. The liability for payment of the tax shall be borne by the purchaser, and shall be in addition to any and all other taxes imposed. 
(Ord. No. 18-O-0032, § 1, 6-18-2018)  
Sec. 16-82. - Collection of tax by motor fuel retailer. 
The owner and the operator of each motor fuel retailer within the city shall jointly and severally have the duty to collect and account for said tax from each purchaser at the time that the consideration for purchase at retail is paid. 
(Ord. No. 18-O-0032, § 1, 6-18-2018)  
Sec. 16-83. - Books and records. 
The owner and operator of each motor fuel retailer within the city shall jointly and severally have the duty to maintain complete and accurate books, records and accounts showing the gross receipts for purchases of motor fuel and the taxes collected each day, which shall be made available to the city for examination and for audit by the city upon reasonable notice and during customary business hours. 
(Ord. No. 18-O-0032, § 1, 6-18-2018)  
Sec. 16-84. - Transmittal of tax collection. 
The owner and operator of each motor fuel retailer within the city shall jointly and severally have the duty to cause to be filed a sworn motor fuel tax return with the city for each motor fuel retailer location within the city. Said return shall be prepared and submitted in forms prescribed by the city and shall be filed with the city by the 25th day of each month. Said return shall also be accompanied by payment to the city of all taxes imposed by this article, which are due and owing for the period covered by the return. The return shall also be accompanied with a copy of the Illinois Department of Revenue Sales and Use Tax Return (ST-1) for sales within the city covering the same reporting period. 
(Ord. No. 18-O-0032, § 1, 6-18-2018)  
Sec. 16-85. - Allocation. 
All monies collected pursuant to this article shall allocated for road and bridge expenses within the general fund. 
(Ord. No. 18-O-0032, § 1, 6-18-2018)  
Sec. 16-86. - Late payment penalty. 
If any tax imposed by this article is not paid when due, a late payment penalty equal to two (2) percent of the unpaid tax shall be added for each month, or any portion thereof, that such tax remains unpaid, and the total of such late payment penalty shall be paid by the motor fuel retailer along with the tax imposed by this article. 
(Ord. No. 18-O-0032, § 1, 6-18-2018)  
Sec. 16-87. - Transmittal of excess tax collections. 
If any person collects an amount in excess of the tax imposed by this article, but which amount is purported to be a collection thereof, and does not return the same to the purchaser who paid the tax, the person who collected the tax shall account for said excess, report said excess collection to the city and pay those excess amounts to the city along with the tax properly collected. 
(Ord. No. 18-O-0032, § 1, 6-18-2018)  
Sec. 16-88. - Enforcement. 
Payment and collection of the tax imposed by this article, any late payment penalty, enforcement of any excess tax collected or any other violation of this article may be enforced by an action in any court of competent jurisdiction or the city's administrative adjudication system. 
(Ord. No. 18-O-0032, § 1, 6-18-2018)  
Sec. 16-89. - Penalty. 
Any person who shall fail or refuse to pay any required tax or who shall fail or refuse to complete or allow the inspection of any books and records required herein, or who shall fail or refuse to file the written report of the gross receipts collected during the preceding month, or who shall willfully and knowingly maintain false books or falsely report the gross receipts taxed hereunder or shall otherwise violate any terms of this chapter shall be liable for the penalty and fines detailed in the Code, in addition to paying the tax, penalties and fees required hereunder. In addition, the city may bring legal action to compel an accounting for, and payment of, all taxes required to be paid over pursuant to this section or for any other violation of this section of the Code. The city, in addition to the recovery of the taxes due hereunder, shall be entitled to recover interest on the delinquent taxes at a rate of one and one-half (1.50) percent per month and the legal fees incurred in connection with the enforcement of this Code provision. 
In addition to any other relief granted by the courts, any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be subject to a fine per section 1-8, general penalty, of this Code. 
For purposes of this subsection, and in determining the appropriate penalty or fine amount due hereunder: 
(1)  A separate offense shall be determined to have been committed each day during which or on which the violation occurs or continues. 
(2)  All violations of any provision of this article that are committed by the same person, or any firm controlled by such person, shall be counted, regardless of whether or not the violations occur at the same location. 
(3)  Any finding or plea of guilty or no contest upon a citation shall be deemed a violation. 
(Ord. No. 18-O-0032, § 1, 6-18-2018)  
Sec. 16-90. - Confidentiality. 
All information received by the city from returns filed pursuant to this article or from any investigations conducted pursuant to this article, except for official city purposes, or as required by the Freedom of Information Act, or otherwise required by law, shall be confidential. 
(Ord. No. 18-O-0032, § 1, 6-18-2018)  
ARTICLE IX. - RETAIL PACKAGE LIQUOR TAX 
 
Sec. 16-91. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article IX, unless the context otherwise requires, the following words or terms shall have the meanings respectively applied to them: 
Alcoholic liquor means any spirits, wine, beer, ale or other liquid containing more than one-half of one (0.5) percent of alcohol by volume, which is fit for beverage purposes. 
Alcoholic liquor facility means any establishment licensed under the provisions chapter 3 of the Code and that sells alcoholic liquor at retail. 
Package liquor means alcoholic liquor sold unopened at retail in its original package or container, and only for consumption off the retail premises. 
Person means any individual, firm or corporation, representative or entity. 
Purchase at retail means to obtain for use or consumption in exchange for a consideration, whether in the form of money, credits, barter or any other nature, and not for resale. 
Retailer means a person who sells or offers for sale, for use or consumption and not for resale, including but not limited to any owner or operator or of alcoholic liquor facility. 
(Ord. No. 18-O-0033, § 1, 6-18-2018)  
Sec. 16-92. - Imposition of tax. 
Effective as of and commencing on September 1, 2018, a tax, in addition to any and all other taxes, is imposed upon the purchase at retail of package liquor at the rate of two (2) percent of the purchase price, exclusive of any other tax imposed by this article IX on such alcoholic liquor. The liability for payment of the tax shall be borne by the purchaser. 
(Ord. No. 18-O-0033, § 1, 6-18-2018)  
Sec. 16-93. - Collection of tax by retailer. 
The owner and the operator of each alcoholic liquor facility within the city shall jointly and severally have the duty to collect and account for said taxes from each purchaser at the time that the consideration for such purchase at retail is paid. 
(Ord. No. 18-O-0033, § 1, 6-18-2018)  
Sec. 16-94. - Books and records. 
The owner and operator of each alcoholic liquor facility within the city shall jointly and severally have the duty to maintain complete and accurate books, records and accounts showing the gross receipts for purchases at retail of alcoholic liquor and the taxes collected each day, which shall be made available to the city for examination and for audit by the city upon reasonable notice and during customary business hours. 
(Ord. No. 18-O-0033, § 1, 6-18-2018)  
Sec. 16-95. - Transmittal of tax collection. 
The owner and operator of each alcoholic liquor facility within the city shall jointly and severally have the duty to cause to be filed with the director of administrative services a sworn return for each such facility. Said return shall be prepared and submitted in forms prescribed by the city. Said returns shall be filed with the city by the 25th day of each month. Said return shall also be accompanied by payment to the city of all taxes imposed by this article which are due and owing for the period covered by the return. The return shall also be accompanied with a copy of the return filed with the Illinois Department of Revenue for sales within the city covering the same reporting period. 
(Ord. No. 18-O-0033, § 1, 6-18-2018)  
Sec. 16-96. - Late payment penalty. 
If any tax imposed by this article is not paid when due, a late payment penalty equal to two (2) percent of the unpaid tax shall be added for each month, or any portion thereof, that such tax remains unpaid, and the total of such late payment penalty shall be paid along with the tax imposed by this article. 
(Ord. No. 18-O-0033, § 1, 6-18-2018)  
Sec. 16-97. - Transmittal of excess tax collections. 
If any person collects an amount in excess of the tax imposed by this article, but which amount is purported to be a collection thereof, and does not return the same to the purchaser who paid the tax, the person who collected the tax shall account for said excess, report said excess collection to the city and pay over those excess amounts to the city along with the tax properly collected. 
(Ord. No. 18-O-0033, § 1, 6-18-2018)  
Sec. 16-98. - Enforcement. 
Payment and collection of the tax imposed by this article, any late payment penalty, enforcement of any excess tax collected or any other violation of this article, may be enforced by an action in any court of competent jurisdiction or the city's administrative adjudication system. 
(Ord. No. 18-O-0033, § 1, 6-18-2018)  
Sec. 16-99. - Penalty. 
Any person who shall fail or refuse to pay any required tax or who shall fail or refuse to complete or allow the inspection of any books and records required herein, or who shall fail or refuse to file the written report of the gross receipts collected during the preceding month, or who shall willfully and knowingly maintain false books or falsely report the gross receipts taxed hereunder or shall otherwise violate any terms of this chapter shall be liable for the penalty and fines detailed in the Code, in addition to paying the tax, penalties and fees required hereunder. In addition, the city may bring legal action to compel an accounting for, and payment of, all taxes required to be paid over pursuant to this section or for any other violation of this section of the Code. The city, in addition to the recovery of the taxes due hereunder, shall be entitled to recover interest on the delinquent taxes at a rate of one and one-half (1.50) percent per month and the legal fees incurred in connection with the enforcement of this Code provision. 
In addition to any other relief granted by the courts, any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be subject to a fine per section 1-8, general penalty, of this Code. 
For purposes of this subsection, and in determining the appropriate amount due hereunder: 
(1)  A separate offense shall be determined to have been committed each day during which or on which the violation occurs or continues. 
(2)  All violations of any provision of this article that are committed by the same person, or any firm controlled by such person, shall be counted, regardless of whether or not the violations occur at the same location. 
(3)  Any finding or plea of guilty or no contest upon a citation shall be deemed a violation. 
(Ord. No. 18-O-0033, § 1, 6-18-2018)  
Sec. 16-100. - Confidentiality. 
All information received by the city from returns filed pursuant to this article or from any investigations conducted pursuant to this article, except for official city purposes, or as required by the Freedom of Information Act, or otherwise required by law, shall be confidential. 
(Ord. No. 18-O-0033, § 1, 6-18-2018)  
Chapter 17 - TRAFFIC[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 2125, adopted Feb. 21, 1989, deleted former Ch. 17 and § 2 of the ordinance enacted a new Ch. 17 to read as set out herein. Former Ch. 17 pertained to traffic and contained §§ 17-1—17-3, 17-16—17-20, 17-31—17-42, 17-56—17-70, 17-81, 17-82, 17-101—17-106, 17-116, 17-117, 17-131—17-138, 17-151—17-163, 17-176—17-180, 17-191—17-195, 17-207—17-214, 17-251, 17-252, 17-266—17-281, 17-291—17-297, 17-311—17-316, 17-320, 17-321, 17-326—17-335, 17-346—17-355, 17-366—17-384, 17-411, 17-431, 17-441, 17-451, 17-461, 17-471, 17-472, 17-491, 17-492, 17-501, 17-511, 17-521, 17-531, 17-541—17-543, 17-561, 17-571, 17-581, 17-600—17-603. For a listing of the ordinances from which former Ch. 17 derived, see the Code Comparative Table, beginning with Ord. No. 895 on page 1888. 
Cross reference— Possession of alcoholic liquor in motor vehicle, § 3-33; inoperable motor vehicles, § 8-1 et seq.; licensing of taxicabs, § 9-251 et seq.; licensing of vehicles, § 9-276 et seq.; public ways, Ch. 15; off-street parking and loading requirements, App. A, § 11.1 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 17-1. - Adoption by reference of state vehicle code. 
Pursuant to Section 20-204 of Act 5 of Chapter 625 of the Illinois Compiled Statutes, 1998, the city hereby adopts and incorporates by reference into the Code of Ordinances of the city each and every provision of the Illinois Vehicle Code as contained in Act 5 of Chapter 625 of the Illinois Compiled Statutes, 1998, as amended, as if fully set out in this Code. Unless otherwise specified in this chapter 17, the penalties and all administrative revocation or suspension procedures are included in this adoption by reference. Any proceeding resulting from a violation of an Illinois Vehicle Code regulation, written as a violation of the City Code, shall be deemed to be a civil matter for purposes of burden of proof and rules of court. The only exceptions to this shall be citations written for offenses permitting incarceration as a penalty or if the Illinois Vehicle Code specifies otherwise. Three (3) copies of said Illinois Vehicle Code have been on file for a period of more than thirty (30) days prior to the adoption of this section and are now on file in the office of the city clerk. 
The fact that a particular activity is proscribed or regulated in both the Illinois Vehicle Code and another section of chapter 17 shall not affect either the validity of this adoption by reference or the validity of the City Code regulation. 
Any regulation found in the Illinois Vehicle Code may be cited as a regulation of the City Code by placing before it the number 17-. (For example, Section 11-601(a) of the Illinois Vehicle Code would be "Section 17-11-601(a)" when written as a section of the City Code. 
(Ord. No. 2125, § 2, 2-21-89; Ord. No. 4300, § 1, 3-20-2000; Ord. No. 05-O-0097, § 2, 12-5-2005)  
Sec. 17-2. - Penalties and related provisions. 
The court upon making a finding of guilty for any offense under section 17-11-501 of this code, in addition to any sentencing alternatives elected by the court, shall impose a fine of not less than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) nor more than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for each such offense. 
(Ord. No. 2125, § 2, 2-21-89; Ord. No. 4300, § 1, 3-20-2000; Ord. No. 05-O-0097, § 3, 12-5-2005)  
Secs. 17-3—17-20. - Reserved (for state statute reference).  
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION 
 
Sec. 17-21. - Police department to submit annual traffic safety report. 
The police chief shall annually prepare a traffic report which shall be filed with the mayor and city council. The report shall contain the following information on traffic matters in this city: 
(a)  The number of traffic accidents, the number of persons killed, the number of persons injured, and other pertinent traffic accident data. 
(b)  The number of traffic accidents investigated and other pertinent data on the traffic safety activities of the department. 
(Ord. No. 2125, § 2, 2-21-89)  
Secs. 17-22—17-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - ENFORCEMENT AND OBEDIENCE TO REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 17-26. - Authority of police department officials. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the officers of the police department or such officers as are assigned by the chief of police to enforce all traffic laws of this city and all of the state vehicle laws applicable to traffic in this city. 
(b)  Officers of the police department or such officers as are assigned by the chief of police are hereby authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand or signal in conformance with traffic laws, provided that in the event of a fire or other emergency to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the police department may direct traffic as conditions may require notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic laws. 
(c)  Members of the emergency services disaster agency (ESDA), when at the scene of an emergency, or in the immediate vicinity of a fire, may direct or assist the police in directing traffic. 
(Ord. No. 2125, § 2, 2-21-89)  
Sec. 17-27. - Violations of chapter are petty offenses. 
Every person convicted of violating any provision of this chapter, whether by doing any act forbidden or failing to perform any act required herein, for which another penalty is not provided and to the extent this section does not conflict with the provisions of the Illinois Vehicle Code, as adopted by reference in section 17-1 of this chapter, shall be guilty of a petty offense. 
(Ord. No. 2125, § 2, 2-21-89) 
Cross reference— Minimum and maximum fines, § 17-1204.  
Sec. 17-28. - Obedience to police department officials. 
No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of a police officer when acting hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 2125, § 2, 2-21-89)  
Sec. 17-29. - Authority of public works personnel. 
It shall be the duty of the public works personnel, as are designated and assigned by the director of public works, to enforce all laws and regulations, as provided for in this Chapter 17, relating to the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles. Nothing in this section shall preclude officers of the police department or such officers as are designated by the chief of police from also enforcing laws relating to the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 13-O-0006, § 2, 2-4-2013)  
Secs. 17-30—17-35. - Reserved  
ARTICLE IV. - CONTROL DEVICES 
 
Sec. 17-36. - Authority to install. 
The city council shall determine and designate locations for traffic-control signs, signals and devices when and as required under this chapter to make effective its provisions. The council may place and maintain such additional traffic-control devices as they may deem necessary to regulate traffic or to guide or warn traffic. 
(Ord. No. 2125, § 2, 2-21-89)  
Secs. 17-37, 17-38. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 02-O-0020, §§ 1, 2, adopted Mar. 4, 2002 amended by deleting §§ 17-37, 17-38 which pertained to play streets—Authority to establish and play streets—Regulations respectively and derived from Ord. No. 2125, § 2, Feb. 21, 1989.  
Sec. 17-39. - City engineer to designate crosswalks and establish safety zones. 
The city engineer is hereby authorized: 
(a)  To designate and maintain, by appropriate devices, marks or lines upon the surface of the roadway, crosswalks at intersections where there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway, and at such other places as deemed necessary. 
(b)  To establish safety zones of such kind and character and at such places as they deem necessary for the protection of pedestrians. 
(Ord. No. 2125, § 2, 2-21-89)  
Sec. 17-40. - Traffic lanes. 
(a)  The city engineer is hereby authorized to mark traffic lanes upon the roadway of any street or highway where a regular alignment of traffic is necessary. 
(b)  Where such traffic lanes have been marked, it shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to fail or refuse to keep such vehicle within the boundaries of any such lane except when lawfully passing another vehicle or preparatory to making a lawful turning movement. 
(Ord. No. 2125, § 2, 2-21-89)  
Secs. 17-41—17-50. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - SPEED REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 17-51. - General speed restrictions. 
(a)  No person shall drive any vehicle upon any public street or highway within the city at a speed which: 
(1)  Is greater than is reasonable and proper with regard to traffic conditions and the use of the highway, or endangers the safety of any person or property; or 
(2)  Is greater than the applicable maximum speed limit established by this section. The fact that the speed of a vehicle does not exceed the applicable maximum speed limit does not relieve the driver from the duty to decrease speed when approaching and crossing an intersection, when approaching and going around a curve, when approaching a hillcrest, when traveling upon any narrow or winding roadway or when special hazard exists with respect to pedestrians or other traffic by reason of weather or highway conditions; and speed shall be decreased as may be necessary to avoid colliding with any person or vehicle on or entering the highway in compliance with legal requirements and the duty of all persons to use due care. 
(Ord. No. 4352, § 1, 9-18-2000)  
Sec. 17-52. - Maximum speed limits. 
As authorized by law, it is hereby determined upon the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation that the reasonable and safe maximum speed limits on all streets within the corporate limits of city is twenty-five (25) miles per hour, except where otherwise posted as indicated in section 17-206 of this chapter. 
Public notice of the maximum speed limits established hereby shall be indicated by the erection of appropriate signs on all streets entering the city and at the appropriate location of all streets intersecting with those identified in section 17-206 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 4352, § 1, 9-18-2000)  
Sec. 17-53. - Duty to decrease speed to avoid danger. 
The fact that the speed of a vehicle is lower than the foregoing prima facie limits shall not relieve the driver from the duty to decrease speed when approaching and crossing an intersection, when approaching and going around a curve, when approaching a hillcrest, when traveling upon any narrow or winding roadway or when special hazards exist with respect to pedestrians or other traffic or by reason of weather or highway conditions. Speed shall be decreased as may be necessary to avoid colliding with any person or vehicle on or entering the highway in compliance with legal requirements and the duty of all persons to use due care. 
(Ord. No. 4352, § 1, 9-18-2000)  
Sec. 17-54. - Minimum speed. 
No person shall drive a motor vehicle at such a slow speed as to impede or block the normal and reasonable movement of traffic except when reduced speed is necessary for safe operation or in compliance with law. Police officers are hereby authorized to enforce this provision by directions to drivers and in the event of apparent willful disobedience to this provision and refusal to comply with the direction of an officer in accordance herewith, the continued slow operation by a driver shall be a violation. 
(Ord. No. 4352, § 1, 9-18-2000)  
Sec. 17-55. - Speeds at specific locations. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of this article, it shall be unlawful to operate a vehicle in excess of the limits prescribed by section 17-206 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 4352, § 1, 9-18-2000)  
Sec. 17-56 - Temporary construction speed zones. 
As authorized by law, pursuant to 625 ILCS 5/11-605.1, within a construction or maintenance speed zone, it shall be unlawful to operate a motor vehicle at speeds in excess of twenty-five (25) miles per hour. 
Public notice of the maximum speed limit within a construction or maintenance speed zone shall be included by the erection of appropriate signs that give proper due warning that a construction or maintenance speed zone is being approached and must indicate the maximum speed limit in effect. 
Public notice of the minimum fine for a violation within a construction or maintenance speed zone shall be included by the erection of appropriate signs that identifies a minimum fine of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for a first violation, and a minimum fine of seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for a second or subsequent violation. 
(Ord. No. 08-O-0029, § 1, 4-21-2008)  
Secs. 17-57—17-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - TURNING MOVEMENTS 
 
Sec. 17-61. - Authority to place restricted turn signs. 
The city council shall determine and designate those intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right turn, left turn or U-turn. The city engineer shall place proper signs at such intersections. The making of such turns may be prohibited between certain hours of any day and permitted at other hours, in which event the same shall be plainly indicted on the signs or they may be removed when such turns are permitted. 
(Ord. No. 2125, § 2, 2-21-89)  
Secs. 17-62—17-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS 
 
Sec. 17-71. - Authority to designate; obedience to signs. 
The city council shall determine and designate any one-way street or alley. The city engineer shall place and maintain signs giving notice thereof. When such designation is made and signs so placed, it shall be unlawful for vehicular traffic to move in other than the indicated direction. 
(Ord. No. 2125, § 2, 2-21-89)  
Secs. 17-72—17-80. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - STOP AND YIELD INTERSECTIONS, ETC. 
 
Sec. 17-81. - Intersections where stop or yield required. 
The city council shall determine and designate intersections where particular hazards exist and to determine: 
(a)  Whether vehicles shall stop at one or more entrances to any such intersection. The city engineer shall place and maintain a stop sign at every such location where a stop is required. 
(b)  Whether vehicles shall yield the right-of-way to vehicles on a different street at such intersection. The city engineer shall place and maintain yield sign at every location where obedience thereto is required. 
(Ord. No. 2125, § 2, 2-21-89)  
Secs. 17-82—17-85. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - MISCELLANEOUS DRIVING RULES 
 
Secs. 17-86—17-90. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - REGULATING SIZE AND WEIGHT OF VEHICLES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 02-O-0129, §§ 1, 2, adopted Nov. 4, 2002, amended Art. X, § 17-91 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. X, § 17-91 pertained to regulation of kinds and classes on highways and derived from Ord. No. 2643, § 1, adopted May 3, 1993; Ord. No. 2697, §§ 5—7, adopted Aug. 2, 1993; Ord. No. 2821, § 1, adopted Aug. 15, 1994. 
 
Sec. 17-91. - Definition of words and phrases. 
(a)  Definition of words and phrases. The following words and phrases when used in this Code shall, for the purpose of this Code, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this article, except when the context otherwise requires and except where another definition is set forth in another article of this Code. 
(1)  Commercial vehicle. Any vehicle operated for the transportation of persons or property in the furtherance of any commercial or industrial enterprise, for-hire or not-for-hire, but not including a commuter van, a vehicle used in a ridesharing arrangement when being used for that purpose, or a recreational vehicle not being used commercially. A commercial vehicle shall be any vehicle or a combination of vehicles with a manufacturers GVWR, GCWR, registered weight, combined registered weight or actual weight on a scale of ten thousand one (10,001) pounds or more. 
(2)  Gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR). The value specified by the manufacturer or manufacturers as the maximum loaded weight of a single vehicle. The GVWR of a combination of vehicles (commonly referred to as the "gross combination weight rating" or GCWR) is the GVWR of the power unit plus the GVWR of the towed unit or units. In the absence of a value specified by the manufacturer, GCWR is determined by adding the GVWR of the power unit and the total weight of the towed unit and any load on the unit. 
(3)  Gross weight. The weight of a vehicle whether operated singly or in combination without load plus the weight of the load thereon. 
(4)  Highway. The entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. 
(5)  Implement of husbandry. Every vehicle designed and adapted exclusively for agricultural, horticultural, or livestock raising operations, including farm wagons, wagon trailers or like vehicles used in connection therewith, or for lifting or carrying an implement of husbandry. 
(6)  Motor vehicle. Every vehicle which is self-propelled and every vehicle which is propelled by electric power obtained from overhead trolley wires, but not operated upon rails, except for vehicles moved solely by human power and motorized wheelchairs. For this act, motor vehicles are divided into two (2) divisions: 
First division: Those motor vehicles, which are designed for the carrying of not more than ten (10) persons. 
Second division: Those motor vehicles which are designed for carrying more than ten (10) persons, those motor vehicles designed or used for living quarters, those motor vehicles which are designed for pulling or carrying freight, cargo or implements of husbandry, and those motor vehicles of the first division remodeled for use and used as motor vehicles of the second division. 
(7)  Permit route. The route authorized by the issuing authority with proper jurisdiction over the roadway(s) for which permission has been granted to move a vehicle or combination of vehicles that is in itself indivisible or carrying an indivisible load that exceeds legal dimensions or weight or a combination thereof. 
(8)  Semitrailer. Every vehicle without motive power, other than a pole trailer, designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and so constructed that some part of its weight and that of its load rests upon or is carried by another vehicle. 
(9)  Tandem axles. Any two (2) or more single axles whose centers are more than forty (40) inches and not more than ninety-six (96) inches apart, measured to the nearest inch between extreme axles in the series. 
(10)  Trailer. Every vehicle without motive power in operation, other than a pole trailer, designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and so constructed that no part of its weight rests upon the towing vehicle. 
(11)  Truck tractor. Every motor vehicle designed and used primarily for drawing other vehicles and not so constructed as to carry a load other than a part of the weight of the vehicle and load so drawn. 
(12)  City. The City of West Chicago. 
(b)  Overweight and/or overdimension vehicles. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to be in control of, to drive, to park, or move on, upon or across or for the owner to cause or knowingly permit to be parked, driven, or moved upon or across, any street or highway under the jurisdiction of the city, any vehicle or combination of vehicles exceeding the size and weight limitations stated in the ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 15-102 (width), ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 15-103 (height), ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 15-107 (length), and ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 15-111 (weight). 
(2)  Size and weights limitations while operating on city streets shall not apply to fire apparatus or equipment for snow or ice removal operations owned or operated by or for any governmental body or to implements of husbandry temporarily operated or towed in a combination in the furtherance of a farm or agricultural endeavor and to any vehicle or combination of vehicles operating under the terms of a valid oversize and/or dimension permit issued by the city under the authority of subsection (c). 
(3)  Where lower size and weight limits or other restrictions are imposed by ordinance under authority of ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 15-111, 15-316 and 15-317, and signs indicating such limitations or restrictions are posted, it shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle or combination of vehicles in excess of such size or weight limitations or in violation of such restrictions. 
(4)  Whenever any vehicle or combination of vehicles is operated in violation of this section, the owner and/or driver of such vehicle shall be deemed guilty of such violation and either or both the owner and driver of such vehicle may be prosecuted for such violation. 
(c)  Permits for overweight and/or overdimension vehicles. 
(1)  A permit shall be required for the movement of any vehicle or combination of vehicles with a nondivisible load on roadways and bridges within the jurisdiction of the city which exceeds the legal dimensions and weights provided in ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 15-102 (width), ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 15-103 (height), ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 15-107 (length), and ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 15-111 (weight). 
(2)  The city with respect to any street or highway under its jurisdiction may upon application to the city on forms provided by the city and good cause being shown therefore issue a special permit authorizing the applicant to operate or move a vehicle or combination of vehicles of a size or weight of vehicle or load exceeding the maximum specified in subsection (c)(1). The applicant shall furnish the following information in the special permit application: 
• The name and address of the owner or lessee of the vehicle. 
• Applicant's name. 
• Type of permit request whether it be for a single trip, round trip, or multiple routing. 
• Description of the object or vehicle to be moved. 
• The number of axles of the vehicle or combination of vehicles. 
• The maximum axle weights of all single, tandem or series axles. 
• Maximum gross weight of the vehicle. 
• The maximum width, length and height of the vehicle and load. 
• Requested routing over city streets to and from a specific location. 
(d)  For purposes of this section, the following definitions apply: 
(1)  A one-way or single trip movement means one (1) move from the point of origin to the point of destination. Any additional stops between the point of origin and the point of destination are expressly prohibited. Single trip permits are effective for seven (7) consecutive days from the date of issuance unless otherwise directed by the city. 
(2)  Round trip movement means two (2) trips over the same route in opposite directions, or upon an alternate route as prescribed by the police department on the permit. Round trip permits are effective for fourteen (14) consecutive days from the date of issuance. 
(3)  Multiple move permits when granted by the city shall be for a period of time not to exceed ninety (90) days from the date of issuance, and shall provide the applicant the ability to make unlimited moves on city streets. 
(e)  The owner or his or her agent shall submit an application fee based on the below chart for a single routing which will be valid for seven (7) calendar days, round trip routing valid for fourteen (14) calendar days and multiple routings valid for a base period of ninety (90) days. Permits are valid only for the date periods specified on the permit and for the specific vehicle, load and routing as established by the chief of police or designee. No substitution of vehicle, load or routing is permitted without expressed written permission by the chief of police or his designee and the permit must be carried in the vehicle to which the permit applies. 
Fee Schedule 
	Fee 
	Single Trip 	Round Trip 	Multiple 
Permit size—Weight (with load) 
  Up to 100,000 pounds 	50 	75 	200 
  100,001—120,000 	75 	100 	250 
  120,001—150,000 	100 	125 	
  Over 150,000 	150 	200 	
Permit size—Width (with load greater than 8'6") 
  Up to 12' 	25 	40 	150 
  14' 	50 	75 	200 
  16' 	75 	100 	
  Greater than 16' wide 	100 	125 	
Permit size—Height (with load greater than 13'6" high) 
  15' 	25 	40 	150 
  Greater than 15' high 	50 	75 	
Permit size—Length (with load) 
  115' 	25 	40 	150 
  145' 	50 	75 	
  Greater than 145' long 	75 	100 	
 
Note: If a vehicle requires a permit due to multiple weight and/or dimension issues, the total fee will be based on the highest individual weight or dimension fee. Any application for a permit which exceeds the maximum weight and dimensions listed in schedule (e) is subject to special assessment fees at the discretion of the chief of police or his designee. 
(f)  Police escorts are generally required for vehicles operating under a valid overweight or over dimension permit which exceeds the weight and size limits described in schedule (e), and when, in the discretion of the police chief or his designee, is necessary to protect life safety, traffic flow and infrastructure. 
(g)  The permittee must make all arrangements with the police department at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the move. 
(h)  Fees for police escort, when required, shall be in addition to the permit fees. The applicant shall pay the cost for a police vehicle escort at the minimum overtime rate of the highest salaried police officer and per any collective bargaining agreement. 
(i)  The chief of police or his designee is authorized to approve the application for approved routes. Upon approval and payment of all required fees, the city shall issue a permit allowing passage of the oversize and/or overweight vehicles over city streets. The permit shall be specific and contain: 
(1)  Permit number. 
(2)  The dates the permit is valid. 
(3)  Whether the permit is for single, round or multiple trip routing. 
(4)  The description of object or vehicle to be moved. 
(5)  Authorized gross weight, axle weights, width, length and height. 
(6)  The authorized routing over city streets including the origin and termination point within the city. 
(7)  The fee paid. 
(8)  The date and signature of the chief of police or his designee. Permits issued electronically shall be considered signed by the chief of police or his designee. 
(9)  In addition, the permit will specify general conditions that the permittee must comply with that are consistent and reasonable for the protection of the general public and city streets. A copy of all permits issued will be provided to the city administrator for informational purposes. Any provisions listed on an approved permit will not be more restrictive than those afforded by the Illinois Department of Transportation (IDOT) OPER 993 form or the American Association of State and Highway Transportation Officials (AASHTO) Guidelines. 
(j)  It is the duty of the permittee to read and familiarize himself with the permit provisions upon receipt. Undertaking of the permit move is deemed prima facie evidence of acceptance of the permit and that: 
(1)  The permittee is in compliance with all operation requirements; 
(2)  All dimension and weight limitations specified in the permit will not be exceeded; 
(3)  All operation, registration and license requirements have been complied with; 
(4)  All financial responsibilities, obligations and other legal requirements have been met; and 
(5)  The permittee assumes all responsibility for injury or damage to persons or to public or private property, including his or her own, or to the object being transported, caused directly or indirectly by the transportation or movement of vehicles and objects authorized under the permit. The permittee agrees to hold the city harmless from all suits, claims, damages, or proceedings of any kind and to indemnify the city for any claim it may be required to pay arising from the movement. 
(k)  The permit shall be carried in the vehicle to which the permit applies at all times while operating on streets within the city and shall be exhibited upon demand to any law enforcement officer, police officer or authorized official of the city. Electronic display of a permit on a device which may be inspected is authorized. 
(l)  Whenever any vehicle is operated in violation of the provisions of a city permit whether it be by size, weight or general provisions, and either or both the owner or driver of such vehicle shall be deemed guilty, and either or both the owner or the driver of such vehicle may be prosecuted for such violation. 
(m)  Vehicles prohibited on certain streets. 
(1)  As provided under the authority of ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 15-111 and 15-316, it shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle upon any street where the operation of that vehicle is prohibited by ordinance and where signs of such prohibition are posted. Vehicles operating under the authority of ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 15-111 or 15-316 shall use the most direct route to points of loading and unloading. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful to park a commercial motor vehicle on a residential street while said truck is running between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. the following day. 
(n)  Oversize/weight vehicles permitted on certain streets. 
(1)  As provided under the authority of ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 15-111(f), the city has designated the following portions of streets and/or highways as Class II designated streets. Vehicles utilizing those as such, can be of a length consistent with ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 15-107 (length). 
Class II designated streets: 
• Arbor Avenue - between Hawthorne Lane and Route 59 (Neltnor Boulevard). 
• Arthur Drive. 
• Atlantic Drive. 
• Blackhawk Drive. 
• Brown Street - between Factory Street and Joliet Street. 
• Carolina Drive. 
• Charles Court. 
• Commerce Drive. 
• Conde Street also known as Tom Marziani Way - from the western right-of-way line of Illinois Route 59 west to a point one thousand one hundred (1,100) feet. 
• Downs Drive. 
• Fenton Lane. 
• Fremont Street - between West Washington Street and Grandlake Boulevard. 
• Grandlake Boulevard - west of Fremont Street. 
• Hawthorne Lane - between Kress Road and Atlantic Drive. 
• Helena Drive. 
• Howard Drive. 
• Industrial Drive. 
• Joliet Street - between Route 38 and Brown Street. 
• Main Street - between Route 59 and Wilson Avenue. 
• Main Street - between Wilson Avenue and West Washington Street. 
• Northwest Avenue. 
• Nuclear Drive. 
• Prince Crossing Road - between Route 64 and the Great Western Trail. 
• Town Road - between Washington Street and the Burlington Northern Railroad Tracks. 
• Wegner Drive. 
• West Washington Street - between Route 38 and Wood Street. 
• Western Drive. 
• Weyrauch Street - between Brown Street and the south end of Weyrauch Street. 
• Winston Street. 
• Wood Street - between West Washington Street and Church Street. 
(2)  The director of public works is authorized and directed to post or cause to be posted, streets designated as class II truck routes as governed by subsection (n)(1). 
(o)  Penalty. 
(1)  Any person, firm or corporation who or which violates, disobeys, neglects, fails to comply with or resists enforcement of the provisions of this chapter will be fined according to the penalty structures provided in the Illinois Vehicle Code as adopted by Ordinance 17-1 of this Code. 
(2)  In addition to seeking a fine, as hereinabove provided, the city attorney may institute any proper action in the name of the city to enjoin the violation of any provision of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 02-O-0129, §§ 1, 2, 11-4-2002; Ord. No. 05-O-0062, § 3, 8-1-2005; Ord. No. 15-O-0006, § 1, 7-6-2015)  
Secs. 17-92—17-95. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XI. - DRIVING WHILE UNDER THE INFLUENCE OF ALCOHOL; RECKLESS DRIVING 
 
Sec. 17-96. - DUI response costs. 
The city shall charge seventy-five dollars ($75.00) for each on-scene police officer/squad to cover the costs relative to emergency responses in regard to DUI cases. 
(Ord. No. 2545, § 1, 5-4-92)  
Secs. 17-97—17-100. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XII. - PENALTIES AND PROCEDURES ON ARREST 
 
Secs. 17-101—17-110. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XIII. - NO-PASSING ZONES GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 17-111. - Council to designate; compliance required. 
The city council shall determine and designate those portions of any highway where overtaking and passing or driving to the left of the roadway would be especially hazardous. The city engineer shall, by appropriate signs or markings on the roadway, indicate the beginning and end of such zones. When the signs or markings are in place and clearly visible to an ordinarily observant person, every driver of a vehicle shall obey the directions thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2125, § 2, 2-21-89)  
Secs. 17-112—17-115. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XIV. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 17-116. - All-night parking prohibited. 
No person shall park a vehicle on any street for a period of time longer than thirty (30) minutes between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. except holders of permits for residential parking on the east side of Clayton Street. 
(Ord. No. 2125, § 2, 2-21-89; Ord. No. 03-O-0024, § 2, 4-7-2003)  
Sec. 17-117. - Temporary prohibitions, police order. 
(a)  The chief of police is hereby authorized to determine and designate by proper signs places in which the stopping, standing, or parking of vehicles would create an especially hazardous condition or would cause unusual delay to traffic due to events in the area including but not limited to road construction, parades, street cleaning or road maintenance. 
(b)  When official signs are erected at hazardous or congested places as authorized herein no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any such designated place. 
(Ord. No. 2125, § 2, 2-21-89)  
Sec. 17-118. - After snowfall. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to park or allow to remain any vehicle on any portion of any public street or highway on which there is an accumulation of snow two (2) inches or greater in depth. 
(b)  Whenever any police officer finds a vehicle in violation of this section, such officer is hereby authorized to require the driver or other person in charge of the vehicle to move the same or to provide for the removal of such vehicle to the nearest garage or other place of safety by means of towing. 
(c)  All expenses and charges incurred by reason of the towing of any vehicle under the provisions of this section and all charges for the storing of any vehicle under the provisions of this section shall be paid by the owner of the vehicle or other person legally entitled to possession thereof, and no vehicle against which there are any unpaid costs or charges under these provisions shall be released to the owner or other person legally entitled to possession thereof until all such charges and costs have been paid and fully satisfied. Notice and opportunity for hearing shall be given to the owner or other person legally entitled to possession in accordance with the applicable general orders of the police department shall be given. 
(d)  The provisions of this section are not to be construed as being in lieu of any penalty or penalties provided for elsewhere in this code or in any other ordinances for violation of the provisions of any ordinance, including this section, but are in addition thereto and are necessary for the maintenance of the free and unobstructed flow of traffic and for the direction and control thereof within the city. 
(e)  The city, its agents, employees and servants shall not be held to answer in any action or damages to any owner or other person legally entitled to the possession of any vehicle which is dealt with by them under the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2125, § 2, 2-21-89; Ord. No. 4045, § 1, 12-15-97)  
Sec. 17-119. - In alleys. 
No person shall park a vehicle within an alley. Nothing herein contained shall prohibit a person from making a delivery in an alley, but the vehicle parked for such purposes shall not be so parked for a period in excess of ten (10) minutes. 
(Ord. No. 2125, § 2, 2-21-89)  
Sec. 17-120. - Violations. 
(a)  Reports. It shall be the duty of the police officers of the city acting in accordance with this Code to report: 
(1)  The vehicles occupying those areas so restricted by signs and that the vehicle is or has been parking in violation of any of the provisions of this Code. 
(2)  The state of registration and license number of each vehicle. 
(3)  The time such vehicle is parking in violation of any of the provisions of this Code. 
(4)  Any other facts, knowledge of which is necessary to a thorough understanding of the circumstances attending such violation. 
(b)  Notice. Each such police officer shall also attach to such vehicle a notice to the owner or operator thereof that such vehicle has been parked in violation of this Code. Each such owner or operator may, within ten (10) days of the time when such notice of violation was attached to such vehicle, make payment to the city as follows: 
(1)  Handicapped parking violations ..... $350.00 
(2)  Tows necessary for the maintenance of the free and unobstructed flow of traffic ..... 55.00 
(3)  Parking violations at the commuter station parking lot ..... 50.00 
(4)  All other parking violations ..... 35.00 
If payment is not received within ten (10) days, the charge for each violation shall be doubled. 
Upon failure to comply with this notice, the collection of this debt shall be turned over to a collection agency or as prescribed by law. 
(Ord. No. 2125, § 2, 2-21-89; Ord. No. 4376, § 1, 12-18-2000; Ord. No. 02-O-0013, § 1, 2-18-2002; Ord. No. 03-O-0085, § 9, 10-6-2003; Ord. No. 11-O-0022, § 1, 5-2-2011; Ord. No. 18-O-0028, § 1, 6-4-2018)  
Sec. 17-121. - Commuter station parking lot. 
(a)  Location. The commuter parking facilities are those off-street parking facilities owned or operated by the city, generally located south of Main Street and west of Neltnor Boulevard, serving and intended for the convenience of METRA commuters. 
(b)  Designations. The commuter parking facilities shall be designated and posted as daily metered and permit parking areas; provided, however, that parking on the portion of the facilities owned by METRA shall be daily parking only. It shall be unlawful to park or to allow a vehicle to be parked in the commuter parking facilities in violation of any provision of this Code or any section of the Illinois Vehicle Code pertaining to the parking of motor vehicles. 
(c)  General parking restrictions. It shall be unlawful for the owner of a vehicle to allow that vehicle to be parked: 
(1)  In any location within the commuter parking facilities which is not a designated/marked parking space; 
(2)  In any manner other than a "head-in" position, with the vehicle driven forward into the parking space; 
(3)  In any designated handicapped parking space or portion of a handicapped parking space without displaying an official handicapped parking permit, sticker or vehicle registration plates; 
(4)  As a permit parking vehicle in a designated daily pay parking space; 
(5)  As a daily pay vehicle in a designated permit parking space; 
(6)  In a daily pay parking space without immediately depositing the daily or multiple day fee and the corresponding parking space number into a "pay-by-space" machine; or 
(7)  In a permit parking space in excess of seventy-two (72) consecutive hours. 
(d)  Hours of operation. The commuter parking facilities shall be open and the parking regulations enforced on a twenty-four (24) hour basis each day with each day commencing at 12:00 a.m. and ending at 11:59 p.m., except that no daily parking fee and/or parking permit will be required on Saturday, Sunday and the following legal holidays: 
(1)  New Year's Day; 
(2)  Memorial Day; 
(3)  Independence Day; 
(4)  Labor Day; 
(5)  Thanksgiving Day; or 
(6)  Christmas Day. 
(e)  Daily parking fee. The daily parking fee shall be as prescribed in Appendix G. 
(f)  Multiple day parking fee. A daily parking fee shall be paid for each twenty-four-hour period the vehicle occupies a specific parking space. The "pay-by-space" machines will accept payment for consecutive twenty-four-hour periods. 
(g)  Permit parking. Parking permits may be available for purchase at the City of West Chicago on a quarterly, semi-annual or yearly basis. The price of the permits shall be determined by the daily parking fee in subsection (e), plus an administrative fee to be determined by the city administrator. Vehicles occupying a parking space in the permit parking designated spaces shall display a valid city commuter parking permit in clear view handing from the rear view mirror, with the side showing the permit number and expiration date facing the front of the vehicle. 
(h)  Remedies. The owner of any vehicle in violation of this section shall be subject to fine, as provided in subsection 17-120(b)(3), and the vehicle shall be subject to towing. 
(Ord. No. 2489, § 1, 11-4-91; Ord. No. 4049, § 1, 3-18-98; Ord. No. 4354, § 1, 9-18-2000; Ord. No. 08-O-007, § 3, 2-4-2008, eff. 5-1-2008; Ord. No. 11-O-0007, § 42, 5-16-2011)  
Sec. 17-122. - Turner Court parking lot. 
(a)  Location. The Turner Court Parking Lot is the parking lot operated by the City of West Chicago, generally located west of Turner Court, south of Washington Street. 
(b)  Designations. The Turner Court Parking Lot shall be designated and posted as daily free parking and overnight permit parking only. It shall be unlawful to park or to allow a vehicle to be parked in the Turner Court Parking Lot in violation of any provision of the Code of Ordinances or any section of the Illinois Vehicle Code pertaining to the parking of motor vehicles. 
(c)  General parking restrictions. It shall be unlawful for the owner of a vehicle to allow that vehicle to be parked: 
(1)  In any location within the Turner Court Parking Lot which is not a designated/marked parking space; 
(2)  In any manner other than a "head-in" position, with the vehicle driven forward into the parking space; 
(3)  In any designated handicapped parking space or portion of a handicapped parking space without displaying an official handicapped parking permit, sticker or vehicle registration plates; 
(4)  Between 3:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. daily without a valid parking permit; 
(5)  In a parking space in excess of seventy-two (72) consecutive hours even with a valid permit. 
(d)  Hours of operation. The Turner Court Parking Lot shall be open and the parking regulations enforced on a twenty-four hour basis each day with each day commencing at 12:00 a.m. and ending at 11:59 p.m. 
(e)  Permit parking—Residents. Parking permits for residents living within the Turner Junction Historic District are available at the West Chicago Police Department. A maximum of two (2) permits shall be issued per dwelling unit with a maximum of forty (40) total parking permits issued. Vehicles shall display a valid City of West Chicago Turner Court Parking Lot Permit in clear view hanging from the rear view mirror with the side showing the permit number and expiration date facing the front of the vehicle. 
(f)  Permit parking—Commercial vehicles. Business owners within the Turner Junction Historic District may receive a parking permit at the West Chicago Police Department to park one (1) commercial vehicle (B-plate or lower) in the Turner Court Parking Lot. To obtain this permit, a business owner must provide proof that he has a business registered with the city and is otherwise legally operating. Five (5) spaces in the Turner Court Lot will be reserved for commercial vehicles. No parking permit shall be issued to any business owner who owes, or who has a family member who owes, the city any money for any purpose whatsoever. 
(g)  Remedies. The owner of any vehicle in violation of this section shall be subject to fine as provided in section 17-120, and the vehicle subject to towing. 
(Ord. No. 10-O-0055, § 1, 7-6-2010; Ord. No. 11-O-0026, § 1, 6-6-2011)  
Secs. 17-123—17-125. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LOADING AND UNLOADING ZONES; PUBLIC CARRIERS 
 
Sec. 17-126. - City council to designate loading and unloading zones. 
The city council shall determine and designate the location of passenger and freight curb loading zones. 
The city engineer shall install all necessary signs to implement said designated zone's restrictions, if any, and the hours during which the restrictions are applicable. All persons shall comply with the terms of the posted passenger and freight curb loading zone signs. 
(Ord. No. 2125, § 2, 2-21-89)  
Sec. 17-127. - Public carrier stops; city council to designate. 
The city council shall determine and designate bus stops, bus stands, taxicab stands and stands for other passenger common carrier motor vehicles on such public streets in such places and in such number as they shall determine to be of the greatest benefit and convenience to the public. The city engineer shall place and maintain signs and pavement markings defining such bus stops, bus stands, taxicab stands or other stands. 
(Ord. No. 2125, § 2, 2-21-89)  
Secs. 17-128—17-130. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - PARKING RESTRICTIONS ON SPECIFIED STREETS 
 
Sec. 17-131. - Prohibited during certain hours. 
The city council shall determine and designate streets and locations within the city on which parking shall be prohibited during certain hours or at all hours. The city engineer shall place and maintain signs giving notice of the prohibition against parking. No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within the area or place so designated by the city council and specified by such signs. 
(Ord. No. 2125, § 2, 2-21-89; Ord. No. 4251, § 1, 11-5-99)  
Secs. 17-132—17-135. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - RESERVED 
Editor's note— Section 2 of Ord. No. 2561, adopted June 1, 1992, repealed former Div. 4, §§ 17-136—17-140, which pertained to parking meters and derived from Ord. No. 2125, § 2, adopted Feb. 21, 1989. 
 
Secs. 17-136—17-145. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XV. - PEDESTRIAN'S RIGHTS AND DUTIES 
 
Secs. 17-146—17-155. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XVI. - BICYCLE REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 17-156. - Emerging from an alley or driveway. 
The operator of a bicycle emerging from an alley, driveway or building shall, upon approaching the sidewalk, or the sidewalk extending any alleyway, yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians approaching on the sidewalk or sidewalk area, and, upon entering the street, shall yield the right-of-way to all approaching vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 2125, § 2, 2-21-89)  
Sec. 17-157. - Clinging to vehicles prohibited. 
No person riding upon any bicycle or skateboard shall attach the same or himself to any moving vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 2125, § 2, 2-21-89)  
Sec. 17-158. - Riding on sidewalks. 
No person shall drive any vehicle upon a sidewalk or sidewalk area except upon a permanent or duly authorized temporary driveway. This section does not apply to any vehicle moved exclusively by human power to any electric personal assistive mobility device, nor to any motorized wheelchair. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to limit or pre-empt the authority of any home rule or non-home rule unit of local government from regulating or prohibiting the use of electric personal assistive mobility devices. 
(Ord. No. 2125, § 2, 2-21-89; Ord. No. 2209, § 2, 11-6-89; Ord. No. 3029, § 1, 6-17-96; Ord. No. 01-O-0093, §§ 1, 2, 9-4-2001; Ord. No. 04-O-0102, §§ 1, 2, 9-7-2004) 
Cross reference— Public ways, Ch. 15; zoning, App. A.  
Secs. 17-159—17-165. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XVII. - SCHEDULES OF DESIGNATED STREETS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 17-166—17-170. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - ONE-WAY STREETS 
 
Sec. 17-171. - Designated. 
When properly posted, traffic shall move only in the direction indicated upon the following streets: 
Tye Court from Washington Street to Galena Street, southbound. 
Turner Court from Main Street, entrance to Washington Street, northbound. 
(Ord. No. 2125, § 2, 2-21-89)  
Secs. 17-172—17-175. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - STOP INTERSECTIONS 
 
Sec. 17-176. - Designated; compliance required. 
Every driver of a vehicle approaching a stop intersection indicated by a stop sign shall stop at the designated stop street described as: 
Adeila Lane. All Adeila Lane traffic shall stop for all Lehman Drive traffic. 
Ainsley Drive. All Ainsley Drive stops for Charlestowne Drive traffic. 
Alamance Drive. All Alamance Drive traffic shall stop for all Bainbridge Boulevard and Braemore Drive traffic. 
Allen Avenue. All Allen Avenue traffic shall stop for Geneva Street traffic. 
Allen Avenue. All Allen Avenue traffic shall stop for all Spencer Street and Augusta Avenue traffic. 
Andrus Drive. All Andrus Drive traffic shall stop for all Bainbridge Boulevard and Davenport Drive traffic. 
Ann Street. All Ann Street traffic shall stop for all Church Street and Joliet Street traffic. 
Applegate Avenue. All Applegate Avenue traffic shall stop for all Hawthorne Lane traffic. 
Appletree Lane. All Appletree Lane stops for Gary's Mill Road traffic. 
Arbor Avenue. All Arbor Avenue traffic shall stop for all Hawthorne Lane, Elmwood Avenue, National Street, Washington Street and Neltnor Boulevard (Route 59) traffic. 
Arthur Drive. All Arthur Drive traffic shall stop for all Powis Road traffic. 
Atlantic Drive. All Atlantic Drive traffic shall stop for all Hawthorne Lane and North Avenue (Route 64) traffic. 
Aubrey Court. All Aubrey Court traffic shall stop for all Bainbridge Boulevard traffic. 
Augusta Avenue. All Augusta Avenue traffic shall stop for all Joliet Street and Route 59 (Neltnor Boulevard) traffic. 
Aurora Street. All North and South Aurora Street traffic shall stop for all Washington Street traffic. 
Bainbridge Boulevard. All Bainbridge Boulevard traffic shall stop for all Blanchard Lane and Smith Road traffic. 
Barber Avenue. All Barber Avenue traffic shall stop for all Brown Street, Conde Street and Pomeroy Street traffic. 
Barber Street. All Barber Street traffic shall stop for all Augusta Avenue traffic. 
Barber Street. All Barber Street traffic shall stop for all Stimmel Street traffic. 
Barnhart Street. All Barnhart Street stops for Bainbridge Boulevard and Camden Drive traffic. 
Belleview Avenue. All Belleview Avenue traffic shall stop for all Elmwood Avenue traffic. 
Bishop Street. All Bishop Street traffic shall stop for all Augusta Avenue, Brown Street, Forest Avenue and Route 38 (Roosevelt Road) traffic. 
Blackhawk Drive. All Blackhawk Drive traffic shall stop for all Powis Road traffic. 
Blair Street. All Blair Street traffic shall stop for all Barber Street, Blakely Street, Joliet Street and Route 59 (Neltnor Boulevard) traffic. 
Blair Street. All Blair Street traffic shall stop for all Gates Street traffic. 
Blair Street. All Blair Street traffic shall stop for all Wood Street traffic. 
Blakely Street. All Blakely Street traffic shall stop for all Augusta Street, Brown Street, and Conde Street traffic. 
Blanchard Lane. All Blanchard Lane traffic shall stop for all Bainbridge Boulevard and Davenport Drive traffic. 
Brentwood Drive. All Brentwood Drive traffic shall stop for all Forest Avenue traffic. 
Braemore Drive. All Braemore Drive traffic shall stop for all Bainbridge Boulevard traffic. 
Briargate Court. All Briargate Court traffic shall stop for all Bainbridge Boulevard traffic. 
Brookwood Drive. All Brookwood Drive stops for Wilson Street traffic. 
Brown Street. All Brown Street traffic shall stop for all Bishop Street traffic. 
Brown Street. All Brown Street traffic shall stop for all Joliet Street, Town Road, Kenwood Street and Route 59 (Neltnor Boulevard) traffic. 
Camden Drive. All Camden Drive traffic shall for all Adelia Lane, Lehman Drive, and Smith Road traffic. 
Carolina Drive. All Carolina Drive traffic shall stop for all Hawthorne Lane traffic. 
Center Street. All Center Street traffic shall stop for all High Street, Main Street, and Washington Street traffic. 
Challen Court. All Challen Court traffic shall stop for all Alamance Drive traffic. 
Charles Court. All Charles Court traffic shall stop for all Washington Street traffic. 
Charlestowne Drive. All Charlestowne Drive stops for Arbor Avenue traffic. 
Cherry Blossom Court. All Cherry Blossom Court traffic shall stop for all Hawthorne Lane traffic. 
Chicago Street. All Chicago Street traffic shall stop for all Main Street traffic. 
Chicago Street. All Chicago Street traffic shall stop for all Oakwood Avenue traffic. 
Church Street. All Church Street traffic shall stop for all Town Road and Wood Street traffic. 
Clara Street. All Clara Street traffic shall stop for all Washington Street and Church Street traffic. 
Claremont Street. All Claremont Street traffic shall stop for all Elmwood Avenue traffic. 
Clayton Street. All Clayton Street traffic shall stop for all Spencer Street traffic. 
Reserved. 
Colford Avenue. All Colford Avenue traffic shall stop for all Route 59 (Neltnor Boulevard) traffic. 
Commerce Drive. All Commerce Drive traffic shall stop for all Route 38 traffic. 
Conde Street. All Conde Street traffic shall stop for all Route 59 (Neltnor Boulevard) and Joliet Street traffic. 
Coolidge Avenue. All Coolidge Avenue traffic shall stop for all Hillview Avenue traffic. 
Culver Lane. All Culver Lane traffic shall stop for Adeila Lane and Camden Drive traffic. 
Dale Avenue. All Dale Avenue traffic shall stop for all Route 59 (Neltnor Boulevard) traffic. 
Davenport Drive. All Davenport Drive traffic shall stop for all Overbeck Lane traffic. 
Dayton Street. All Dayton Street traffic shall stop for all Oak Street traffic. 
Downs Drive. All Downs Drive traffic shall stop for all Kress Road traffic. 
Dunham Drive. All Dunham Drive stops for Prince Crossing Road traffic. 
Easton Avenue. All Easton Avenue traffic shall stop for all Hillview Avenue traffic. 
Easton Avenue. All Easton Avenue traffic shall stop for all Main Street and Washington Street traffic. 
Elite Avenue. All Elite Avenue traffic shall stop for all Elmwood Avenue traffic. 
Elizabeth Street. All Elizabeth Street traffic shall stop for all Augusta Avenue, Brown Street, and Forest Avenue traffic. 
Elmwood Street. All Elmwood Street traffic shall stop for all Belleview Street traffic. 
Elmwood Avenue. All Elmwood Avenue traffic shall stop for all Fremont Street, Arbor Avenue, Ingalton Avenue and Route 59 (Neltnor Boulevard). 
Factory Street. All Factory Street traffic shall stop for all Ann Street traffic. 
Fairchild Lane. All Fairchild Lane traffic shall stop for all Barnhart Street traffic. 
Fenton Lane. All Fenton Lane traffic shall stop for all Washington Street traffic. 
Fieldcrest Drive. All Fieldcrest Drive traffic shall stop for all Meadowview Crossing and Meadowview Drive traffic. 
Fieldcrest Drive. All Fieldcrest Drive traffic shall stop for all Prairie Crossing Drive traffic. 
Forest Avenue. All Forest Avenue traffic shall stop for all Town Road and Joliet Street traffic. 
Foxfield Drive. All Foxfield Drive stops for Davenport Drive traffic. 
Fremont Street. All Fremont Street traffic shall stop for all National Street traffic. 
Fulton Street. All Fulton Street traffic shall stop for all Washington Street traffic. 
Galena Street. All Galena Street traffic shall stop for all High Street, Main Street, and Washington Street traffic. 
Garden Street. All Garden Street traffic shall stop for all York Street and Washington Street traffic. 
Gates Street. All Gates Street traffic shall stop for all August Avenue, Brown Street, Conde Street, Dayton Avenue, and Forest Avenue traffic. 
George Street. All George Street traffic shall stop for all Sherman Street traffic. 
Glen Avenue. All Glen Avenue traffic shall stop for all Bishop Street, Joliet Street and Route 59 traffic. 
Glen Avenue. All Glen Avenue traffic shall stop for Elizabeth Street and Gates Street traffic. 
Grand Lake Boulevard. All Grand Lake Boulevard traffic shall stop for all Arbor Avenue, Fremont Street, Ingalton Avenue, Ridgeland Avenue and Route 59 (Neltnor Boulevard) traffic. 
Hahn Avenue. All Hahn Place traffic shall stop for all Forest Avenue traffic. 
Harrison Street. All Harrison Street traffic shall stop for all Norris Street traffic. 
Harvester Road. All Harvester Road traffic shall stop for all Powis Road, and Hawthorne Lane traffic. 
Havens Drive. All Havens Drive traffic shall stop for all Bainbridge Boulevard and Blanchard Lane traffic. 
Hawthorne Lane. All Hawthorne Lane traffic shall stop for all Prince Crossing Road, Arbor Avenue, and Powis Road traffic. 
Hazel Street. All Hazel Street traffic shall stop for all Bishop Street traffic. 
Hazel Street. All Hazel Street traffic shall stop for all Joliet Street traffic. 
Helena Drive. All Helena Drive traffic shall stop for all Wegner Drive traffic. 
Hemlock Lane. All Hemlock Lane traffic shall stop for all Sandcherry Lane and Snowberry Lane traffic. 
Heritage Woods Drive. All Heritage Woods Drive traffic shall stop for all Illinois Route 59 (Neltnor Boulevard) traffic and for Post Oak Circle traffic, excluding where Heritage Woods Drive traffic intersects with both Sweetbay Lane and Post Oak Circle traffic. 
High Street. All High Street traffic shall stop for all Washington Street traffic. 
Highland Avenue. All Highland Avenue traffic shall stop for all Elmwood Avenue traffic. 
Hill Court. All Hill Court traffic shall stop for all Ingalton Avenue traffic. 
Hillview Avenue. All eastbound Hillview Avenue traffic shall stop for all Prince Crossing Road traffic. 
Industrial Drive. All Industrial Drive traffic shall stop for all Hawthorne Lane traffic. 
Ingalton Avenue. All Ingalton Avenue traffic shall stop for all Washington Street and Hawthorne Lane traffic. 
James Avenue. All James Avenue traffic shall stop for all Ingalton Avenue traffic. 
Jenice Avenue. All Jenice Avenue traffic shall stop for all Hillview Avenue traffic. 
Joliet Street. All Joliet Street traffic shall stop for all Brown Street, and Geneva Street traffic. 
Kenwood Avenue. All Kenwood Avenue traffic shall stop for all Ann Street, and Brown Street traffic. 
Kidwell Drive. All Kidwell Drive traffic shall stop for all Alamance Drive and Braemore Drive traffic. 
Kline Road. All Kline Road traffic shall stop for all Route 64 (North Avenue) traffic. 
Kresswood Drive. All Kresswood Drive traffic shall stop for all Wilson Street traffic. 
Laurel Lane. All Laurel Lane traffic shall stop for all Post Oak Circle traffic. 
Lawrence Avenue. All Lawrence Avenue traffic shall stop for all Coolidge Avenue traffic. 
Lehman Drive. All Lehman Drive stops for Bainbridge Boulevard and Camden Drive traffic. 
Lester Street. All Lester Street traffic shall stop for all Bishop Street, Oak Street, and Gates Street traffic. 
Lester Street. All Lester Street traffic shall stop for all Joliet Street, Route 59 (Neltnor Boulevard), and Elizabeth Street traffic. 
Lincoln Avenue. All Lincoln Avenue traffic shall stop for all Church Street and Brown Street traffic. 
Lindsay Court. All Lindsay Court traffic shall stop for all Lehman Drive traffic. 
Lyman Avenue. All Lyman Avenue traffic stop for all Ann Street and Church Street traffic. 
MacQueen Drive. All MacQueen Drive traffic shall stop for all Hawthorne Lane traffic. 
McChesney Road. All McChesney Road traffic shall stop for all Route 38 (Roosevelt Road), and Fabyan Parkway traffic. 
McConnell Avenue. All McConnell Avenue traffic shall stop for all Fremont Street traffic. 
McConnell Avenue. All McConnell Avenue traffic shall stop for all Arbor Avenue traffic. 
Main Street. All Main Street stops for Prince Crossing Road traffic. 
Mansfield Court. All Mansfield Court traffic shall stop for all Lehman Drive traffic. 
Meadow Ridge Drive. All Meadow Ridge Drive stops for Prince Crossing Road traffic. 
Meadowlark Drive. All Meadowlark Drive traffic shall stop for all Klein Road traffic. 
Meadowview Crossing. All Meadowview Crossing traffic shall stop for all Fieldcrest Drive and Meadowview Drive traffic. 
Meadowview Crossing. All Meadowview Crossing stops for Prince Crossing Road traffic. 
Meadowview Drive. All Meadowview Drive traffic shall stop for all Fieldcrest Drive and Meadowview Crossing traffic. 
Meadowview Drive. All Meadowview Drive traffic shall stop for all Prince Crossing Drive traffic. 
Mulberry Drive. All Mulberry Drive stops for Diversey Parkway traffic. 
Mulberry Drive. All Mulberry Drive traffic shall stop for all Indianwood traffic. 
Natalie Drive. All Natalie Drive stops for Woodside Drive traffic. 
National Street. All National Street traffic shall stop for all Arbor Avenue and Ingalton Avenue traffic. 
Norris Avenue. All Norris Avenue traffic shall stop for all Ann Street, Church Street, and Washington Street traffic. 
Norris Avenue. All Norris Avenue traffic shall stop for all Diversey Parkway traffic. 
Oak Street. All Oak Street traffic shall stop for all Augusta Avenue, Brown Street, Forest Avenue, Grand Lake Boulevard, Route 38 (Roosevelt Road), and Washington Street traffic. 
Oak Street. All Oak Street traffic shall stop for all Elmwood Street and Glen Avenue traffic. 
Oakwood Avenue. All Oakwood Avenue traffic shall stop for all Washington Street and Ingalton Avenue traffic. 
Orchard Lane. All Orchard Lane stops for Gary's Mill Road traffic. 
Overbeck Lane. All Overbeck Lane traffic shall stop for all Lehman Drive traffic. 
Parker Street. All southbound Parker Street traffic stops for all Spencer Street traffic. 
Parkside Avenue. All Parkside Avenue traffic shall stop for all Church Street and Brown Street traffic. 
Partridge Drive. All Partridge Drive traffic shall stop for all Meadowlark Drive traffic. 
Pearl Street. All Pearl Street traffic shall stop for all Ann Street traffic. 
Pilsen Road. All Pilsen Road traffic shall stop for all Hawthorne Lane traffic. 
Pine Street. All Pine Street traffic shall stop for all Route 59 (Neltnor Boulevard) and Ingalton Avenue traffic. 
Plymouth Court. All Plymouth Court traffic shall stop for all Route 59 (Neltnor Boulevard) traffic. 
Pomeroy Street. All Pomeroy Street traffic shall stop for all Blakely Street, Route 59 (Neltnor Boulevard), and Joliet Street traffic. 
Pomeroy Street. All Pomeroy Street traffic shall stop for all Gates Street traffic. 
Pomeroy Street. All Pomeroy Street traffic shall stop for all Wood Street traffic. 
Post Oak Circle. All Post Oak Circle shall stop for all Heritage Woods Drive traffic at the intersection of Heritage Woods Drive and Sweetbay Lane only. 
Powis Court. All Powis Court traffic shall stop for all Powis Road traffic. 
Powis Road. All southbound Powis Road traffic shall stop for all Hawthorne Lane traffic. 
Powis Road. All Powis Road traffic shall stop for all Hawthorne Lane traffic and all Smith Road traffic. 
Prairie Crossing Drive. All Prairie Crossing Drive stops for Route 64 (North Avenue) traffic. 
Prince Crossing. All Prince Crossing Road traffic shall stop for all Saint Charles Road Traffic. 
Ray Avenue. All Ray Avenue traffic shall stop for all Ingalton Avenue traffic. 
Red Oak Court. All Red Oak Court traffic shall stop for all Snowberry Lane traffic. 
Ridgeland Avenue. All Ridgeland Avenue traffic shall stop for all Washington Street traffic. 
Ridgewood Lane. All Ridgewood Lane traffic shall stop for all Wild Ginger Trail traffic. 
Rosewood Drive. All Rosewood Drive traffic shall stop for all Hawthorne Lane traffic. 
Saint Charles Road. All Saint Charles Road traffic shall stop for all Kline Road traffic. 
Sassafras Drive. All Sassafras Drive traffic shall stop for all Thomas Drive and Hemlock Lane traffic. 
Sherman Street. All Sherman Street traffic shall stop for all Ann Street, Church Street, Stimmel Street and Washington Street traffic. 
Shingle Oak Drive. All Shingle Oak Drive traffic shall stop for all Atlantic Drive, Post Oak Circle and Sandcherry Lane traffic. 
Shingle Oak Drive. All Shingle Oak Drive traffic shall stop for all Atlantic Drive and Post Oak Circle traffic. 
Snowberry Lane. All Snowberry Lane traffic shall stop for all Heritage Woods Drive traffic. 
Sophia Street. All Sophia Street traffic shall stop for all Washington Street traffic. 
Spencer Street. All Spencer Street traffic shall stop for all Joliet Street, and Wilson Avenue traffic. 
Sterling Avenue. All Sterling Avenue traffic shall stop for all Coolidge Avenue traffic. 
Stimmel Street. All Stimmel Street traffic shall stop for all Gates Street and Wood Street traffic. 
Stimmel Street. All Stimmel Street traffic shall stop for all Blakely Street, Joliet Street, and Route 59 (Neltnor Boulevard) traffic. 
Stockberry Lane. All Stockberry Lane traffic shall stop for all Lehman Drive and Overbeck Lane traffic. 
Sudbury Court. All Sudbury court traffic shall stop for all Barnhart Street traffic. 
Summit Avenue. All Summit Avenue traffic shall stop for all Oakwood Avenue traffic. 
Sweetbay Lane. All Sweetbay Lane traffic shall stop for all Heritage Woods Drive and Snowberry Lane traffic. 
Sycamore Street. All Sycamore Street traffic shall stop for all Conde Street traffic. 
Tanager Lane. All Tanager Lane traffic shall stop for all Meadowlake Drive traffic. 
Tara Lane. All Tara Lane stops for Charlestowne Drive traffic. 
Thomas Drive. All Thomas Drive stops for Marcella Lane traffic. 
Town Road. All Town Road traffic shall stop for all Route 38 (Roosevelt Road), and Washington Street traffic. 
Turner Avenue. All Turner Avenue traffic shall stop for all Arbor Avenue traffic. 
Turner Court. All Turner Court traffic shall stop for all Washington Street traffic. 
Tye Court. All Tye Court traffic shall stop for all Galena Street traffic. 
Vine Street. All Vine Street traffic shall stop for all Church Street traffic. 
Virgie Place. All Virgie Place traffic shall stop for all Ingalton Avenue traffic. 
Washington Street. All eastbound Washington Street traffic shall stop for all High Street traffic. 
Wegner Drive. All Wegner Drive traffic shall stop for all Route 38 (Roosevelt Road) and Washington Street traffic. 
Wendell Avenue. All Wendell Avenue traffic shall stop for all Ingalton Avenue, and Route 59 (Neltnor Boulevard) traffic. 
Wegner Drive. All Wegner Drive traffic shall stop for all Washington Street traffic. 
Western Drive. All Western Drive traffic shall stop for all Kress Road traffic. 
Weyrauch Street. All Weyrauch Street traffic shall stop for Brown Street, Ann Street, and Blair Street traffic. 
Weyrauch Street. All Weyrauch Street traffic shall stop for all Pomeroy Street traffic. 
Weyrauch Street. All Weyrauch Street traffic shall stop for all Stimmel Street traffic. 
Whispering Oaks Drive. All Whispering Oaks Drive stops for Wilson Street traffic. 
White Oak Lane. All White Oak Lane traffic shall stop for all Heritage Woods Drive traffic. 
Wild Ginger Trail. All Wild Ginger Trail traffic shall stop for all Hawthorne Lane traffic. 
Willow Creek Road. All Willow Creek Road traffic shall stop for all Hawthorne Lane traffic. 
Wilson Avenue. All Wilson Avenue traffic shall stop for all Conde Street traffic. 
Winston Street. All Winston Street traffic shall stop for all Atlantic Drive traffic. 
Wood Street. All Wood Street traffic shall stop for all Ann Street, Geneva Street, and Washington Street traffic. 
Wood Street. All Wood Street traffic shall stop for all Brown Street traffic. 
Woodside Drive. All Woodside Drive traffic shall stop for all Hawthorne Lane traffic. 
Wyeth Drive. All Wyeth Drive traffic shall stop for all Bainbridge Boulevard traffic. 
York Avenue. All York Avenue traffic shall stop for all Arbor Avenue, Garden Street, Sophia Street and Fremont Street traffic. 
(Ord. No. 2125, § 2, 2-21-89; Ord. No. 1903, § 1, 10-7-91; Ord. No. 2543, § 1, 4-20-92; Ord. No. 2723, §§ 1, 2, 12-6-93; Ord. No. 2728, § 1, 12-20-93; Ord. No. 2744, § 1, 3-21-94; Ord. No. 2844, § 1, 11-21-94; Ord. No. 2907, § 1, 6-5-95; Ord. No. 2949, § 2, 10-16-95; Ord. No. 2964, § 1, 1-2-96; Ord. No. 4035, § 1, 12-1-97; Ord. No. 4053, § 1, 2-16-98; Ord. No. 4127, § 1, 9-21-98; Ord. No. 4206, § 1, 7-19-99; Ord. No. 4252, § 1, 11-5-99; Ord. No. 4273, § 1, 2-6-2000; Ord. No. 4351, § 1, 9-18-2000; Ord. No. 01-O-0031, § 1, 6-4-2001; Ord. No. 02-O-0007, § 1, 2-4-2002; Ord. No. 02-O-0083, §§ 1, 2, 6-3-2002; Ord. No. 03-O-0025, § 1, 4-7-2003; Ord. No. 03-O-0075, § 1, 10-20-2003; Ord. No. 05-O-0021, § 1, 3-21-2005; Ord. No. 05-O-0062, §§ 4, 5, 8-1-2005; Ord. No. 06-O-0024, § 1, 3-20-2006; Ord. No. 06-O-0032, § 1, 4-3-2006; Ord. No. 06-O-0074, §§ 1, 2, 9-5-2006; Ord. No. 07-O-0063, § 1, 8-6-2007; Ord. No. 09-O-0051, § 1, 10-5-2009; Ord. No. 13-O-0008, § 1, 2-4-2013; Ord. No. 13-O-0022, § 1, 7-1-2013; Ord. No. 16-O-0016, § 1, 4-18-2016; Ord. No. 18-O-0007, § 1, 3-5-2018)  
Secs. 17-177—17-180. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - YIELD INTERSECTIONS 
 
Sec. 17-181. - Designated; compliance required. 
Every driver of a vehicle approaching a yield intersection indicated by a yield sign shall yield to traffic at the designated yield street described as: 
Fulton Street. All Fulton Street traffic shall yield for all Center Street traffic. 
Lakeside Drive. All Lakeside Drive traffic shall yield for all Willow Creek Drive traffic. 
Long Oak Drive. All Long Oak Drive traffic shall yield for all Willow Creek Drive traffic. 
Persimmon Drive. All Persimmon Drive traffic shall yield to all High Ridge Drive traffic and all Dunham Drive traffic. 
(Ord. No. 15-O-0016, § 1, 5-4-2015; Ord. No. 17-O-0022, § 1, 7-3-2017)  
Secs. 17-182—17-185. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING PROHIBITED 
 
Sec. 17-186. - Designated; compliance required. 
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to park, or be parked within thirty (30) feet upon the approach to any yield sign, stop sign or traffic-control signal located at the side of a roadway, on the following streets as described: 
(1)  Those streets listed as numbers (1) through (103) in section 17-176, "Stop intersections." 
(2)  Those streets listed as numbers (1) through (12) in section 17-216, "Traffic-control devices," of the Code. 
(3)  Those streets listed as numbers (1) through (14) in section 17-181, "Yield intersections," of the Code. 
(Ord. No. 2125, § 2, 2-21-89)  
Sec. 17-187. - Stopping and standing prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to stop the vehicle or leave it standing while occupied on the following described streets: 
Conde Street, north side between Route 59 and Gates Street. 
(Ord. No. 2583, § 1, 6-15-92)  
Secs. 17-188—17-190. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - PARKING PROHIBITED AT ALL TIMES 
 
Sec. 17-191. - Streets designated; compliance required. 
When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall at any time park a vehicle upon any of the following described streets: 
(a)  Zone 1. Area south of Washington Street, east of Main Street and east of Joliet Street: 
Allen Avenue, west side, between Geneva Street to the dead end south of Spencer Street. 
Allen Avenue, west side, between Glen Avenue and Augusta Avenue. 
Augusta Avenue, south side, between Joliet Street and Route 59 (Neltnor Boulevard). 
Augusta Avenue, north side, between Illinois Route 59 and a point one hundred fifty-five (155) feet west of the west right-of-way line of Illinois Route 59. 
Bainbridge Boulevard, both sides between Smith Road and Braemore Drive. 
Barber Avenue, west side, between Glen Avenue and Augusta Avenue. 
Barber Avenue, west side, between Spencer Street and Brown Street. 
Bishop Street, west side, between Brown Street and Hazel Street. 
Bishop Street, west side, between Lester Street and Route 38 (Roosevelt Road). 
Blair Street, north side, between Illinois Route 59 and Easton Avenue. 
Blair Street, north side, between Illinois Route 59 and a point one hundred fifty-five (155) feet west of the west right-of-way line of Illinois Route 59. 
Blair Street, south side, between Joliet Street and Route 59 (Neltnor Boulevard). 
Blair Street, south side, between Illinois Route 59 and Ridgeland Avenue. 
Blakely Street, west side, between Conde Street and Brown Street. 
Blakely Street, west side, between Glen Avenue and Augusta Avenue. 
Brown Street, south side, between Joliet Street and Route 59 (Neltnor Boulevard). 
Brown Street, north side, between Illinois Route 59 and a point one hundred fifty-five (155) feet west of the west right-of-way line of Illinois Route 59. 
Cambden Drive, both sides between Smith Road and Lehman Drive. 
Center Street, south side, between High Street and Washington Street. 
Chicago Street, north side, between Main Street and Oakwood Avenue. 
Clayton Street, both sides, except holders of permits for residential parking duly issued by the city to residents on this street may park on the east side. 
Colford Avenue, north side, between Oakwood Avenue and Route 59 (Neltnor Boulevard). 
Conde Street, north side, between Wilson Avenue and Route 59 (Neltnor Boulevard). 
Conde Street, between Joliet Street and Wilson Avenue. 
Dale Avenue, south side, between Elizabeth Street and Route 59 (Neltnor Boulevard). 
Dayton Avenue, south side, between Route 38 (Roosevelt Road) and Route 59 (Neltnor Boulevard). 
Easton Avenue, west side, between Washington Street and Hillview Avenue. 
Elizabeth Street, east side, between Brown Street and Lester Street. 
Elizabeth Street, west side, between Brown Street and Dayton Avenue. 
Forest Avenue, north side, between Bishop Street and Neltnor Boulevard (Route 59). 
Forest Avenue, south side, between Oak Street and a point one hundred twenty (120) feet west. 
Fulton Street, west side, between Washington Street and Chicago Street. 
Galena Street, south side, between High Street and Washington Street. 
Gates Street, west side, between Conde Street and Dayton Avenue. 
Glen Avenue, south side, between Joliet Street and Route 59 (Neltnor Boulevard). 
Hazel Street, south side, between Joliet Street and Bishop Street. 
High Street, west side, from Washington Street to the offset portion of this diagonal parking area provided for the 200 High Street Building (this diagonal parking shall not be affected by this parking restriction). This restriction shall commence again from the south edge of the last diagonal parking stall and shall continue to Chicago Street. 
Hillview Avenue, south side, between Easton Avenue and the city limits. 
Joliet Street, east side, between Geneva Street and the city limits. 
Lester Street, north side, between Illinois Route 59 and a point one hundred fifty-five (155) feet going west. 
Lester Street, south side, between Bishop Street and Route 59 (Neltnor Boulevard). 
Oak Street, west side, between Brown Street and Route 38 (Roosevelt Road). 
Oakwood Avenue, east side, between Summit Street and a point one hundred (100) feet north of Colford Avenue. 
Oakwood Avenue, west side, between Washington Street and Colford Avenue. 
Parker Avenue, west side, between Geneva Street and Spencer Street. 
Pomeroy Street, south side, between Joliet Street and Route 59 (Neltnor Boulevard). 
Pomeroy Street, north side, between Illinois Route 59 and a point one hundred fifty-five (155) feet west of the west right-of-way line of Illinois Route 59. 
Spencer Street, both sides, between Joliet Street and Sycamore Street. 
Stimmel Street, north side, between Illinois Route 59 and a point one hundred fifty-five (155) feet west of the west right-of-way line of Illinois Route 59. 
Stimmel Street, south side, between Joliet Street and Route 59 (Neltnor Boulevard). 
Summit Avenue, north side, between Oakwood Avenue and end of street. 
Sycamore Street, west side, between Spencer Street and Conde Street. 
Wilson Avenue, between Conde Street and Main Street. 
(b)  Zone 2. Area south of Washington Street and west of Main Street and west of Joliet Street. 
Ann Street, north side, between Kenwood Avenue and a point fifty (50) feet west of the E.J. and E. Railroad tracks. 
Anne Street, north side and south side, Weyrauch Street to Joliet Street. 
Avard Street, west side, between Washington Street and Burlington Northern Railroad tracks. 
Blair Street, north side, between Joliet Street and Factory Street. 
Blair Street, north side, between Sherman Street and west end of Blair Street. 
Blair Street, south side, between E.J. and E. Railroad tracks and Sherman Street. 
Brown Street, north side, between Joliet Street and Factory Street. 
Brown Street, north side, between the east right-of-way line, on Kenwood Avenue to a point twenty (20) feet to the east and between the west right-of-way line of Lyman to a point twenty (20) feet to the west. 
Brown Street, south side, between Lyman Avenue and Town Road. 
Church Street, north side, from a point thirty (30) feet west of the fire station apron to a point thirty (30) feet east of the same fire station apron located at 509 Church Street. 
Church Street, south side, between Wood Street and Town Road. 
Clara Street, west side, between Washington Avenue and Church Street. 
Factory Street, west side, between Ann Street and Brown Street. 
Forest Avenue, north side, between Lyman Avenue and Town Road; south side from a point approximately four hundred twenty-three (423) feet east of the east right of way line of Town Road to a point approximately four hundred eighty-five (485) feet east of the east right-of-way line of Town Road. 
George Street, the 200 block, both sides, except for holders of permits for residential parking duly issued by the city to residents on this street; and 
George Street, south side, between the EJ & E Railroad tracks and Pearl Street. 
George Street, south side, between Pearl Street and Wood Street. 
Harrison Street, north side, between Avard Avenue and Clara Street. 
Hazel Street, north side, between Joliet Street and Factory Street. 
Joliet Street, west side, between Brown Street and the city limits. 
Joliet Street, west side, Brown Street to Conde Street, and a point twenty (20) feet north of the centerline, extended, of Spencer Street to Geneva Street. 
Kenwood Avenue, west side, between Ann Street and Forest Avenue. 
Lester Street, north side, between Joliet Street and Factory Street. 
Lincoln Avenue, east side, between Church Street and Forest Avenue. 
Lyman Avenue, east side, between Ann Street and the Pioneer School. 
Lyman Avenue, west side, between Brown Street and Forest Avenue. 
Milo Court, west side, between Harrison Street and end of street. 
Norris Avenue, east side, between Washington Street and Ann Street. 
Parkside Avenue, west side, between Church Street and Forest Avenue. 
Pearl Street, east side, between George Street and Ann Street. 
Pomeroy Street, north side, between Joliet Street and Factory Street. 
Sherman Street, east side, between Washington Street and Church Street. 
Sherman Street, west side, between Church Street and Stimmel Street. 
Stimmel Street, north side, between Joliet Street and Factory Street. 
Stimmel Street, north side, between Sherman Street and the west end of Stimmel Street. 
Stimmel Street, south side, between E.J. and E. Railroad tracks and Sherman Street. 
Town Road, east side, between Washington Street and Route 38 (Roosevelt Road). 
Town Road, west side, between Forest Avenue and Route 38 (Roosevelt Road). 
Town Road, west side, between Washington Street and Brown Street. 
Vine Street, west side, between Church Street and George Street. 
Weyrauch Street, west side, between Ann Street and Lester Street. 
Wood Street, west side, between Ann Street and Brown Street. 
(c)  Zone 3. Area north of Washington Street and east of Fremont Street: 
Arbor Avenue, east side, between Washington Street and the city limits. 
Arbor Avenue, west side, between McConnell Avenue and a point forty (40) feet north of the north right-of-way line of McConnell Avenue. 
Belleview Avenue, east side, between Grand Lake Boulevard and National Street. 
Campbell Drive, both sides between Academy Lane and Hawthorne Lane. 
Claremont Avenue, east side, between Grand Lake Boulevard and National Street. 
Elite Avenue, east side, between Grand Lake Boulevard and National Street. 
Elmwood Street, north side, between Claremont Avenue and Highland Avenue. 
Elmwood Street, south side, between Fremont Street and Route 59 (Neltnor Boulevard). 
Fairview Avenue, south side, between Sophia Street and Garden Street. 
Fremont Street, east side, between McConnell Avenue and National Street. 
Garden Street, east side, between Washington Street and York Street. 
Garden Street, west side, between East Grand Lake Boulevard and York Street. 
Grand Lake Boulevard, south side, between Fremont Street and Ridgeland Avenue. 
Highland Avenue, east side, between Grand Lake Boulevard and National Street. 
Ingalton Avenue, west side, between Washington Street and city limits. 
McConnell Avenue, south side, between Arbor Avenue and Sophia Street. 
National Street, north side, between Arbor Avenue and Ingalton Street. 
National Street, south side, between Yale Street and Arbor Avenue. 
North Oak Street, east side, from Washington Street to Elmwood Street. 
Oakwood Avenue, east side, between Washington Street and Ingalton Avenue. 
Oakwood Avenue, west side, between York Avenue and a point two hundred fifty (250) feet south of the south right-of-way line of York Avenue. 
Oakwood Avenue, west side, between York Avenue and a point two hundred fifty (250) feet south of the south right-of-way line of York Avenue (except on Saturdays and Sundays during which only handicapped parking will be permitted from a point beginning fifty (50) feet and ending one hundred fifteen (115) feet from the south right-of-way line of York Avenue). 
Pine Street, south side, between Ingalton Avenue and Route 59 (Neltnor Boulevard). 
Plymouth Court, south side, between North Oak Street and Route 59 (Neltnor Boulevard). 
Prairie Crossing Drive , east side, between Fieldcrest Drive and North Avenue (IL Route 64) frontage road. 
Ridgeland Avenue, both sides, between Grand Lake Boulevard and a point three hundred (300) feet south. 
Rosewood Drive, west side, from the intersection of Hawthorne Lane to a point one thousand three hundred (1,300) feet north. 
Smith Road, from the EJ & E Railroad tracks to the western boundary of the city. 
Sophia Street, east side, between Washington Street and Turner Avenue. 
Virgie Place, north side, between Ingalton Avenue and a point two hundred (200) feet east of the east right-of-way line of Oakwood Avenue. 
Wendall Street, south side, between Ingalton Avenue and Route 59 (Neltnor Boulevard). 
York Avenue, south side, between Fremont Street and Oakwood Avenue. 
(d)  Zone 4. Area north of Washington Street and west of Fremont Street: 
Acorn Hill Lane, south side, between the east intersection with Long Oak Drive and the west intersection with Long Oak Drive. 
Aurora Street, east side, between Washington Street and end of street. 
Aurora Street, west side, between Washington Street and a point one hundred fifty (150) feet north. 
Diversey Parkway, north side, from Norris Avenue to a point two hundred (200) feet east of Mulberry Drive. 
Elliot Avenue, east side, between Grand Lake Boulevard and York Avenue. 
Foxfield Drive, south side, from the western right-of-way line of Lehman Drive/Davenport Drive to the western municipal corporate limits (a point approximately two hundred seventy-five (275) feet west). 
Foxfield Drive, north side, from the western right-of-way line of Lehman Drive/Davenport Drive to a point two hundred ten (210) feet west. 
Galvin Court, south side, between Natalie Drive and a point three hundred (300) feet east. 
Grand Lake Boulevard, north side, between Fremont Street and the end of the street. 
Grand Lake Boulevard, south side, from a point two hundred eight (208) feet west of the west right-of-way line of Fremont Street to a point two hundred thirty (230) feet west of the Fremont Street right-of-way line. 
Hemlock Lane, north side between Sandcherry Lane and Snowberry Lane. 
Heritage Woods Drive, north side between Illinois Route 59 (Neltnor Boulavard.) and the west intersection with Post Oak Circle. 
Heritage Woods Drive, south side between White Oak Lane and Illinois Route 59 (Neltnor Boulevard.) 
Lake Side Drive, north and east sides, between the north intersection of Willow Creek Road and the south intersection with Willow Creek Drive. 
Laurel Lane, north side between the east and west intersections with Post Oak Circle. 
Long Oak Drive, south side, between Woodside Drive and Willow Creek Drive. 
Marcella Lane, north and east sides, between Thomas Drive and Woodside Drive. 
Natalie Drive, north side, between the east intersection with Thomas Drive and the west intersection with Thomas Drive. 
Natalie Drive, south side, between Thomas Drive and a point one hundred (100) feet west. 
Natalie Drive, west side, between the west intersection with Thomas Drive and Woodside Drive. 
Post Oak Circle, east side and south sides, between Shingle Oak Drive and east intersection with Laurel Lane. 
Post Oak Circle, west side between the east intersection with Laurel Lane and east intersection with Heritage Woods Drive. 
Red Oak Court, north side between Snowberry Lane and a point one hundred fifty (150) feet west. 
Sandcherry Lane, east side between Shingle Oak Drive and Hemlock Lane and a point two hundred fifty (250) feet south. 
Sassafrass Drive, east side between Hemlock Lane and Thomas Drive. 
Snowberry Lane, east and north sides, between Heritage Woods Drive and White Oak Lane. 
Sweet Bay Lane, east side between Heritage Woods Drive and Snowberry Lane. 
Thomas Drive, north and west sides, between the west intersection with Natalie Drive and the east intersection with Natalie Drive. 
Western Drive, north side, between Industrial Drive and Kress Road. 
White Oak Lane, east side between Heritage Woods Drive and Snowberry Lane. 
Willow Creek Road, east side, between Hawthorne Lane and a point one hundred (100) feet north. 
Willow Creek Road, west side, between Woodside Drive and Hawthorne Lane. 
Woodside Drive, east side, between Hawthorne Lane and Natalie Drive. 
Woodside Drive, south side, between Natalie Drive and Willow Creek Road. 
Woodside Drive, west side, between Hawthorne Lane and a point one hundred (100) feet north. 
Woodside Court, north side, between Woodside Drive and a point three hundred (300) feet west. 
Yale Street, east side between National Street and Elmwood Street. 
York Avenue, north side, between Fremont Street and Elliot Avenue. 
(e)  Citywide Area. Both sides of street: 
Ann Street, between Joliet Street and a point fifty (50) feet west of the E.J. & E. Railroad tracks. 
Arbor Avenue, between Neltnor Boulevard (Route 59) and Hawthorne Lane. Ingalton Avenue between Route 59 (Neltnor Boulevard) and Amber Court. 
Atlantic Drive, both sides between Illinois Route 64 (North Avenue) and Hawthorne Lane. 
Carolina Drive, between Hawthorne Lane and Winston Street. 
Downs Drive, between Kress Road and Industrial Drive. 
East Washington Street, between Main (Fremont) Street to the east city limits, except that the diagonal parking area provided for the West Chicago Public Library shall not be affected by this parking restriction. 
Fabyan Parkway, between Route 38 (Roosevelt Road) and the west city limits. 
Geneva Street, between Wood Street and Parker Street. 
Hawthorne Lane, between Ingalton Avenue and Prince Crossing. 
Hawthorne Lane, between Kress Road and Ingalton Avenue. 
Industrial Drive, from Downs Drive north to the end of the street. 
Klein Road, between the north city limits and North Avenue. 
Main Street, between Chicago Street and the east city limits. 
McConnell Avenue, between Arbor Avenue and the west end of the street. 
Neltnor Boulevard (Illinois Route 59) throughout city. 
Norris Avenue, from Diversey Parkway to a point two hundred (200) feet south of St. Andrews Court. 
North Avenue (Illinois Route 64) throughout city. 
North Avenue (Illinois Route 64) Frontage Road, south side of North Avenue (Illinois Route 64), from North Avenue (Illinois Route 64) to the west end of the street (approximately 800 feet west of Prairie Crossing Drive). 
Prince Crossing Road, between Geneva Road and St. Charles Road. 
Roosevelt Road (Illinois Route 38) throughout city. 
Shingle Oak Drive, both sides between Atlantic Drive and Post Oak Circle 
Turner Avenue, between Arbor Avenue and Garden Street. 
West Washington Street, between Main Street and the east property line of Lot 1 of Winslow's Addition. 
West Washington Street, between the C. & N.W. Railroad tracks and Route 38 (Roosevelt Road). 
Wilson Avenue, between Spencer Street and Main Street. 
Winston Street, between Atlantic Drive and Carolina Drive. 
Wood Street, between Washington Street and Geneva Street and Ann Street, except the wider section on the east side of Wood Street between George Street and a point thirty (30) feet south of the entrance of the high school parking lot, and from a point thirty (30) feet north of the high school parking lot to the bend in the road to the north. 
(Ord. No. 2125, § 2, 2-21-89; Ord. No. 2152, § 1, 4-17-89; Ord. No. 2171, § 3, 6-5-89; Ord. No. 2244, §§ 3—5, 1-5-90; Ord. No. 2317, § 3, 7-2-90; Ord. No. 2318, § 1, 7-2-90; Ord. No. 2358, § 1, 10-15-90; Ord. No. 2377, § 1, 1-7-91; Ord. No. 2413, §§ 1—3, 5-6-91; Ord. No. 2441, §§ 1, 2, 6-3-91; Ord. No. 2490, § 1, 10-21-91; Ord. No. 2615, § 1, 12-7-92; Ord. No. 2692, § 1, 8-2-93; Ord. No. 2728, § 2, 12-20-93; Ord. No. 2917, §§ 1, 2, 6-19-95; Ord. No. 2939, § 2, 9-5-95; Ord. No. 2951, §§ 1, 2, 10-16-95; Ord. No. 2996, § 1, 5-20-96; Ord. No. 4031, § 1, 11-3-97; Ord. No. 4046, § 1, 12-15-97; Ord. No. 4100, § 1, 5-4-98; Ord. No. 4129, § 1, 10-5-98; Ord. No. 4251, § 2, 11-5-99; Ord. No. 4338, § 1, 9-18-2000; Ord. No. 4403, § 1, 3-5-2001; Ord. No. 01-O-0039, § 1, 6-4-2001; Ord. No. 01-O-0094, §§ 1, 3, 9-4-2001; Ord. No. 01-O-0116, § 1, 12-3-2001; Ord. No. 02-O-0047, § 1, 4-1-2002; Ord. No. 02-O-0124, § 1, 11-4-2002; Ord. No. 03-O-0024, § 1, 4-7-2003; Ord. No. 06-O-0024, §§ 2—4, 3-20-2006; Ord. No. 06-O-0032, §§ 2—4, 4-3-2006; Ord. No. 06-O-0074, § 3, 9-5-2006; Ord. No. 06-O-0087, § 1, 10-16-2006; Ord. No. 07-O-0062, § 1, 8-6-2007; Ord. No. 08-O-0015, § 1, 3-3-2008; Ord. No. 08-O-0017, § 1, 3-3-2008; Ord. No. 08-O-0031, § 1, 5-5-2008; Ord. No. 09-O-0010, § 1, 2-2-2009; Ord. No. 09-O-0029, § 1, 4-6-2009; Ord. No. 11-O-0058, §§ 1, 2, 10-3-2011; Ord. No. 13-O-0012, § 1, 3-4-2013; Ord. No. 16-O-0021, § 1, 4-18-2016)  
Secs. 17-192—17-195. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 7. - PARKING PROHIBITED DURING CERTAIN HOURS ON CERTAIN STREETS 
 
Sec. 17-196. - Designated; compliance required. 
When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle between the hours specified herein on any day, except Sundays and public holidays, upon any streets or parts of streets as follows. 
(a)  The following named streets are limited to two-hour parking between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. daily: 
(1)  Dale Street, the north side from South Oak Street to Route 59 (South Neltnor Boulevard). 
(2)  Fremont Street, both sides, from McConnell Avenue to Washington Street. 
(3)  Galena Street, both sides, from Main Street to High Street. 
(4)  Joliet Street, west side, from a point twenty (20) feet south of the centerline, extended, of Spencer Street to a point twenty (20) feet north of the centerline, extended, of Spencer Street. 
(5)  Reserved. 
(6)  Main Street, both sides, from Washington Street to Chicago Street. 
(7)  Washington Street, both sides, from Main Street to Aurora Street. 
(b)  The following named streets are limited to four-hour parking between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. daily: 
(1)  Reserved. 
(2)  Center Street, the north side from Washington Street to High Street. 
(3)  Chicago Street, the south side from High Street to Oakwood Avenue. 
(4)  Fulton Street, the east side from Chicago Street to Washington Street. 
(5)  Galena Street, the south side from High Street to Washington Street. 
(6)  High Street, the east side from Chicago Street to Center Street. 
(7)  McConnell Avenue, the north side from Arbor Avenue to Sophia Street. 
(8)  Turner Court, the west side from Main Street to Washington Street. 
(c)  Parking, standing or stopping shall be prohibited on the following streets between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on school days: 
Natalie Drive , the south side from the intersection of the centerlines of Marcella Lane, Natalie Drive and Thomas Drive to a point one hundred fifty (150) feet south/southwest. 
Marcella Lane , the south side from the intersection of the centerlines of Marcella Lane, Natalie Drive and Thomas Drive to a point one hundred eighteen (118) feet north/northeast. 
Thomas Drive , both sides from the intersection of the centerlines of Marcella Lane, Natalie Drive and Thomas Drive to a point two hundred fifty (250) feet northwest/west. 
Marcella Lane , the west side from a point four hundred thirty-four (434) feet north of the intersection of the centerlines of Willow Creek Drive and Woodside Drive to a point five hundred four (504) feet north. 
(d)  The street portion of the following named streets shall be limited to twenty (20) minutes of parking between the hours specified: 
(1)  George Street, the north side from the east right-of-way line of Sherman Street to a point eighty (80) feet east, a loading zone area, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. on school days. 
(2)  Reserved. 
(3)  Main Street, the south side the first parking stall west of Turner Court daily, between 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. 
(4)  Main Street, the south side two (2) parking stalls located within the intersection with Galena Street daily, between 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. 
(4.5)  Sherman Street, the east side from the north right-of-way line of George Street to a point one hundred (100) feet north, a loading zone area, between the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m. on school days. 
(5)  Turner Court alley, the east side, a loading zone area daily between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. except Sundays and legal holidays. 
(6)  Wood Street, the north side from sixty (60) feet west of the southwest corner of Lot 2 of Winslow Brothers first addition to thirty (30) feet west of the southeast corner of such Lot 2, between 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on school days, a loading zone area. 
(7)  Wood Street, the west side from thirty (30) feet south of the northeast corner of Lot 1 of Winslow Brothers first addition to thirty (30) feet north of the westbound corner of Lot 2 of such addition, between 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on school days, a loading zone area. 
(8)  Geneva Street, the south side from one hundred (100) feet east of the southeast corner of Wood Street and Geneva Street, to two hundred (200) feet east of the southeast corner of Wood Street and Geneva Street. 
(e)  The street portion of the following named streets should be limited to ten (10) minutes of parking between the hours specified: 
(1)  The second and third parking stalls on the north side of Main Street, east of Galena Street. 
(2)  Reserved. 
(f)  The following parking areas are limited to two-hour parking between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. daily: 
(1)  Main Street , the right-of-way south of the curb, from a point two hundred fifty (250) feet east of the centerline of Wilson Avenue to a point three hundred ninety (390) feet east of the centerline of Wilson Avenue. 
(2)  Reserved. 
(g)  The street portion of the following named streets shall have no parking thereon from 7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., except Saturday, Sunday, and holidays: 
Conde Street, the south side between Clayton Street and Route 59 (Neltnor Boulevard). 
(h)  The street portion of the following named streets shall have no parking thereon from 8:30 a.m. to 9:30 a.m., from 11:00 a.m. to 12:30 p.m., and from 2:30 p.m. to 3:30 p.m., on school days: 
Kenwood Avenue, the east side from two hundred twenty-five (225) feet north of the north right-of-way line of Brown Street to a point five hundred forty (540) feet north of the north line of Brown Street. 
(i)  The street portion of the following named streets shall have no parking thereon except Sunday and holidays: 
Wood Street, the east side from a point thirty (30) feet north of the high school parking lot to the bend in the road to the north. 
(j)  Reserved. 
(k)  The street portion of the following named streets shall have no parking thereon from 7:00 a.m. to 1:30 p.m. on school days, except for holders of permits for residential parking duly issued by the city to residents on these streets: 
Allen Avenue, the east side from Geneva Street to dead end south of Spencer Street. 
Ann Street, the south side from Sherman Street to fifty (50) feet west of the E.J. & E. Railroad track. 
Barber Street, the east side from Spencer Street to Brown Street. 
Blair Street, the north side from E.J. & E. tracks to Sherman Street. 
Blair Street, the south side from Joliet Street to Factory Street. 
Blair Street, the north side from Joliet Street to Blakely Street. 
Blakely Street, the east side from Conde Street to Brown Street. 
Brown Street, the north side from Joliet Street to Blakely Street. 
Brown Street, the south side from Joliet Street to Factory Street. 
Church Street, the north side from Sherman Street to Wood Street. 
Clara Street, the east side from the Burlington Northern tracks to Church Street. 
Factory Street, east side, between Ann Street and Brown Street. 
George Street, the north side from Sherman Street to Wood Street. 
Joliet Street, the west side from Conde Street to Stimmel Street. 
Parker Avenue, the east side from Geneva Street to Spencer Street. 
Pomeroy Street, the north side from Joliet Street to Blakely Street. 
Pomeroy Street, the south side from Joliet Street to Factory Street. 
Sherman Street, the west side from the Burlington Northern Railroad tracks to Church Street. 
Sherman Street, the east side from Church Street to a point one hundred (100) feet north of the north right-of-way line of George Street. 
Sherman Street, the east side from George Street to Stimmel Street. 
Stimmel Street, the north side from the E.J. & E. tracks to Sherman Street. 
Stimmel Street, the south side from Joliet Street to Factory Street. 
Stimmel Street, the north side from Joliet Street to Blakely Street. 
Vine Street, the east side from Church Street to George Street. 
Weyrauch Street, the east side from Ann Street to Brown Street. 
Wood Street, the east side from Ann Street to Brown Street. 
(l)  The street portion of the following named streets shall have on school days, no parking thereon only passenger loading and unloading between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. 
(m)  Reserved. 
(n)  The street portion of the following named streets shall have no parking thereon from 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. on school days: 
Glen Avenue, the north side from a point sixty (60) feet east of Joliet Street to a point one hundred twenty (120) feet east of Joliet Street. 
(o)  Parking, standing or stopping shall be prohibited on the following streets between the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m., and 2:30 p.m. to 3:30 p.m., on school days: 
Marcella Lane , the south side from a point one hundred eighteen (118) feet north/northeast of the intersection of the centerlines of Marcella Lane, Natalie Drive and Thomas Drive to a point three hundred sixty (360) feet east. 
(Ord. No. 2125, § 2, 2-21-89; Ord. No. 2171, § 2, 6-5-89; Ord. No. 2244, § 2, 1-15-90; Ord. No. 2345, §§ 1—4, 9-4-90; Ord. No. 2374, §§ 1, 2, 12-3-90; Ord. No. 2376, § 1, 12-3-90; Ord. No. 2526, § 1, 3-2-92; Ord. No. 2561, § 1, 6-1-92; Ord. No. 2615, § 2, 12-17-92; Ord. No. 2627, § 1, 3-15-93; Ord. No. 2635, §§ 1, 2, 3-15-93; Ord. No. 2717,§ 1, 11-1-93; Ord. No. 2776, § 3, 5-19-94; Ord. No. 2867, § 1, 2-20-95; Ord. No. 4031, § 2, 11-3-97; Ord. No. 4047, § 1, 12-15-97; Ord. No. 4100, § 2, 5-4-98; Ord. No. 4050, § 1, 2-16-98; Ord. No. 4180, § 1, 5-17-99; Ord. No. 4285, § 1, 3-20-2000; Ord. No. 4403, § 1, 2, 3-5-2001; Ord. No. 01-O-0052, §§ 1, 2, 7-2-2001; Ord. No. 01-O-0094, § 2, 9-4-2001; Ord. No. 02-O-0017, §§ 1, 2, 3-4-2002; Ord. No. 03-O-0083, § 1, 9-15-2003; Ord. No. 03-O-0076, § 1, 10-20-2003; Ord. No. 04-O-0023, §§ 1—3, 4-5-2004; Ord. No. 11-O-0058, § 3, 10-3-2011; Ord. No. 16-O-0021, § 1, 4-18-2016; Ord. No. 16-O-0039, § 1, 11-7-2016)  
Sec. 17-197. - Truck parking restricted. 
When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall park on that portion of the city street, a truck, van, pickup, or any other vehicle which blocks visibility of drivers entering the street at the following locations: 
(1)  Main Street north side. The first two (2) parking stalls west of Chicago Street. 
(2)  Main Street north side. The first two (2) parking stalls west of Galena Street. 
(3)  Main Street south side. The first two (2) parking stalls west of the east entrance to the Community Center Building parking lot. 
(4)  National Street north side. The first five (5) parking stalls east of the entrance to Prairie Oaks Aquatic Center Parking Lot. 
(Ord. No. 2125, § 2, 2-21-89; Ord. No. 2939, § 1, 9-5-95)  
Secs. 17-198—17-200. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 8. - TRUCK ROUTES 
 
Sec. 17-201. - Designated; compliance required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a truck in excess of five (5) tons of weight, unless making a delivery thereon, upon any of the following streets: 
Acorn Hill Lane, Adelia Lane, Ainsley Drive, Alamance Drive, Allen Avenue, Amber Court, Andrus Drive, Ann Street, Applegate Avenue, Appletree Lane, Arapaho Drive, Arbor Avenue, Aster Lane, Aubrey Court, Augusta Avenue, Aurora Street, and Avard Avenue. 
Bainbridge Boulevard, Barber Avenue, Barnhart Street, Bayberry Court, Belleview Avenue, Bishop Street, Blair Street, Blakely Street, Blanchard Lane, Bobwhite Lane, Braemore Drive, Briargate Court, Brookwood Drive, Brown Street* and Bunting Court. 
Camden Drive, Center Street, Challen Court, Charlestowne Drive, Cherokee Drive, Cherry Blossom Court, Cherrywood Lane, Chicago Street, Chickadee Court, Chippewa Lane, Church Street, Clara Street, Claremont Street, Clayton Street, Colford Avenue, Columbine Lane, Conde Street*, Coolidge Avenue, Crabapple Court, Cranesbill Drive, and Culver Lane. 
Dale Avenue, Davenport Drive, Dayton Avenue, Diversey Parkway and Dunham Road. 
Eagle Ridge Court, Easton Avenue, Elite Avenue, Elizabeth Street, Elliott Avenue, Elm Road and Elmwood Avenue. 
Factory Street, Fairbank Court, Fairchild Lane, Fairview Avenue, Fielderest Drive, Forest Avenue, Foxfield Drive, Fremont Street*, and Fulton Street. 
Galena Street, Gavin Court. Garden Street, Gates Street, Geneva Street, George Street, Glen Avenue, Grand Lake Boulevard*, and Grove Avenue. 
Hahn Place, Hampton Course, Harrison Street, Havens Drive, Hawthorne Lane (between Atlantic Drive and Prince Crossing Road), Hazel Street, High Ridge Drive, High Street, Highgate Court, Highland Avenue, Hill Court, Hillview Avenue, Hillview Court, and Honeysuckle Avenue. 
Indianwood Lane and Ingalton Avenue. 
Jacob Court, James Avenue, Jenice Court, and Joliet Street*. 
Kautz Road (between Geneva Drive and International Drive), Kenwood Avenue, Kidwell Drive, Klein Road, Knollwood Lane and Kresswood Drive. 
Lake Side Drive, Lawrence Avenue, Lehman Drive, Lester Street, Lillian Lane, Lincoln Avenue, Lindsay Court, and Long Oak Drive, and Lyman Street. 
MacQueen Drive, Main Street (east of Neltnor Boulevard), Mansfield Court, Marcella Lane, Marshview Court, McChesney Road, McConnell Avenue, Meadowlark Drive, Meadow Ridge Drive, Meadowview Crossing, Meadowview Drive, Milo Court, and Mulberry Drive. 
Nagel Court, Natalie Drive, National Street, Nor-Oaks Court, Norris Avenue, and Norris Street. 
Oak Avenue, Oak Street, Oakwood Avenue, Orchard Lane, and Overbeck Lane. 
Parker Avenue, Parkside Avenue, Partridge Drive, Peachtree Lane, Pearl Street, Persimmon Drive, Pilsen Road, Pine Street, Plumtree Lane, Plymouth Court, Pomeroy Street, Prairie Court, Prairie Crossing Drive, Prince Crossing Road, north of North Avenue and from the Great Western Trail south to the city limits). 
Ray Avenue, Ridgeland Avenue, Ridgewood Court, Ridgewood Lane, and Rosewood Drive. 
Sandpiper Trail, Sherman Street, Sophia Street, Spencer Street*, Spring Cress Court, Spring Cress Lane, St. Andrews Court, St. Charles Road, Sterling Avenue, Stimmel Street, Stockberry Lane, Sudbury Court, and Summit Avenue. 
Tananger Lane, Tara Lane, Town Road*, Trillium Trail, Turner Avenue, and Turner Court. 
Vine Street and Virgie Place. 
Washington Street*, Wendall Street, Weyrauch Street*, Whispering Oaks Drive, Wild Ginger Trail, Wildwood Lane, Willow Creek Road, Wilson Avenue, Wilson Street, Wood Street*, Woodboro Drive, Woodside Court, Woodside Drive and Wyeth Drive. 
Yale Street and York Avenue. 
* Exceptions noted in section 17-202. 
(Ord. No. 2125, § 2, 2-21-89; Ord. No. 2375, § 1, 12-3-90; Ord. No. 2634, §§ 1, 2, 4-5-93; Ord. No. 2642, §§ 1, 2, 5-3-93; Ord. No. 2697, §§ 1, 2, 8-2-93; Ord. No. 2714, §§ 1, 2, 10-4-93; Ord. No. 2776, § 1, 5-19-94; Ord. No. 4335, § 1, 10-2-2000; Ord. No. 4387, § 1, 2-19-2001; Ord. No. 4405, § 1, 3-5-2001; Ord. No. 4407, § 1, 3-5-2001; Ord. No. 06-O-0030, § 1, 4-3-2006)  
Sec. 17-202. - Class II truck routes designated. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a truck exceeding the size and weight limitations for a Class II Highway as defined in the Illinois Compiled Statutes 625 ILCS 5/15 on the following streets: 
Arbor Avenue - between Hawthorne Lane and Neltnor Boulevard 
Arthur Drive 
Atlantic Drive 
Blackhawk Drive 
Brown Street - between Factory Street and Joliet Street 
Carolina Drive 
Charles Court 
Commerce Drive 
Conde Street - between Sycamore Street and Neltnor Boulevard 
Downs Drive 
Fenton Lane 
Fremont Street - between Grand Lake Boulevard and Washington Street 
Grand Lake Boulevard - between Fremont Street and the west end of Grand Lake Boulevard 
Harvester Road 
Hawthorne Lane - between Kress Road and Atlantic Drive 
Helena Drive 
Howard Drive 
Industrial Drive 
Joliet Street - between Route 38 and Brown Street 
Kautz Road - between Route 38 and Geneva Drive 
Main Street - between Neltnor Boulevard and Washington Street 
Northwest Avenue 
Nuclear Drive 
Prince Crossing Road - between Route 64 and the Great Western Trail 
Spencer Street - between Wilson Street and Sycamore Street 
Sycamore Street 
Town Road - between Washington Street and the Burlington Northern Railroad 
Washington Street - between Route 38 and Wood Street and between Neltnor 
Boulevard and the east city limits 
Wegner Drive 
Western Drive 
Weyrauch Street - between Brown Street and the south end of Weyrauch Street 
Wilson Avenue - between Main Street and Spencer Street 
Winston Street 
(Ord. No. 2642, § 3, 5-3-93; Ord. No. 2697, §§ 3, 4, 8-2-93; Ord. No. 2714, §§ 3, 4, 10-4-93; Ord. No. 2728, § 3, 12-20-93; Ord. No. 2776, § 2, 5-19-94; Ord. No. 2848, §§ 1, 2, 12-5-94; Ord. No. 4335, § 2, 10-2-2000; Ord. No. 4405, § 2, 3-5-2001; Ord. No. 4407, § 2, 3-5-2001; Ord. No. 06-O-0030, § 1, 4-3-2006; Ord. No. 10-O-0091, § 1, 10-18-2010)  
Secs. 17-203—17-205. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 9. - SPEED ZONES 
 
Sec. 17-206. - Designated; compliance required. 
(a)  Fifteen miles per hour. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle at a speed in excess of fifteen (15) miles per hour in the alleys or alleyways in the following locations: 
From Pine Street to Plymouth Court, located between Route 59 (Neltnor Boulevard) and Oak Street. 
From Pine Street to Washington Street, located between Oak Street and Ingalton Avenue. 
From Route 59 (Neltnor Boulevard) to Oak Street, located between Pine Street and Grand Lake Boulevard. 
From Route 59 (Neltnor Boulevard) to Ingalton Avenue, located between Grand Lake Boulevard and Wendall Avenue. 
From Route 59 (Neltnor Boulevard) to Ingalton Avenue, located between Wendall Avenue and Elmwood Avenue. 
From Claremont Avenue to Ingalton Avenue, located between Elmwood Avenue and Grand Lake Boulevard. 
Two hundred (200) feet north of Grand Lake Boulevard to National Street, located between Claremont Avenue and Elite Avenue. 
One hundred (100) feet north of Grand Lake Boulevard to Elmwood Avenue, located between Highland Avenue and Claremont Avenue. 
From National Street to Elmwood Avenue, located between Highland Avenue and Belleview Avenue. 
From National Street to Grand Lake Boulevard, located between Arbor Avenue and Fremont Street. 
From York Avenue to Grand Lake Boulevard, located between Arbor Avenue and Fremont Street. 
From Sophia Street to Garden Street, located between Grand Lake Boulevard and Fairview Avenue. 
From Garden Street to Sophia Street, located between York Avenue and Fairview Avenue. 
From York Avenue to McConnell Avenue, located between Sophia Street and Arbor Avenue. 
From Oakwood Avenue to the easterly dead end, located between Colford Avenue and Summit Avenue. 
From Chicago Street to Washington Street, located between Fulton Street and Oakwood Avenue. 
From Chicago Street to Galena Street, located between High Street and Fulton Street. 
From Sherman Street to Vine Street, located between Church Street and George Street. 
From Sherman Street to Lyman Street, located between Church Street and George Street. 
From Sherman Street to Pearl Street, located between George Street and Ann Street. 
From Sherman Street to the E.J. & E. Railway tracks, located between George Street and Ann Street. 
From Wood Street to the E.J. & E. Railway tracks, located between George Street and Ann Street. 
From Factory Street to Weyrauch Street, located between Ann Street and Blair Street. 
From Factory Street to approximately one hundred fifty (150) feet prior to Joliet Street, located between Blair Street and Stimmel Street. 
From Factory Street to approximately one hundred fifty (150) feet prior to Joliet Street, located between Stimmel Street and Pomeroy Street. 
From Ann Street to Brown Street, located between Joliet Street and Weyrauch Street. 
From Joliet Street to Allen Avenue, located between Geneva Street and Spencer Street. 
From Spencer Street to approximately two hundred (200) feet prior to Conde Street, located between Barber Street and Allen Street. 
From Barber Street to Allen Avenue, located between Spencer Street and Conde Street. 
Approximately one hundred fifty (150) feet east of Joliet Street to approximately one hundred fifty (150) feet east of Blakely Street, located between Stimmel Street and Blair Street. 
From Blair Street to Brown Street, located between Joliet Street and Barber Street. 
From Blakely Street to Barber Street, located between Blair Street and Conde Street. 
Approximately two hundred (200) feet east of Joliet Street to approximately two hundred (200) feet east of Barber Street, located between Pomeroy Street and Brown Street. 
Approximately two hundred (200) feet east of Joliet Street to approximately one hundred (100) feet east of Blakely Street, located between Pomeroy Street and Stimmel Street. 
Turner Court, between Main Street and Washington Street. 
Tye Court, between Washington Street and Galena Street. 
(b)  Twenty miles per hour. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle at a speed in excess of twenty (20) miles per hour on the following streets unless otherwise provided: 
Main Street, from the intersection of Washington Street to the intersection of Chicago Street. 
(c)  Thirty miles per hour. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle at a speed in excess of thirty (30) miles per hour on the following streets unless otherwise provided: 
Arbor Avenue, between Illinois Route 59 and National Street. 
Atlantic Drive, between Illinois Route 64 (North Avenue) and Hawthorne Lane. 
Carolina Drive, between Winston Street and Hawthorne Lane. 
Joliet Street, between Brown Street and Illinois Route 38. 
Main Street, between Illinois Route 59 and Prince Crossing Road. 
Shingle Oak Drive, between Atlantic Drive and Sandcherry Lane. 
Town Road, between Washington Street and Church Street. 
Town Road, between Church Road and Illinois Route 38. 
Washington Street, between Town Road and Aurora Street. 
Washington Street, between High Street and Illinois Route 59. 
Wegner Drive, between Washington Street and Illinois Route 38. 
(d)  Thirty five miles per hour. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle at a speed in excess of thirty-five (35) miles per hour on the following streets unless otherwise provided: 
Hawthorne Lane, between the EJ&E and the UP Railroad and Prince Crossing Road. 
Hawthorne Lane, between the EJ&E and the UP Railroad and Arbor Avenue. 
St. Charles Road, between Klein Road and Prince Crossing Road. 
Washington Street, between Illinois Route 38 and Town Road. 
(e)  Forty miles per hour. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle at a speed in excess of forty (40) miles per hour on the following streets unless otherwise provided: 
Hawthorne Lane, between Powis Road and the EJ&E and the UP Railroad. 
Joliet Street, between Illinois Route 38 and north of Joy Road. 
Joliet Street, five hundred (500) feet north of its intersection with Wilson Street to five hundred (500) feet south of its intersection with Wilson Street. 
Kautz Road, between the northern city limit and the Illinois Prairie Path. 
Kautz Road, between the Illinois Prairie Path and Illinois Route 38. 
Klein Road, between Meadowlark Drive (north) and Meadowlark Drive (south). 
Klein Road, between the northern city limit and Illinois Route 64. 
Powis Road, between Smith Road and Illinois Route 64. 
Prince Crossing Road, between Illinois Route 64 and Hawthorne Lane. 
Prince Crossing Road, between Hawthorne Lane and National Road. 
Prince Crossing Road, between National Road and Washington Street. 
Smith Road, between the western city limit and Powis Road. 
(f)  Reserved. 
(g)  Reserved. 
(h)  Posted state speed limits. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle at a speed in excess of the state posted speed limits on the following streets unless otherwise provided: 
Route 38 (Roosevelt Road), within the city limits. 
Route 59 (Neltnor Boulevard), within the city limits. 
Route 64 (North Avenue), within the city limits. 
(Ord. No. 2125, § 2, 2-21-89; Ord. No. 2317, § 1, 12-3-90; Ord. No. 2491, §§ 1, 2, 10-21-91; Ord. No. 2670, §§ 1—3, 8-2-93; Ord. No. 2706, § 1, 9-20-93; Ord. No. 2728, § 4, 12-23-93; Ord. No. 3070, §§ 2—5, 4-21-97; Ord. No. 4126, § 1, 9-21-98; Ord. No. 4134, § 1, 10-19-98; Ord. No. 4165, §§ 1, 2, 4-5-99; Ord. No. 4352, § 2, 9-18-2000; Ord. No. 01-O-0030, §§ 1, 2, 6-4-2001; Ord. No. 06-O-0024, § 5, 3-20-2006; Ord. No. 06-O-0032, § 5, 4-3-2006)  
Secs. 17-207—17-210. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 10. - ALLEYS AND ALLEYWAYS 
 
Sec. 17-211. - Designated. 
The following described areas shall be established as alleys: 
The alley or alleyway from Pine Street to Plymouth Court, located between Route 59 (Neltnor Boulevard) and Oak Street. 
The alley or alleyway from Pine Street to Washington Street, located between Oak Street and Ingalton Avenue. 
The alley or alleyway from Route 59 (Neltnor Boulevard) to Oak Street, located between Pine Street and Grand Lake Boulevard. 
The alley or alleyway from Route 59 (Neltnor Boulevard) to Ingalton Avenue, located between Grand Lake Boulevard and Wendall Avenue. 
The alley or alleyway from Route 59 (Neltnor Boulevard) to Ingalton Avenue, located between Wendall Avenue and Elmwood Avenue. 
The alley or alleyway from Claremont Avenue to Ingalton Avenue, located between Elmwood Avenue and Grand Lake Boulevard. 
The alley or alleyway two hundred (200) feet north of Grand Lake Boulevard to National Street, located between Claremont Avenue and Elite Avenue. 
The alley or alleyway one hundred (100) feet north of Grand Lake Boulevard to Elmwood Avenue, located between Highland Avenue and Claremont Avenue. 
The alley or alleyway from National Street to Elmwood Avenue, located between Highland Avenue and Belleview Avenue. 
The alley or alleyway from National Street to Grand Lake Boulevard, located between Arbor Avenue and Belleview Avenue. 
The alley or alleyway from York Avenue to Grand Lake Boulevard, located between Arbor Avenue and Fremont Street. 
The alley or alleyway from Arbor Avenue to Oakwood Avenue, located between Grand Lake Boulevard and Fairview Avenue. 
The alley or alleyway from Oakwood Avenue to Sophia Street, located between York Avenue and Fairview Avenue. 
The alley or alleyway from York Avenue to McConnell Avenue located between Sophia Street and Arbor Avenue. 
The alley or alleyway from Oakwood Avenue to the easterly dead-end, located between Colford Avenue and Summit Avenue. 
The alley or alleyway from Chicago Street to Washington Street, located between Fulton Street and Oakwood Avenue. 
The alley or alleyway from Chicago Street to Galena Street, located between High Street and Fulton Street. 
The alley or alleyway from Sherman Street to Vine Street, located between Church Street and George Street. 
The alley or alleyway from Sherman Street to Lyman Street, located between Church Street and George Street. 
The alley or alleyway from Sherman Street to Pearl Street, located between George Street and Ann Street. 
The alley or alleyway from Sherman Street to E.J. & E. Railway tracks, located between George Street and Ann Street. 
The alley or alleyway from Wood Street to the E.J. & E. Railway tracks, located between George Street and Ann Street. 
The alley or alleyway from Factory Street to East Street, located between Ann Street and Blair Street. 
The alley or alleyway from Factory Street to approximately one hundred fifty (150) feet prior to Joliet Street, located between Blair Street and Stimmel Street. 
The alley or alleyway from Factory Street to approximately one hundred fifty (150) feet prior to Joliet Street, located between Stimmel Street and Pomeroy Street. 
The alley or alleyway from Ann Street to Brown Street, located between Joliet Street and East Street. 
The alley or alleyway from Joliet Street to Allen Avenue, located between Geneva Street and Spencer Street. 
The alley or alleyway from Spencer Street to approximately two hundred (200) feet prior to Conde Street, located between Barber Street and Allen Avenue. 
The alley or alleyway from Barber Street to Allen Avenue, located between Spencer Street and Conde Street. 
The alley or alleyway approximately one hundred fifty (150) feet east of Joliet Street to approximately one hundred fifty (150) feet east of Blakely Street, located between Stimmel Street and Blair Street. 
The alley or alleyway from Blair Street to Brown Street, located between Joliet Street and Barber Street. 
The alley or alleyway from Blakely Street to Barber Street, located between Blair Street and Conde Street. 
The alley or alleyway approximately two hundred (200) feet east of Joliet Street to approximately two hundred (200) feet east of Barber Street, located between Pomeroy Street and Brown Street. 
The alley or alleyway approximately two hundred (200) feet east of Joliet Street to approximately one hundred (100) feet east of Blakely Street, located between Pomeroy Street and Stimmel Street. 
(Ord. No. 2125, § 2, 2-21-89)  
Secs. 17-212—17-215. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 11. - TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES 
 
Sec. 17-216. - Compliance required. 
The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any official traffic-control device on the streets and highways described as: 
(1)  Fabyan Parkway, at Route 38 (Roosevelt Road). 
(2)  Main Street, at Route 59 (Neltnor Boulevard). 
(3)  Powis Road, at Route 64 (North Avenue). 
(4)  Route 38 (Roosevelt Road), at Joliet Street. 
(5)  Route 38 (Roosevelt Road), at Kress Road. 
(6)  Route 38 (Roosevelt Road), at Washington Street. 
(7)  Route 59 (Neltnor Boulevard), at Dayton Avenue (Roosevelt Road access for westbound traffic). 
(8)  Route 59 (Neltnor Boulevard), at Forest Avenue. 
(9)  Route 59 (Neltnor Boulevard), at Route 38 (Roosevelt Road access ramp for east bound traffic). 
(10)  Route 64 (North Avenue), at Route 59 (Neltnor Boulevard). 
(11)  Route 64 (North Avenue), at Prince Crossing Road. 
(12)  Washington Street, at Fremont Street/Main Street. 
(13)  Washington Street, at Route 59 (Neltnor Boulevard). 
(14)  Wilson Street, at Main Street. 
(Ord. No. 2125, § 2, 2-21-89; Ord. No. 2244, § 1, 1-15-90; Ord. No. 1903, § 3, 10-7-91) 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 2244, adopted Jan. 15, 1990, added provisions to § 17-216 which were included in subsection (10). In order to maintain the alphabetical order of streets within this section, the editor has renumbered subsection (10)—(12) as (11)—(13).  
Secs. 17-217—17-220. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 12. - U-TURN AREAS 
 
Sec. 17-221. - Designated. 
Wherever authorized signs are erected indicating that no U-turn is permitted, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of any such signs on the following streets in the areas indicated: 
On Fremont Street from McConnell Avenue to Washington Street. 
On Galena Street from Main Street to High Street. 
On Main Street from Washington Street to the intersection of Chicago Street. 
On Washington Street from the easterly curbing of High Street to the westerly curbing of Turner Court. 
(Ord. No. 2125, § 2, 2-21-89)  
Secs. 17-222—17-225. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 13. - LEFT TURNS 
 
Sec. 17-226. - Use of turn lane designated; compliance required. 
When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall disobey the directions of any sign indicating no left turn by southbound and northbound traffic, except by use of a constructed and approved Illinois Department of Transportation left turn stacking lane, at the following locations: 
From a point beginning at the intersection of the median strip of Route 59 (Neltnor Boulevard) and the southern right-of-way line of Main Street, for a distance of eight hundred twelve (812) feet measured in a southerly direction along the center line of Route 59 (Neltnor Boulevard). 
(Ord. No. 2125, § 2, 2-21-89)  
Sec. 17-227. - Prohibited from driveways. 
When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall disobey the directions of any sign indicating "no left turn" from a driveway at the following locations: 
(1)  From a point beginning at the intersection of the easterly right-of-way line of Route 59 (Neltnor Boulevard) and the southerly line of Main Street for a distance of eight hundred twelve (812) feet measured in a southerly direction along the easterly right-of-way of Route 59 (Neltnor Boulevard). 
(2)  From a point beginning at the intersection of the westerly right-of-way line of Route 59 (Neltnor Boulevard) and the northern right-of-way line of Main Street for a distance of three hundred thirty-nine (339) feet measured in a northerly direction along the westerly right-of-way of Route 59 (Neltnor Boulevard). 
(3)  From a point beginning at the intersection of Arbor Avenue and Route 59 on the westerly right-of-way line of Route 59 (Neltnor Boulevard) for a distance one thousand (1000) feet in the northerly direction along the westerly right-of-way line of Route 59 (Neltnor Boulevard). 
(Ord. No. 2125, § 2, 2-21-89; Ord. No. 2751, § 1, 4-4-94)  
Sec. 17-228. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Formerly, § 17-228 prohibited left turns at specific intersections. Such section, derived from Ord. No. 2125, § 2, adopted Feb. 21, 1989, was deleted by Ord. No. 4031, § 3, adopted Nov. 3, 1997.  
Sec. 17-229. - Prohibited, compliance required. 
When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall disobey the direction of any sign indicating "no left turn" at the following locations: 
Hahndorf Road at the intersection of Neltnor Boulevard (Route 59). 
Neltnor Boulevard (Route 59) between the intersection of Arbor Avenue and the Chicago and Great Western Railroad Tracks, northbound traffic. 
(Ord. No. 2729, § 1, 1-17-94; Ord. No. 2947, § 1, 9-18-95)  
Secs. 17-230—17-235. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 14. - SPECIFIC NO-PASSING ZONES 
 
Sec. 17-236. - Designated. 
Wherever authorized signs and markings are erected and made, no kind of a vehicle shall pass on the left of the streets described as follows: 
Arbor Avenue, north and south bound, National Street to Hawthorne Lane. 
Fremont Street, north and south bound, Washington Street to the south side of 111 Fremont Street. 
Hawthorne Lane, east and west bound, Arbor Avenue to E.J. & E. Railroad tracks. 
Hawthorne Lane, east bound, one hundred (100) feet west of E.J. & E. Railroad tracks to E.J. & E. Railroad tracks. 
Hawthorne Lane, east and west bound, Arbor Avenue to Prince Crossing Road. 
Hawthorne Lane, east and west bound, Powis Road to Kress Road. 
Ingalton Avenue, north and south bound, National Street to northern city limits. 
Ingalton Avenue, south bound, National Street to Elmwood Avenue. 
Joliet Street, north bound from southern city limits to Route 38 (Roosevelt Road). 
Joliet Street, south bound from Route 38 (Roosevelt Road) to about one hundred fifty (150) feet south. 
Joliet Street, north and south bound, Route 38 (Roosevelt Road) to Augusta Street. 
Joliet Street, north and south bound, Hazel Street to Brown Street. 
Kautz Road, from a point six hundred (600) feet south of the intersection with the centerline of former Hawthorne Lane to about six hundred (600) feet north of said point. 
Main Street, east and west/north and south bound, Route 59 (North Avenue) to Washington Street. 
Main Street, east and west, one hundred twenty-five (125) feet east of Route 59 (Neltnor Boulevard) to Route 59. 
Powis Road, south bound, about five hundred (500) feet north of Hawthorne Lane to Hawthorne Lane. 
Powis Road, north bound, about two hundred (200) feet north of Hawthorne Lane to Hawthorne Lane. 
Powis Road, north bound, Arthur Drive to the Chicago and Northwestern Railroad tracks. 
Powis Road, south bound, about one hundred (100) feet north of the Chicago and Northwestern to the Chicago and Northwestern Railroad tracks. 
Powis Road, north and south bound, about two hundred (200) feet south of Route 64 (North Avenue) to Route 64. 
Washington Street, east from the intersection of Main/Fremont Streets to the eastern city limits. 
Washington Street, east and west bound, E.J. & E. Railroad tracks to Main/Fremont intersection. 
Washington Street, east bound, one hundred (100) feet west of the E.J. & E. Railroad tracks to the E.J. & E. Railroad tracks. 
Wilson Avenue, north and south bound, Main Street to 319 Wilson Avenue. 
(Ord. No. 2125, § 2, 2-21-89; Ord. No. 2706, § 2, 9-20-93; Ord. No. 4035, § 2, 12-1-97)  
Secs. 17-237—17-240. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 15. - TURNS ON RED 
 
Sec. 17-241. - No turn on red. 
In accordance with section 17-106, and when properly signposted, no driver of vehicle shall disobey the directions of any sign indicating that right turns on red are prohibited on the streets described as: 
Hawthorne Lane, eastbound at Route 59. 
Washington Street, west bound at Main Street. 
Washington Street, west bound at Route 59 (Neltnor Boulevard). 
(Ord. No. 2125, § 2, 2-21-89; Ord. No. 4035, § 3, 12-1-97)  
Secs. 17-242—17-245. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 16. - RIGHT TURNS ONLY 
 
Sec. 17-246. - Designated. 
Right turns only will be permitted as follows: 
Traffic on the west approach entering Route 59 (Neltnor Boulevard) from Brown Street, Lester Street, Glen Avenue, and Dale Avenue approaches shall be permitted to make right turns only onto Route 59 (Neltnor Boulevard). 
(Ord. No. 2125, § 2, 2-21-89)  
DIVISION 17. - SCHOOL SPEED ZONES 
 
Sec. 17-247. - Designated; compliance required. 
When signs are erected giving notice thereof, it shall be unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle at a speed in excess of twenty (20) miles per hour on the following streets when the adjacent school is in session and students are present: 
School 	Street 
Currier 	Garys Mill Road, from 350 feet West of Windsor Court to 50 feet East of Canterbury Court. 
Gary 	Forest Avenue, from Joliet Street to Bishop Street. 
	Glen Avenue, from 100 feet East of Allen Street to Blakely Street. 
	Joliet Street, from 100 feet North of Forest Avenue to 300 feet South of Forest Avenue. 
Lincoln 	Geneva Street, from Joliet Street to Wood Street. 
	Wood Street, from Church Street to Geneva Street. 
Pioneer 	Brown Street, from Lyman Street to 200 feet West of Kenwood Avenue. 
	Kenwood Avenue, from 100 feet South of Brown Street to 900 feet North of Brown Street. 
St. Mary's 	Garden Street, from York Avenue to Washington Street. 
	Lyman Street, from Brown Street to 200 feet South of Brown Street. 
	Oakwood Avenue, from 300 feet North of Washington Street to York Avenue. 
	Washington Street, from Fulton Street to 200 feet East of Oakwood Avenue. 
	York Avenue, from Garden Street to 200 feet North of Oakwood Avenue. 
Turner 	Ingalton Avenue, from National Street to Lee Street. 
	National Street, from Claremont Street to Ingalton Avenue. 
Wegner 	Tara Lane, from 100 feet North of Willowcreek Road to 1000 feet North of Willowcreek Road. 
W.C. Middle School 	Bishop Street, between Brown Street and east Forest Avenue 
Wegner School 	Woodside Drive, from a point 50 feet northeast of the intersection of Willow Creek Drive and Woodside Drive to Marcella Lane. 
	Marcella Lane, from Woodside Drive to Natalie Drive. 
	Natalie Drive, from Marcella Lane to a point 50 feet east of Thomas Drive. 
West Chicago High School 	Ann Street, from 100 feet East of Wood Street High School to Joliet Street. 
	Joliet Street, from Ann Street to 300 feet South of Geneva Street. 
West Chicago Junior High School 	Hazel Street, from Joliet Street to Bishop Avenue. 
Wheaton Christian High School 	Prince Crossing Road, from 1200 feet North of Hawthorne Lane to Hawthorne Lane. 
 
(Ord. No. 01-O-0137, § 1, 1-7-2002; Ord. No. 02-O-0008, § 1, 2-4-2002)  
Secs. 17-248, 17-249. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 18. - LOADING AND UNLOADING ZONES 
 
Sec. 17-250. - Designated; compliance required. 
When signs are giving notice thereof, the following streets shall be designated as loading and unloading zones between the hours specified, and it shall be unlawful for the driver of an vehicle to park, or be parked, in any designated loading and unloading zone: 
(a)  Main Street, the south side, the first three (3) parking spaces east of Turner Court, between the hours of 10:30 a.m. and 1:30 p.m., each Monday through Friday. 
(b)  Reserved. 
(Ord. No. 4217, § 1, 9-7-99)  
Secs. 17-251—17-299. - Reserved (for code).  
Secs. 17-300—17-1200. - Reserved (for state statute reference).  
ARTICLE XVIII. - HANDICAPPED PERSONS' MOTOR VEHICLE PARKING 
 
Sec. 17-1201. - Issuance of parking stickers. 
Handicapped persons' motor vehicle stickers will be issued by the city to handicapped persons or disabled veterans so requesting them when they complete an application and are qualified and approved for such registration. 
(Ord. No. 2125, § 2, 2-21-89)  
Sec. 17-1202. - Authority to park in designated spaces. 
Persons displaying such stickers are authorized to park in designated handicapped parking spaces pursuant to Chapter 95½, Section 11-1301.1 of the Illinois Revised Statutes. 
(Ord. No. 2125, § 2, 2-21-89)  
Sec. 17-1203. - Unlawful use of stickers. 
It shall be unlawful to use such a sticker when the vehicle is not being used to transport a person who is handicapped. 
(Ord. No. 2125, § 2, 2-21-89)  
ARTICLE XIX. - PENALTY FOR VIOLATION 
 
Sec. 17-1204. - Minimum and maximum fines. 
The violation of or failure to comply with any provision of this chapter shall constitute an offense against the city and, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, shall subject the offender, upon conviction, to a fine as provided by section 1-8, general penalty, of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2125, § 2, 2-21-89; Ord. No. 03-O-0085, § 10, 10-6-2003) 
Cross reference— Violations of chapter as petty offenses, § 17-27.  
Sec. 17-1205. - Seizure and impoundment of motor vehicles used in connection with illegal activities. 
(a)  Violations authorizing seizure. A motor vehicle, operated with the permission, express or implied, of the owner of record, that is used in connection with the following violations, shall be subject to seizure and impoundment by the city, and the owner of record of said vehicle shall be liable to the city for an administrative penalty in addition to any towing and storage fees as hereinafter provided. 
(1)  Driving while the driver's license, permit or privilege to operate a motor vehicle is suspended or revoked, in violation of section 6-303 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, as amended, pursuant to Illinois Secretary of State action; except that vehicles shall not be subjected to seizure or impoundment if the suspension is for an unpaid citation (parking or moving) or due to failure to comply with emission testing, an administrative penalty of five hundred seventy-five dollars ($575.00). 
(2)  Driving under the influence of drugs or alcohol, 625 ILCS 5/11-501(a), an administrative penalty of five hundred seventy-five dollars ($575.00). 
(3)  When a motor vehicle is operated by a person against whom a warrant has been issued by a Circuit Court in Illinois for failing to answer charges that the driver violated section 6-101, 6-303, or 11-501 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, as amended, subsection (a)(1) or (a)(2) above an administrative penalty of five hundred seventy-five dollars ($575.00). 
(4)  No valid drivers license, 625 ILCS 5/6-101(a), an administrative penalty of five hundred seventy-five dollars ($575.00). 
a.  Except a person that had a valid driver's license that is expired for less that twelve (12) months. 
b.  Except a person who is less than seventeen (17) years of age operating a motor vehicle on any street or highway when in violation of the Child Curfew Act (720 ILCS 555/0.01 et seq.) or section 66-71. 
(5)  Fleeing or attempting to elude, 625 ILCS 5/11-204, an administrative penalty of five hundred seventy-five dollars ($575.00). 
(6)  Drag racing, 625 ILCS 5/11-504, an administrative penalty of five hundred seventy-five dollars ($575.00). 
(7)  Illegal transportation of alcohol/driver, 625 ILCS 5/11-502(a an administrative penalty of five hundred seventy-five dollars ($575.00). 
(8)  Firearms offenses, an administrative penalty of five hundred seventy-five dollars ($575.00). 
a.  720 ILCS 5/24-1, Unlawful use of weapons. 
b.  720 ILCS 5/24-1.1, Unlawful use or possession of weapons by felons or persons in the custody of the department of corrections facilities. 
c.  702 ILCS 5/24-1.2 Aggravated discharge of a firearm. 
d.  702 ILCS 5/11-1.2-5, Aggravated discharged of a machine gun or a firearm equipped with a devise designed or used for silencing the report of a firearm. 
e.  720 ILCS 5/24-1.5, Reckless discharge of a firearm. 
f.  702 ILCS 5/24-1.6, Aggravated unlawful use of a weapon. 
(9)  Drug offenses: Possession of cannabis more than thirty (30) grams, 720 ILCS 550/4(d), (e), (f), and (g), an administrative penalty of five hundred seventy-five dollars ($575.00). 
(10)  Drug offenses: Unauthorized possession of controlled substances, 720 ILCS 570/402, an administrative penalty of five hundred seventy-five dollars ($575.00). 
(11)  Indecent solicitation of a child, in violation of 720 ILCS 5/11-6, an administrative penalty of five hundred seventy-five dollars ($575.00). 
(12)  Solicitation to meet a child, in violation of 720 ILCS 5/11-6.6, an administrative penalty of five hundred seventy-five dollars ($575.00). 
(13)  Prostitution, in violation of 720 ILCS 5/11-14, an administrative penalty of five hundred seventy-five dollars ($575.00). 
(14)  Soliciting for a prostitute, in violation of 720 ILCS 5/11-15, an administrative penalty of five hundred seventy-five dollars ($575.00). 
(15)  Pandering, in violation of 720 ILCS 5/11-16, an administrative penalty of five hundred seventy-five dollars ($575.00). 
(16)  Keeping a place of prostitution, in violation of 720 ILCS 5/11-17, an administrative penalty of five hundred seventy-five dollars ($575.00). 
(17)  Patronizing a prostitute, in violation of 720 ILCS 5/11-18, an administrative penalty of five hundred seventy-five dollars ($575.00). 
(18)  Operation of a motor vehicle with suspended registration for non-insurance, in violation of 625 ILCS 5/3-708, an administrative penalty of five hundred seventy-five dollars ($575.00). 
(19)  Leaving scene—accident—death or injury, in violation of 625 ILCS 5/11- 401(a), an administrative penalty of five hundred seventy-five dollars ($575.00). 
(20)  Leaving scene—failure to report death or injury within ½ hour, in violation of 625 ILCS 5/11-401(b), an administrative penalty of five hundred seventy-five dollars ($575.00). 
(21)  Leaving scene - accident - vehicle damage, in violation of 625 ILCS 5/11-402, an administrative penalty of five hundred seventy-five dollars ($575.00). 
(b)  General regulations. 
(1)  This section shall not replace or otherwise abrogate any existing state or federal laws or city ordinances pertaining to vehicle seizure and impoundment, and these penalties shall be in addition to any penalties that may be assessed by a court for any criminal charges. 
(2)  This section shall not apply if the vehicle used in the violation was stolen at the time and the theft was reported to the appropriate police authorities within twenty-four (24) hours after the theft was discovered, or upon verifiable proof that the vehicle was stolen at the time the vehicle was impounded. 
(3)  Fees for towing and storage of a vehicle under this section shall be those approved by the chief of police for all tow companies authorized to tow for the police department. 
(c)  Notice. Whenever a police officer has probable cause to believe that a vehicle is subject to seizure and impoundment pursuant to this section, the police officer shall provide for the towing of the vehicle to a facility authorized by the city. Before or at a time the vehicle is towed, the police officer shall notify any person identifying himself as the owner of the vehicle or any person who is found to be in control of the vehicle at the time of the alleged violation, of the fact of the seizure and of the vehicle and of the owner's right to request a preliminary vehicle impoundment hearing to be conducted under this section. Said vehicle shall be impounded pending the completion of the hearings provided for in subsection (d) herein, unless the owner of the vehicle posts with the city a cash bond in the amount of five hundred seventy-five dollars ($575.00) and pays the towing and storage charges. 
Before the time a vehicle is towed, if in the judgment of the police officer then present, a person authorized by the owner or operator of the vehicle is present and able to provide for the lawful immediate removal of the vehicle, the vehicle will be released to that person and prompt removal of the vehicle effected, and no administrative penalty imposed. 
(d)  Preliminary hearing. If the owner of record of a vehicle seized pursuant to this section desires to appeal the seizure, said owner must make a request for said hearing within twenty-four (24) hours of the seizure. Said request shall be in writing and filed with the chief of police, or his designee who shall conduct such preliminary hearing within twenty-four (24) hours after receipt of the request excluding Saturdays, Sundays, or city holidays. All interested persons shall be given a reasonable opportunity to be heard at the preliminary vehicle impoundment hearing. The formal rules of evidence will not apply at the hearing and hearsay evidence shall be admissible only if it is the type commonly relied upon by reasonably prudent persons in the conduct of their affairs. If after the hearing, the chief of police or his designee determines there is probable cause to believe that the vehicle is subject to seizure and impoundment pursuant to this section, he shall order the continued impoundment of the vehicle as provided in this section unless the owner of the vehicle posts with the city a cash bond in the amount of five hundred seventy-five dollars ($575.00) and pays the tower any applicable toning and storage fees. If the chief of police or his designee determines that there is no such probable cause, the vehicle will be returned without penalty or other fees. 
(e)  Hearing. Within ten (10) days after a vehicle is seized and impounded pursuant to this section, the city shall notify by certified mail, return receipt requested, the owner of record or lessee of the vehicle, and any lienholder of record of the date, time, and location of a plea hearing that will be conducted, pursuant to this section. The owner or lessee of the vehicle and any lienholder of record will appear at a plea hearing and enter a plea of guilty or not guilty. If a plea of guilty is entered, the cause will be disposed of at that time. If the owner or lessee of the vehicle and any lienholder of record pleads not guilty, a final hearing shall be scheduled and held, unless continued by order of the hearing officer, no later than forty-five (45) days after the vehicle was seized. All interested persons shall be given a reasonable opportunity to be heard at the hearing. At any time prior to the hearing date, the hearing officer may, at the request of either party, direct witnesses to appear and give testimony at the hearing. The formal rules of evidence will not apply at the hearing, and hearsay evidence shall be admissible only if it is the type commonly relied upon by reasonably prudent persons in the conduct of their affairs. If, after the hearing, the hearing officer determines by a preponderance of evidence that the vehicle was used in connection with a violation set forth in this section, the hearing officer shall enter an order finding the owner of record of the vehicle civilly liable to the city for an administrative penalty in the amount of five hundred seventy-five dollars ($575.00) and requiring the vehicle to continue to be impounded until the owner or lessee of the vehicle, and any lienholder of record pays the administrative penalty to the city plus fees to the tower for the towing and storage of the vehicle. If the owner of record or lessee of the vehicle and any lienholder of record fails to appear at the hearing, the hearing officer shall enter a default order in favor of the city. If the hearing officer finds no such violation occurred, the hearing officer shall order the immediate return of the owner's vehicle or cash bond without fees. 
(f)  Administrative penalty. If an administrative penalty is imposed pursuant to this section, such penalty shall constitute a debt due and owing the city. If a cash bond has been posted pursuant to this section the bond shall be applied to the penalty. If a vehicle has been impounded when such a penalty is imposed, the city may seek to obtain a judgment on the debt and enforce such judgment against the vehicles as provided by law. Except as provided otherwise in this section, a vehicle shall continue to be impounded until the penalty is paid to the city and any applicable towing fees are paid to the tower, in which case possession of the vehicle shall be given to the person who is legally entitled to possess the vehicle or the vehicle is sold or otherwise disposed of to satisfy a judgment to enforce a lien as provided by law. If the administrative penalty and applicable fees are not paid within thirty-five (35) days after an administrative penalty is imposed against an owner of record or lessee of the vehicle, and any lienholder of record who defaults by failing to appear at the hearing, the vehicle shall be deemed unclaimed and shall be disposed of in the manner provided by law for the disposition of unclaimed vehicles. In all other cases, if the administrative penalty and applicable fee are not paid within thirty-five (35) days after the expiration of time at which administrative review of the hearing officer's determination may be sought, or within thirty-five (35) days after an action seeking administrative review has been resolved in favor of the city, whichever is applicable, the vehicle shall be deemed unclaimed and shall be disposed of in the manner provide by law for the disposition of unclaimed vehicles under the Illinois Vehicle Code. 
(g)  Vehicle possession. 
(1)  Except as otherwise specifically provided by law, no owner, lien holder, or other person shall be legally entitled to take possession of a vehicle impounded under this section until the administrative penalty and fees applicable under this section have been paid. However, whenever a person with a lien of record against an impounded vehicle has commenced foreclosure proceedings, possession of the vehicle shall be given to that person if he or she agrees in writing to refund the city the amount of the net proceeds of any foreclosure sale, less any amounts required to pay all lien holders of record, not to exceed the administrative penalty, plus the applicable fees. 
(2)  For purposes of this section, the "owner of record" of a vehicle is the record title holder as registered with the Secretary of State of the State of Illinois. 
(Ord. No. 05-O-0069, § 1, 11-7-2005; Ord. No. 07-O-0011, § 2, 2-5-2007; Ord. No. 07-O-0105, § 8, 12-7-2007, eff. 1-1-2008; Ord. No. 09-O-0035, § 1, 7-6-2009, eff. 7-16-2009; Ord. No. 11-O-0007, § 43, 5-16-2011, eff. 6-1-2011; Ord. No. 12-O-0001, § 1, 1-16-2012)  
Secs. 17-1206—17-2019. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XX. - RED LIGHT AUTOMATED TRAFFIC LAW ENFORCEMENT SYSTEM 
 
Sec. 17-2020. - Definitions. 
Automated traffic law enforcement system means a device within the City of West Chicago with one (1) or more motor vehicle sensors working in conjunction with a red light signal to produce recorded images of motor vehicles entering an intersection against a steady or flashing red signal indication in violation of section 11-306 of the Illinois Vehicle Code ("Code"), 625 ILCS 5/11-306, or similar violation of the City of West Chicago Municipal Code. 
Disregarding a traffic control device means failure to stop and remain stopped before an intersection that is controlled by a red signal as provided for in section 11-306 of the Code. 
No turn on red means where the motor vehicle comes to a complete stop and does not enter the intersection as defined by section 1-132 of the Code, during the cycle of the red signal indication unless one (1) or more pedestrians are present, even if the motor vehicle stops at a point past a stop line or crosswalk where a driver is required to stop, as specified in subsection (c) of Section 11-306 of the Code or this Ordinance 
Recorded images means images produced by the automated traffic law enforcement system, which consist of either two (2) or more photographs; two (2) or more microphotographs; two (2) or more electronic images; or, a video recording showing the motor vehicle and, on at least one (1) image or portion of the recording, clearly identifying the registration plate number of the motor vehicle. 
Traffic compliance administrator means the person appointed as such pursuant to section 11-208.3 of the Code and shall have the following additional powers: adopt, distribute and process automated traffic law violation notices and other notices required by this article, collect money paid as fines and penalties, operate the automated traffic law enforcement system, and make certified reports to the Secretary of State as required by this article. 
(Ord. No. 07-O-0050, § 2, 6-18-2007; Ord. No. 10-O-0099, § 1, 12-6-2010)  
Sec. 17-2021. - Violations. 
It shall be a violation of this article for a vehicle to disregard a traffic control device or turn on red in violation of section 11-306 of the Code. 
(Ord. No. 07-O-0050, § 2, 6-18-2007; Ord. No. 10-O-0099, § 1, 12-6-2010)  
Sec. 17-2022. - Defenses. 
The following may be considered defenses by the hearing officer for a violation of section 17-2021: 
(1)  That the motor vehicle or registration plates of the motor vehicle were stolen before the violation occurred, and not under the control of or in the possession of the owner at the time of the violation; 
(2)  That the driver of the vehicle passed through the intersection when the light was red either (i) in order to yield the right-of-way to an emergency vehicle or (ii) as part of a funeral procession. 
To demonstrate that the motor vehicle or the registration plates were stolen before the violation occurred and were not under the control or possession of the owner at the time of the violation, the owner must submit proof that a report concerning the stolen motor vehicle or registration plates was filed with a law enforcement agency in a timely manner. 
(Ord. No. 07-O-0050, § 2, 6-18-2007; Ord. No. 10-O-0099, § 1, 12-6-2010)  
Sec. 17-2023. - Notice of violation. 
When the automated traffic law enforcement system records a motor vehicle entering an intersection in violation of section 17-2021, the city shall issue a written notice of violation to the registered owner or lessee of the vehicle, which shall be delivered by U.S. mail within thirty (30) days after the Illinois Secretary of State notifies the city of the identity of the registered owner or lessee of the vehicle, and in no event later than ninety (90) days following the violation. The city shall only be required to notify a lessee if the leasing company/lessor provides the lessee's name by an affidavit and a copy of the lease within sixty (60) days of the notice's issuance. If the driver information is not provided within sixty (60) days, the leasing company/lessor may be found liable. If any notice to an address is returned as undeliverable, a second notice shall be sent to the last known address recorded in a United States Post Office approved database of the owner or lessee of the cited vehicle. The second notice shall be made by first class mail postage prepaid. 
A notice of violation associated with an automated traffic law violation shall require a review of the associated recorded image by the traffic compliance administrator, who shall inspect the image and determine whether the motor vehicle was being operated in violation of section 17-2021, or whether one (1) of the defenses enumerated in section 17-2022 is visibly applicable upon inspection. Upon determination that the recorded image captures a violation and that no defense applies, the notice of violation shall be served upon the registered vehicle owner in the manner provided for above. The traffic compliance administrator shall retain a copy of all violation notices, recorded images and other correspondence mailed to the owner of the vehicle. Each notice of violation shall constitute evidence of the facts contained in the notice and is admissible in any proceeding alleging a violation of the above-noted statutory and local provisions and shall be prima facie evidence of a violation, subject to rebuttal on the basis of the defenses established in this article. 
The notice of violation shall include the following information: 
(1)  The name and address of the registered owner or lessee of the vehicle, as indicated by the records of the Secretary of State, or, if such information is outdated or unattainable, then the last known address recorded in a United States Post Office approved database; 
(2)  The make (only if discernable) and registration number of the motor vehicle involved in the violation; 
(3)  The violation charged; 
(4)  The location where the violation occurred; 
(5)  The date and time of the violation; 
(6)  A copy of the recorded images; 
(7)  The amount of the civil penalty and the date by which the penalty should be paid (fourteen (14) days from the date of issuance), if a hearing is not requested, and a statement that the payment of the fine shall operate as a final disposition of the violation; 
(8)  A statement that a failure to pay the civil penalty by the date noted may result in an additional late fee being assessed against the owner or lessee; 
(9)  The amount of the late fee; 
(10)  A statement that the failure to pay by the date specified will result in a final determination of liability and may result in the suspension of driving privileges for the registered owner of the vehicle; 
(11)  A statement that the recorded images constitute prima facie evidence of a violation; 
(12)  A statement that the person may elect to proceed by paying the fine or challenging the charge in court, by mail or by administrative hearing; and 
(13)  A statement of how an administrative hearing may be requested. 
(Ord. No. 07-O-0050, § 2, 6-18-2007; Ord. No. 10-O-0099, § 1, 12-6-2010)  
Sec. 17-2024. - Hearing. 
The owner of a vehicle being operated in violation of section 17-2021 may request a hearing by the respond-by date on the notice of violation (fourteen (14) days from the date of issuance), to challenge the evidence or set forth an applicable defense. The notice of violation shall constitute evidence of the facts contained in the notice and is admissible in any proceeding alleging a violation of section 17-2021. The notice of violation shall be prima facie evidence of a violation, subject to rebuttal on the basis of the defenses established in section 17-2022. 
The owner's failure to appear at the hearing will result in a finding of liability. In the event of a failure to appear, a "findings, decision and order" letter will be sent to the owner. The owner's failure to pay the amount by the date specified in that letter will result in a final determination. 
(Ord. No. 07-O-0050, § 2, 6-18-2007; Ord. No. 10-O-0099, § 1, 12-6-2010)  
Sec. 17-2025. - Nonresidents. 
Where the registered owner or lessee of the cited vehicle is not a resident of the city but seeks to contest the merits of the alleged violation, such person may contest the charges using the same available defenses as stated above, but rather than attend the administrative hearing, they may submit any and all documentary evidence to the traffic compliance administrator no later than the hearing date, together with a written statement reflecting that they are nonresidents of the City of West Chicago. The traffic compliance administrator shall forward all timely-submitted materials to the hearing officer for review and determination. 
(Ord. No. 07-O-0050, § 2, 6-18-2007; Ord. No. 10-O-0099, § 1, 12-6-2010)  
Sec. 17-2026. - Final determination. 
A final determination of violation liability shall occur following failure to pay the fine, a failure to request a hearing by the respond-by date, after a hearing officer's determination of violation liability and the exhaustion of or failure to exhaust any administrative review procedures provided by the City Code. Where a person fails to appear at a hearing to contest the alleged violation in the time and manner specified in a prior mailed notice, the hearing officer's determination shall become final upon a failure to pay the amount owed on date provided in the "findings, decision and order" letter. Appeal may be made to the Circuit Court of DuPage County on any final determination as provided for by the Administrative Review Act. 
(Ord. No. 07-O-0050, § 2, 6-18-2007; Ord. No. 10-O-0099, § 1, 12-6-2010)  
Sec. 17-2027. - Notice of determination of liability. 
A determination of automated traffic law violation liability shall occur following failure to pay the fine or penalty, or to contest the alleged violation within fourteen (14) days of the notice of violation. Where a person fails to appear at a hearing to contest the alleged violation in the time and manner specified in a prior mailed notice, the hearing officer will enter findings, decision and order's determination of automated traffic law violation liability shall become final: (a) upon denial of a timely petition to set aside that determination, or (b) upon expiration of the period for filing such a petition without a filing having been made. If a person appears at a hearing and is found liable or contests the violation by mail and is found liable, the hearing officer will enter findings, decision and order, which is a final determination of automated traffic law violation liability that is a final, appealable order. 
(Ord. No. 07-O-0050, § 2, 6-18-2007; Ord. No. 10-O-0099, § 1, 12-6-2010)  
Sec. 17-2028. - Notice of final determination. 
A notice of final determination shall be sent following the final determination of automated traffic law violation liability and the conclusion of judicial review. The notice of final determination shall include the following information: 
(1)  A statement that the unpaid fine is a debt due and owing to the City of West Chicago. 
(2)  A warning that a failure to pay any fine due and owing to the City of West Chicago within fourteen (14) days may result in a petition to the Circuit Court of DuPage County to have the unpaid fine rendered as a judgment or may result in the suspension of the person's drivers license for failure to pay fines or penalties for five (5) or more violation under this article. 
(Ord. No. 07-O-0050, § 2, 6-18-2007; Ord. No. 10-O-0099, § 1, 12-6-2010)  
Sec. 17-2029. - Petitions to set aside determination. 
A petition to set aside determination of an automated traffic law violation must be filed with or mailed to the traffic control administrator within fourteen (14) days of the date of mailing of the notice of determination of liability. The grounds for the petition are limited to: 
(1)  The person was not the owner or lessee of the cited vehicle on the date of the violation notice was issued; 
(2)  The person having already paid the fine for the violation in question; and 
(3)  Excusable failure to appear at or request a new date for a hearing. 
Upon receipt of a timely petition to set aside the determination of liability, the hearing officer shall review the petition to determine if cause has been shown to set aside the determination. If cause has been shown, the city shall forward the petitioner a new hearing date on which the petitioner must appear to present his case. The city shall notify the petitioner of the hearing officer's decision to grant a hearing or deny the petition within fourteen (14) days of the city's receipt. 
(Ord. No. 07-O-0050, § 2, 6-18-2007; Ord. No. 10-O-0099, § 1, 12-6-2010)  
Sec. 17-2030. - Notice of impending drivers license suspension. 
A notice of impending drivers license suspension shall be sent to the person liable for any fine or penalty that remains due and owing on five (5) or more violations of this article. The notice of impending drivers license suspension shall state the following information: 
(1)  The failure to pay the fine owing within forty-five (45) days of the notice's date will result in the City of West Chicago notifying the Secretary of State that the person is eligible for initiation of suspension proceedings under Section 6-306.5 of the Code; 
(2)  A statement that the person may obtain a copy of the original ticket imposing a fine by sending a self-addressed, stamped envelope to the City of West Chicago along with a request for the copy. 
The notice of impending drivers license suspension shall be sent by first class mail, postage prepaid, to the address recorded with the Secretary of State or, if any notice to that address is returned as undeliverable, to the last known address recorded in a United States Post Office approved database. 
(Ord. No. 07-O-0050, § 2, 6-18-2007; Ord. No. 10-O-0099, § 1, 12-6-2010)  
Sec. 17-2031. - Drivers license suspension. 
The traffic compliance administrator, by certified report, shall request that the Secretary of State suspend the driving privileges of an owner of a registered vehicle who has failed to pay any fine or penalty due and owing as a result of five (5) automated traffic violations. The report shall be certified and contain the following: 
(1)  The name, last known address as recorded with the Secretary of State, as provided by the lessor of the cited vehicle at the time of lease, or as recorded in a United States Post Office approved database if any notice sent under this article is returned as undeliverable, and driver's license number of the person who failed to pay the fine or penalty and the registration number of any vehicle known to be registered to such person in a state; 
(2)  The name of the municipality making the report pursuant to this section; and 
(3)  A statement that a notice of impending driver's license suspension has been sent to the person named in the report at the address recorded with the Secretary of State or at the last address known to the lessor of the cited vehicle at the time of the lease or, if any notice sent under this article is returned as undeliverable at the last known address recorded at a United States Post Office approved database; the date on which such notice was sent; and address to which such notice was sent. 
The traffic compliance administrator shall notify the Secretary of State whenever a person named in the certified report has paid the previously recorded fine or penalty or whenever the municipality determines that the original report was in error. A certified copy of such notification shall also be given upon request and at no additional charge to the person named therein. 
Any person receiving notice from the Secretary of State that their driving privileges may be suspended at the end of a specified period may challenge the accuracy of the certified report prepared by the traffic compliance administrator. The person shall, within seven (7) days after having received notice from the Secretary of State, request an opportunity to speak with the traffic compliance administrator to challenge the accuracy of the certified report. If the traffic compliance administrator determines that the original report was in error due to the fact that the person challenging the report was not the owner or lessee of the vehicle or that the person has already paid their fine for the five (5) or more automated traffic violations, the traffic compliance administrator shall immediately notify the Secretary of State of such error in a subsequent certified report. 
(Ord. No. 07-O-0050, § 2, 6-18-2007; Ord. No. 10-O-0099, § 1, 12-6-2010)  
Sec. 17-2032. - Penalty. 
Any person violating section 17-2021 shall be fined one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each offense. Failure to pay the original fine within fourteen (14) days of the issuance of the notice of final determination shall result in an additional one hundred dollars ($100.00) late payment fine. 
(Ord. No. 07-O-0050, § 2, 6-18-2007; Ord. No. 10-O-0099, § 1, 12-6-2010)  
Chapter 17.5 - RESERVED 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 2125, adopted Feb. 28, 1989, specifically repealed former Ch. 17.5, which contained § 17.5-1, relative to the adoption by reference of the state vehicle code, derived from Ord. No. 1698, § 1, adopted Nov. 21, 1983. Provisions relative to the state vehicle code are currently included in § 17-1 et seq.  
Chapter 18 - WATER AND SEWER SERVICES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 4; housing, Ch. 7; nuisances, Ch. 10; pollution control, Ch. 14. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 18-1. - Definitions and abbreviations. 
(a)  Abbreviations. The following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings: 
BOD 	Biochemical oxygen demand 
CFR 	Code of Federal Regulations 
COD 	Chemical oxygen demand 
FOG 	Fats, oil and grease 
IEPA 	Illinois Environmental Protection Agency 
mg/l 	Milligrams per liter 
NCPS 	National categorical pretreatment standards 
NPDES 	National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System 
POTW 	Publicly owned treatment works 
PSES 	Pretreatment Standards for Existing Sources 
PSNS 	Pretreatment Standards for New Sources 
RCRA 	Resource Conservation and Recovery Act 
SIC 	Standard Industrial Classification 
SWDA 	Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 USC 6901 et seq.) 
TSS 	Total suspended solids 
TTO 	Total toxic organics 
USC 	United States Code 
USEPA 	United States Environmental Protection Agency 
 
(b)  Definitions. For the purposes of this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings indicated, unless their context requires otherwise: 
A as in "cyanide-A" means amendable to alkaline chlorination. 
Act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended. (33 USC 1251 et seq.) 
Administrator means the administrator of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 
Ammonia means the concentration of ammonia-nitrogen in mg/l. 
Approving authority means the mayor and city council of the city acting by and through their duly authorized agent or representative, the director of public works. 
Authorized representative of industrial user is: 
(1)  A principal executive officer of at least the level of vice president, if the industrial user is a corporation; 
(2)  A general partner or proprietor if the industrial user is a partnership or proprietorship, respectively; 
(3)  A duly authorized representative only if the authorization is made in writing to the city by a person described above. 
Average strength sewage means sewage with characteristics not exceeding a five-day twenty-degree Celsius biochemical oxygen demand of two hundred (200) mg/l; a suspended solids content of two hundred twenty (220) mg/l, an ammonia-nitrogen content of fifteen (15) mg/l based on one hundred (100) gpcpd, and a pH range of 6.5 to 7.5. 
Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) means the quantity of oxygen, expressed in mg/l, utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures as described in Standard Methods. 
Building drain means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer or other approved point of discharge, beginning five (5) feet (one and five-tenths (1.5) meters) outside the inner face of the building wall. 
Building drainage sewer means a sewer which carries storm drainage, surface water, foundation drainage, and roof drainage, but excludes sewage and industrial waste from the building plumbing to a public storm sewer or natural outlet. 
Building inspector means the superintendent of building inspection/zoning administration of the city or his authorized deputy, agent or representative. 
Building sanitary sewer means a sewer which carries only sewage and industrial wastes from the building to the public sanitary sewer. 
Chemical oxygen demand (COD) means the quantity of oxygen consumed from a chemical oxidant (standard potassiumdichromate solution) under standard laboratory procedures as described in Standard Methods. 
City means the City of West Chicago. 
City engineer means the city engineer/director of public works or his authorized representative. 
Combined sewer means a sewer which is designed and intended to receive wastewater, storm, surface and groundwater drainage. 
Combined waste stream formula means the formula as found in 40 CFR section 403.6(e). 
Commercial user shall include transit lodging, retail and wholesale establishments or places engaged in selling merchandise, or rendering services. 
Compatible pollutant means biochemical oxygen demand, chemical oxygen demand, FOG, suspended solids, pH fecal coliform bacteria, and ammonia-nitrogen and additional pollutants identified in the NPDES permit. 
Composite sample means a sample of wastewater based on a flow proportional or time proportional method. 
Consistent POTW treatment works removal, pollutant removal or removal means reduction in the amount of a pollutant or alteration of the nature or concentration of a pollutant in the influent of the POTW to a less incompatible or concentrated state of the effluent. Consistent city removal efficiency shall be the difference between the average concentration of the pollutant in the influent of the treatment plant and the average concentration of the pollutant in the effluent of the treatment plant divided by the average concentration of the pollutant in the influent. 
Construction is considered to have commenced when: 
(1)  Installation or assembly of facilities or equipment has begun; 
(2)  Significant site preparation has begun for installation or assembly; 
(3)  The owner or operator has entered into a binding contractual obligation. 
Control manhole means a structure located on a site from which industrial wastes are discharged. The purpose of a control manhole is to provide access for a representative of the city to sample and/or measure discharges. 
Cooling water means the water discharged from any use such as air conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, to which the only pollutant added is heat. 
Customer means a person, partnership, corporation, trust or other party which uses and/or receives service from the waterworks and/or sanitary sewerage system of the city. 
Debt service charge shall be the amount to be paid each billing period for payment of interest, principal and coverage of revenue bonds outstanding and shall be allocated to the various waste characteristics such as volume, BOD, suspended solids, and ammonia-nitrogen. 
Director means the director of IEPA. 
Easement means an acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by others. 
Effluent criteria are defined in any applicable NPDES permit. 
End of pipe means that point at which the user's combined regulated and unregulated discharge enters the city collections system without additional discharges diluting the flow. 
End of process means the point at which regulated process flows can be sampled, prior to mixing with unregulated waste streams. 
Existing source means any building, structure, facility, or installation from which there is or may be a discharge which is not a new source. 
Fats, oil, or grease (FOG) means any hydrocarbons, fatty acids, soaps, fats, waxes, oils, and any other material that is extracted by trichlorotrifluoroethane solvent. 
Fecal coliform means any number of organisms common in the intestinal tract of man and animal whose presence in sanitary sewage is an indicator of pollution. 
Federal grant means the U.S. government participation in the financing of the construction of treatment works as provided for by title II—Grants for Construction of Treatment Works of the Act. 
Floatable oil is oil, fat or grease in a physical state such that it will separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment facility. A wastewater shall be considered free of floatable fat if it is properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the collection system. 
Flow means volume of wastewater per unit of time. 
Garbage means solid waste from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food, and from the commercial handling, storage and sale of produce. 
Grab sample means a sample which is taken from a waste stream on a one-time basis without regard to the flow in the waste stream and without consideration of time. 
Incompatible pollutant means all pollutants other than compatible pollutants as defined in this section. 
Indirect discharge or discharge means the introduction of pollutants into a POTW from any nondomestic source regulated under section 307(b), (c) or (d) of the Act. 
Industrial users shall include establishments engaged in manufacturing activities involving the mechanical or chemical transformation of material or substance into products. 
Industrial wastes means any solid, liquid, or gaseous substance discharged, permitted to flow or escaping from any industrial, manufacturing, commercial or business establishment or process or from the development, recovery or processing of any natural resource as distinct from sanitary sewage. 
Infiltration means the water entering a sewer system, including building drains and sewers, from the ground, through such means as, but not limited to, defective pipes, pipe joints, connections, or manhole walls. (Infiltration does not include, and is distinguished from, inflow.) 
Infiltration/inflow means the total quantity of water from both infiltration and inflow without distinguishing the source. 
Inflow means the water discharge into a sewer system, including building drains and sewers, from such sources as, but not limited to, roof leaders; cellar, yard, and area drains; foundation drains; unpolluted cooling water discharges; drains from springs and swampy areas; manhole covers, cross-connections from storm sewers, and combined sewers, catch basins, storm waters, surface runoff, street wash waters or drainage. (Inflow does not include, and is distinguished from, infiltration.) 
Institutional/governmental user shall include schools, hospitals, churches, penal institutions, and users associated with federal, state, and local governments. 
Interference means a discharge which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, both: 
(1)  Inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations, or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and 
(2)  Therefore, is a cause of violation of any requirement of the POTW's NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation) or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with the following statutory provisions and regulations or permits issued thereunder (or more stringent state or local regulations): Section 405 of the Clean Water Act, the Solid Waste Disposal Act, (SWDA) (including Title II, more commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA), and including state regulations contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the SWDA), the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, and the Marine Protection, Research and Sanctuaries Act. 
Living unit means the same as defined in the zoning ordinance of the city for the occupancy of one family. 
Lot means any parcel of land as set forth in the zoning ordinance of the city. 
Main, water main and main lines means that portion of the water main to which the service lines are attached and, hooked up and which is owned by the city and is located within a public way or easement serving an entire geographical area. 
Major water mains means water mains of not less than twelve (12) inches in diameter and looped at intervals of approximately every one-half mile, conveying water from wells or storage reservoirs to various sections of the water distribution system. 
Milligrams per liter (mg/l) means a unit of the concentration of water or wastewater constituent. It is 0.001 g of the constituent 1.00 ml of water. It has replaced the unit formerly used commonly, parts per million, to which it is approximately equivalent, in reporting the results of water and wastewater analysis. 
National categorical pretreatment standard means any pretreatment standard specifying quantities or concentrations of pollutants which may be discharged to a POTW by industrial users in specific industrial subcategories as established in regulations promulgated by the USEPA in 40 CFR chapter I, subchapter N. 
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit (NPDES permit) means a permit issued under the national pollutant discharge elimination system for discharge of wastewaters to the navigable waters of the United States pursuant to the Act. 
Natural outlet means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or other body of surface or groundwater. 
New source means any building, structure, facility, remodeling (if that remodeling could result in the assigning by the city of a new Standard Industrial Classification code) or installation from which there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under section 307(c) of the Act. 
(1)  Construction is at a site where no other point source is located; 
(2)  The process or production equipment causing discharge is totally replaced due to construction; or 
(3)  Production or wastewater generator processes of the facility are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. 
Objectionable substance means any waste discharge that may cause interference with the POTW plant operations, may cause pass through to the receiving stream that violates stream standards, may interfere with sludge disposal options, or may interfere with collections system and lift station operations either singly or synergistically with the waste or other dischargers, or that can result in harm to worker health and safety. 
Operation of maintenance costs means all costs, direct or indirect, (other than debt service) necessary to ensure adequate wastewater treatment on a continuing basis, conforming with related federal, state, and local requirements, and assuring optimal long-term facility management. These costs include an annual charge for replacement of equipment computed on the basis of the cost of equipment replacement divided by its useful life. 
Ordinance means this ordinance. 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 1985 amended Arts. I and III of this chapter. The word "ordinance" has been changed to "article" or "chapter," where appropriate, within these provisions. 
Owner means any person, partnership, corporation, trust, or other party having legal title to the lot, tract, or parcel of land for which usage or service from the waterworks and/or sanitary sewerage system of the city is provided and/or proposed. 
Oxygen demand means any measurement of total oxygen demand using COD, BOD, or other words. 
Pass through means a discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTW's NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation). 
Permitted wastewater hauler vehicle means a vehicle used for hauling wastewater, which has been granted a permit under the requirements of this chapter. 
Person means any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation or group, partnership and municipality. 
pH means the intensity of the acid or base condition of a solution, calculated by taking the logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration. 
Pollutant means any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat wrecked or discharged equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt or industrial, municipal, and agricultural waste discharged into water. 
Population equivalent is a term used to evaluate the impact of industrial or other waste on a treatment works or stream. One population equivalent is one hundred (100) gallons of sewage per day, containing seventeen-hundredths (0.17) pounds of BOD and twenty-hundredths (0.20) pounds of suspended solids. 
ppm means parts per million by weight. 
Pretreatment requirements means any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment, other than a pretreatment standard, imposed on an industrial user. 
Pretreatment standards means, for any specified pollutant, city prohibitive discharge standards as set forth in section 300.105, city-specific limitations on discharge set forth in section 300.110, the State of Illinois pretreatment standards or the national categorical pretreatment standards (when effective), whichever standard is most stringent. 
Properly shredded garbage means the wastes from the preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch (one and twenty-seven-hundredths (1.27) centimeters) in any dimension. 
Property service lines means that portion of water lines and appurtenant construction running from the water main to the house, building or improvement upon the property. 
Publicly owned treatment works (POTW) means a treatment works as defined by section 212 of the Act, owned by the city. This definition includes any devices and systems used in the storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of municipal sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature that convey wastewater to the POTW treatment plant regardless of ownership, but does not include sewers, pipes, and other conveyances not connected to the city POTW treatment plant. 
Public sewer means a sewer dedicated to or provided by or subject to the jurisdiction of the city consisting of collector sewer, interceptor sewer, force main and pumping station. 
Regional administrator means the regional administrator for the USEPA for Region V. 
Replacement means expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment, accessories, or appurtenances which are necessary during the useful life of the treatment works to maintain the capacity and performance for which such works were designed and constructed. The term "operation and maintenance" includes replacement. 
Residential user shall mean all dwelling units such as houses, mobile homes, apartments, and permanent multifamily dwellings. 
Sanitary interceptor sewer means sanitary sewers not less than twelve (12) inches in diameter which receive sewage from a number of sanitary lateral sewers and conduct such sewage to point for treatment and disposal. 
Sanitary lateral sewers means sanitary sewers not less than eight (8) inches in diameter which discharge into other sewers and provide service directly to the various lots, tracts and parcels of land along their routes. 
Sanitary sewage means the combination of liquid and water-carried wastes discharged from sanitary plumbing conveniences by reason of normal human and domestic use activities. 
Sanitary sewer means a sewer that conveys sewage or industrial wastes or a combination of both, and into which storm, surface, and groundwaters or unpolluted industrial wastes are not intentionally admitted. 
Sanitary sewage system means and includes any and all of the following: A sewage treatment plant or plants; collecting, intercepting and outlet sewers; lateral sewers; force mains, conduits; pumping stations; ejector stations; and all other appurtenances, extensions and improvements necessary, useful or convenient for collection, treatment and disposal in a sanitary manner of sewage and industrial wastes. 
Secondary water mains means a grid iron of water mains not less than six (6) inches in diameter connected to the major water mains to deliver the fire flow and domestic supply to the various properties and customers along their routes. 
Service charges means charges for making the waterworks or sanitary sewerage system of the city ready to serve particular lots, tracts, or parcels of land. 
Sewage means a combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments, together with such ground, surface, and stormwaters as may be present. 
Sewage treatment plant means any arrangement of devices; structures and equipment for treatment sewage. 
Sewerage means the system of sewers and appurtenances for the collection, transportation and pumping of sewage. 
Sewers means a pipe or conduit for conveying sewage or any other waste liquids, including storm, surface and groundwater drainage. 
Shall is mandatory; may is permissible. 
Significant user means an industrial user of POTW's wastewater system who: 
(1)  Has a discharge flow of twenty-five thousand (25,000) gallons or more per average work day; 
(2)  Has in its wastewater incompatible pollutants as defined pursuant to section 307 of the Act, or by state statutes, or by applicable federal or state rules and regulations, or compatible pollutants that exceed the strength of normal domestic waste; or 
(3)  Is found by the POTW, IEPA or USEPA to have a reasonable potential to adversely affect, either singly or in combination with other contributing industries, the wastewater treatment system, the quality of sludge, the plant's effluent quality, or air emissions generated by the plant; 
(4)  Is subject to any national categorical pretreatment standard; or 
(5)  Contributes a process waste stream which makes up five (5) percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment plant. 
Sludge means the settlable solids separated from the liquids during the wastewater treatment processes. 
Slug means any discharge of water or wastewater which in concentration of any given pollutant, as measured by a grab sample, exceeds more than five (5) times the allowable concentrations as set forth in this chapter or any pollutant, including oxygen-demanding pollutants, released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which will cause interference with the POTW. 
Standard Methods means the examination and analytical procedures set forth in the most recent edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water, Sewage and Industrial Waste," published jointly by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association, and the Federation of Sewage and Industrial Waste Association. 
Storm sewer means a sewer that carries storm, surface and groundwater drainage but excludes sewage and industrial wastes other than unpolluted cooling water. 
Stormwater runoff means that portion of the rainfall that is drained into the sewers. 
Surcharge means that part of the user charge system in addition to the user charge and debt service charge which is levied on those persons whose wastes discharges are greater than normal domestic sanitary sewage wastes and is imposed to recover the cost of treating excess strength industrial wastes. 
Suspended solids means solids that either float on the surface of or are in suspension in water, sewage, or industrial waste and which are removable by a laboratory filtration device as determined by standard methods. 
T as in "cyanide-T," means total. 
Total metals means the sum of the concentration of metals in section 300.110. 
Total solids means the sum of suspended and dissolved solids. 
Total suspended solids (TSS) means total suspended matter, expressed in milligrams per liter, that either floats on the surface of, or is in suspension in water, wastewater, or other liquids and is removable by laboratory filtration using a Reeve Angel type 934A or 984H glass fiber filter disc as prescribed in Standard Methods. 
Total toxic organics means the summation of all quantified values for the organics as specified in the applicable regulation. 
Unpolluted water means water of quality equal to or better than the effluent criteria set forth in 35 Illinois Administrative Code part 304 or water that would not cause violation of receiving water quality standards benefited by discharge to the sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided. 
Upset means an exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with applicable national categorical pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the industrial user. An upset does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack or preventive maintenance, or careless or improper operation. 
Usage rates means rates for the use of the waterworks or sanitary sewerage system of the city. 
Useful life means the estimated period during which the treatment works will be operated and shall be thirty (30) years from the date of start-up of any wastewater facilities constructed with a federal grant. 
User means any person who contributes, causes or permits the contribution of wastewater onto the POTW treatment plant. 
User charge means a charge established for users of the treatment facilities in the proportionate share to each user of the cost of operation and maintenance including replacement of such facilities pursuant to section 204(b) of PL 92-500 and shall include surcharges for the treatment of any excess strength wastes. 
User class shall mean the type of user: "residential, institutional/governmental, commercial," or "industrial" as defined herein. 
Wastewater means the combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions including polluted cooling water. 
(1)  Sanitary wastewater means the combination of liquid and water carried wastes discharged from toilet and other sanitary plumbing facilities. 
(2)  Industrial wastewater means a combination of liquid and water-carried waste, discharged from any industrial user including the wastewater from pretreatment facilities and polluted cooling water. 
Wastewater discharge permit means the document or documents issued to a user by the city allowing discharge to the POTW in accordance with the terms of this chapter. 
Wastewater facilities means the structures, equipment, and processes required to collect, carry away, and treat domestic and industrial wastes and dispose of the effluent. 
Wastewater hauler means any person, partnership or corporation engaged in transporting sanitary wastewater as a commercial venture. 
Wastewater and service charge shall be the charge per quarterly period established for all users of the wastewater facilities. It shall consist of the total of the basic user charge, the basic user rate, which includes the surcharge, if applicable, and the debt service charge. 
Wastewater treatment works means an arrangement of devices and structures for treating wastewater, industrial wastes, and sludge. Sometimes used as synonymous with "wastewater treatment plant" or "sewage treatment plant" or "pollution control plant." 
Watercourse means a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
Water distribution system means a grid of water mains to convey the water from the source of supply to the point of use. 
Waters of the State of Illinois means all streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation systems, drainage system and all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are contained within, flow through, or border upon the state or any portion thereof. 
Water storage means a tank or tanks for storing water for fire protection or equalization of demands. 
Waterworks means and includes a water supply and distribution system in its entirety or any integral part thereof including mains, hydrants, meters, valves, standpipes, storage tanks, pump tanks, intakes, wells, impounding reservoirs, pumps, machinery, purification plants, softening apparatus and all other elements useful in connection with such system. 
Waterworks and sewerage fund is the principal accounting designation for all revenue received and expenses incurred in the operation of the waterworks and/or sewerage system. These revenues and expenses shall be segregated so that water system revenues and expenses shall be recorded in the waterworks account of the waterworks and sewerage fund and revenues and expenses of the sewerage system shall be recorded in the sewerage account of the waterworks and sewerage fund. 
(Ord. No. 1985, § 1, 3-21-88; Ord. No. 2097, § 2, 11-21-88; Ord. No. 2895, §§ 1, 2, 5-1-95; Ord. No. 2930, § 1, 9-5-95; Ord. No. 4207, § 1, 5-15-2000) 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 1985, adopted Mar. 30, 1988, deleted former §§ 18-1, 18-1.1 and 18-1.2, and enacted provisions in lieu thereof to read as set out in §§ 18-1, 18-1.1, 18-1.2. The deleted provisions pertained to definitions, service area and extension of major water mains and interceptor sanitary sewers, respectively, and derived from Ord. No. 816, § 1, adopted Jan. 21, 1963, and Ord. No. 1066, §§ 101(1—35), 402, 403, adopted Oct, 19, 1970. See also the editor's footnote to Art. III of this chapter.  
Sec. 18-1.1. - Service area. 
With the exceptions of areas or land lying outside of the city which are presently receiving city water service, the city shall hereafter furnish no city water service to any land or area lying outside the corporate limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1985, § 1, 3-21-88) 
Note— See the editor's note following § 18.1.  
Sec. 18-1.2. - Extension of major water mains and interceptor sanitary sewers. 
In the event that a major water main or sanitary interceptor sewer as shown in the Report on Water Utility, dated April 30, 1987, or the Wastewater Planning Study, dated October 1976, is through an area to be subdivided or developed, or is required as an off site line to service the proposed development, the city may share in the installation of the major water main or sanitary interceptor sewer in a ratio of the diameter of water main or sanitary sewer required by the city to the diameter of water main or sanitary sewer required to serve the proposed subdivision or development. Such formula shall be made and designated as such by the council. 
(Ord. No. 1985, § 1, 3-21-88) 
Note— See the editor's note following § 18-1.  
Sec. 18-1.3. - Extension of secondary water mains or sanitary lateral sewers. 
The extension of secondary water mains or sanitary lateral sewers shall be made as follows: 
(1)  Upon petition by an owner or group of owners to the city to make an extension of the water main or sanitary sewer at their cost. 
(2)  The improvements shall be within a subdivision, planned in accordance with the subdivision ordinance for the city. 
(3)  Upon petition from a group of property owners requesting that said improvements be installed by special assessment. 
(4)  By agreement with the city. 
(Ord. No. 1066, § 404, 10-19-70)  
Sec. 18-2. - Application. 
An application for any services or usage of the waterworks or sanitary sewerage system shall be made in writing to the clerk, superintendent of public works, or proper building official of the city. Every application shall contain an agreement by the applicant to abide by and accept all of the provisions and ordinances of the waterworks and sanitary sewerage system. Service charges and usage charges shall be paid to the city administrator. 
(Ord. No. 1066, § 102, 10-19-70)  
Sec. 18-3. - Establishment of service accounts; liability for service. 
(a)  Water and sewer service accounts shall be established and held in the name of the property owner (may also be referred to as landlord or lessor) and shall not be established and held in the name of a non-owner, including but not limited to a tenant of leased property. At the discretion of the city, water and sewer service accounts may be kept in the names of an agent or management company, so long as the city has all property ownership information on file. 
(b)  The owner, customer and/or user shall be jointly and severally liable for any customer and/or user service charges provided that the city shall first seek payment for said charges from the property owner account holder. 
(c)  Upon a change in tenancy of a rental property with ten (10) or fewer units per building, the property owner shall provide the city with the name, address and phone number of any new tenant. 
(Ord. No. 11-O-0003, § 2, 1-17-2011)  
Sec. 18-4. - Water and sewer service mandatory. 
(a)  All living units, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions located within the city which use water and generate wastewater shall be connected to the city water and sewerage system. 
(b)  When the building inspector, in conjunction with the council, finds on the basis of the evidence presented to them that as applied to a particular building or structure extraordinary hardship will result from the strict compliance with the provisions of this section, the owner of such building or structure may be exempted from compliance with this section. The owner of a building or structure so exempted shall install alternate suitable sanitary sewerage and waterworks facilities complying with the provisions of this Code or other ordinances of the city. No finding of extraordinary hardship shall be made unless the evidence discloses that: 
(1)  As a result of the particular physical surroundings, shape, topography, or location with reference to the nearest connection to the sanitary sewerage or waterworks system of the city of the tract or parcel of land on which the particular building or structure involved is situated, a particular hardship to the owner would result, as distinguished from mere inconvenience; 
(2)  The conditions upon which the request for the exemption is based are unique to the tract or parcel of land on which the building or structure involved is situated and are not generally applicable to other tracts or parcels of land; and 
(3)  The granting of the exemption will not be detrimental to the public safety, health or welfare or injurious to other property in the neighborhood in which the particular building or structure is located. 
No exemption shall be granted under this subsection with respect to water connection requirements, and wells for purposes other than groundwater monitoring or remediation shall be prohibited, in the portions of the city described as follows: 
(i)  That part of the City of West Chicago lying within the Northeast Quarter of Section 16, Township 39 North, Range 9 East of the Third Principal Meridian in DuPage County, Illinois, excepting therefrom the following: 
a.  The north 617.2 feet (except the east 400 feet of the south 365 feet thereof) of that portion of said Northeast Quarter of said Section 16 lying east of the Elgin, Joliet & Eastern Railway right-of-way; and 
b.  The west 230 feet of said Northeast Quarter of said Section 16. 
(ii)  Lots 9, 12, 13 and 14 in Block 3, Lots 4 and 5 in Block 4 and Lots 1, 2, and 3 in Block 5 in Second Addition to Westshire Gardens, being a subdivision in the Southeast quarter of Section 9 Range 39 north, Range 9, east of the third principal meridian, according to the Plat thereof recorded October 20, 1926 as Document No. 223494, in DuPage County, Illinois. 
(iii)  The west 347 feet, as measured on the south line of the northeast quarter of the southwest quarter of Section 15, Township 39 north, Range 9 east of the third principal meridian (except that part lying in Roosevelt Road, also known as State Bond Issue Route 6) in DuPage County, Illinois. 
(iv)  Of Lot 2 in Bruss Assessment Plat and also that part of Lot 1 Lying west of a line drawn from the southwest corner of said Lot 1. Said Bruss Assessment Plat being of Lot 2 in Max Dierking's Assessment Plat of part of the west half of Section 15, Township 39 north, Range 9 east of the third principal meridian. According to said Bruss Assessment Plat recorded September 1, 1989 as Document R89-108982 in the Recorder's Office of DuPage County, Illinois. 
(c)  The city may, from time to time, review the exemption granted hereunder and may revoke said exemption. The city shall notify the owner of said revocation and said revocation shall be effective ninety (90) days after notice by the city. The owner may request a hearing before the city engineer to review the revocation. The revocation shall be made by the city engineer upon a determination that the extraordinary hardship no longer exists. 
(Ord. No. 1985, § 2, 3-21-88; Ord. No. 3069, § 1, 2-24-97; Ord. No. 05-O-0010, § 1, 4-4-2005) 
Editor's note— Section 2 of Ord. No. 1985, adopted Mar. 30, 1988, deleted former § 18-4 and enacted provisions in lieu thereof to read as set out in § 18-4. Former § 18-4 pertained to extraordinary hardship and derived from Ord. No. 1066, § 117, adopted Oct. 19, 1970.  
Sec. 18-5. - Contractors performing work on the waterworks or sanitary sewerage system. 
(a)  The applicant shall notify the city in writing of any person, firm or corporation proposing to perform work on any part of the waterworks or sanitary sewerage system. The city reserves the right to object to and reject any applications where the person, firm or corporation is deemed to be incompetent or unfit or has done unsatisfactory work for the city. 
(b)  The applicant shall indemnify and save harmless the city and its agents from all claims, demands, suits, actions, recoveries and judgments of every nature and description brought or recovered against the applicant or his contractor by reason of errors, omissions acts of the applicant, his agents or employees, in the execution of any work on the waterworks or sanitary sewerage system. 
(Ord. No. 1066, § 118, 10-19-70)  
Sec. 18-6. - General improvements and extensions policy. 
Improvements or extensions of water supply, storage, major water mains, sewage treatment, pumping station and interceptor sewers will be planned, designed and constructed by the city in the course of orderly development, demand and financial capabilities. 
(Ord. No. 1066, § 401, 10-19-70)  
Sec. 18-7. - Protection from damage. 
No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenances or equipment which is a part of the sanitary sewerage or waterworks system of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1066, § 108, 10-19-70)  
Sec. 18-8. - Powers and authority of inspectors. 
The superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter upon all properties for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1066, § 109, 10-19-70)  
Sec. 18-9. - Pollution of public and private property. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be deposited in an unsanitary manner upon public or private property within the city or in any area under the jurisdiction of such city, any human or animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste. 
(Ord. No. 1066, § 110, 10-19-70)  
Sec. 18-10. - Powers and authority of inspectors. 
(a)  The superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing in accordance with the provisions of this article. The superintendent or his representatives shall have no authority to inquire into any processes including metallurgical, chemical, oil, refining, ceramic, paper or other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the sewers or waterways or facilities for waste treatment. 
(b)  While performing necessary work on private properties the superintendent or duly authorized employees of the city shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the company and the company shall be held harmless for injury or death to the city employees and the city shall indemnify the company against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the company and growing out of the gauging and sampling operation, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the company to maintain safe conditions as required. 
(c)  The superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the city holds a duly negotiated easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement, shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved. 
(Ord. No. 1066, § 903, 10-19-70)  
Sec. 18-11. - Violations; penalty. 
(a)  Any person found to be violating any provision of this chapter shall be served by the city with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations. 
(b)  Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit provided for in subsection (a), shall be fined in the amount not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each violation. Each day in which any such violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(c)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss or damage occasioned the city by reason of such violation. 
(Ord. No. 1066, §§ 1001—1003, 10-19-70; Ord. No. 1608, § 1, 9-7-82; Ord. No. 2895, § 3, 5-1-95)  
Sec. 18-12. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 15-O-0020, § 2, adopted June 15, 2015, repealed § 18-12, which pertained to hearings; termination; suspension, and derived from Ord. No. 1386, § 1, 11-6-78; Ord. No. 1613, § 1, 11-1-82; Ord. No. 04-O-0105, § 2, 11-15-2004.  
Sec. 18-13. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 15-O-0020, § 2, adopted June 15, 2015, repealed § 18-13, which pertained to hearings; contesting accuracy of charges on bills, and derived from Ord. No. 04-O-0105, § 3, 11-15-2004.  
Secs. 18-14—18-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - WATER  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 18-26. - Water supply turn on. 
No water from the city's water supply shall be furnished without being measured by an approved meter. The water shall be furnished to premises only by the public works director or his authorized agent. Water may be furnished at city fire hydrants under the following conditions: 
(a)  Prior approval is received from the public works director or his authorized agent. 
(b)  A meter, supplied by the city, is used to measure the water used. 
(c)  A deposit of seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for a large meter, or five hundred dollars ($500.00) for a small meter, is placed with the city for the use of a temporary meter. This deposit shall be returned to the customer after the meter is returned to the city in good operating condition, without interest and less any unpaid weekly and/or water usage charges. For the purposes of this section, a small meter is any meter of less than two (2) inches in size. 
(d)  A customer using a large meter shall pay a minimum water usage charge of one hundred dollars ($100.00), which shall include an amount of water not to exceed five hundred (500) cubic feet, and shall pay for any water used in excess of five hundred (500) cubic feet at the rate charged residential customers. In addition, a customer using a large meter shall pay a meter usage charge of ten dollars ($10.00) per week. Meters will be read monthly by the city's finance agent in charge of meter billing. 
(e)  A customer using a small meter shall pay a minimum meter and water usage charge of one hundred ($100.00), which shall include the amount of water used during the first month of usage. After the first month, a customer using a small meter shall pay a meter and water usage charge of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per week. 
(Ord. No. 1066, § 104, 10-19-70; Ord. No. 1545, § 2, 10-5-81; Ord. No. 2586, § 1, 9-8-92; Ord. No. 4160, § 1, 4-19-99; Ord. No. 01-O-0082, § 1, 9-4-2001)  
Sec. 18-27. - Connection charges. 
(a)  For any owner, individual, firm or corporation the privilege of a connection to the waterworks system for the purpose of extending said system to serve lots, tracts or parcels of land, the property owner shall pay a rate of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per fixture unit to the city before approval of any building permit. 
(b)  For any owner, individual, firm or corporation the privilege of connection to an existing water main for domestic, process or fire demand, which main has been installed by the city or by agreement with others and no connection charge or special assessment has been paid by the property owner, the property owner shall pay a rate of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per fixture unit for up to the first twenty (20), and twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per fixture unit thereafter to the city before approval of any building permit. 
Increasing the number of plumbing fixtures in an existing single-family residence shall be exempt from the above schedule of charges, but there shall be paid to the city those charges as provided in section 18-27(c) of this chapter. 
(c)  For any owner, individual, firm or corporation adding plumbing fixtures in an existing single-family residence, the following flat-fee charges for connection to the water system and the sanitary sewer system shall be paid to the city before approval of any building permit: 
Fixture     Rate 
Water Closet ..... $150.00 
Bath tub or shower ..... 125.00 
Kitchens sink ..... 75.00 
Dish washer ..... 75.00 
Washing machine ..... 75.00 
Floor drain ..... 75.00 
Lavatory ..... 75.00 
(d)  Additional connection charges-Joliet Street Project. 
(1)  Definition of the improvement. For the purposes of this subsection, the improvement means the Joliet Street watermain extension as fully detailed on the Engineering Plans for Joliet Street Sewer and Watermain Extension and Prince Crossing Road Watermains Extension, as prepared by SDI Consultants, Ltd., Oak Brook, Illinois. 
(2)  Direct benefit. The following parcels are deemed to receive a direct benefit from the construction of the improvement: 
All of Lots 4 and 5 to Koepke's Assessment Plat in the west half of Section 15, Township 39 North, Range 9, East of the Third Principal Meridian, according to the plat thereof recorded November 20, 1961 as Document No. R61-30844 in DuPage County, Illinois; 
Also: 
All of Lots 3, 4 and the south 648.05 feet of Lot 1 in Max Dierking's Assessment Plat in the west half of Section 15, Township 39 North, Range 9, East of the Third Principal Meridian, according to the Plat thereof recorded July 19, 1948 as Document No. 549696, in DuPage County, Illinois; 
Also: 
That part of the southwest quarter of the southwest quarter of Section 15, Township 39 North, Range 9, East of the Third Principal Meridian in DuPage County, Illinois, described as follows: 
Beginning at the northwest corner of said southwest quarter of the southwest quarter of Section 15; thence easterly along the north line of said southwest quarter of the southwest quarter of Section 15, a distance of 12.00 feet; thence southerly along a line parallel with the west line of said Section 15, a distance of 412.5 feet; thence westerly along a line parallel with said north line of the southwest quarter of the southwest quarter of Section 15, a distance of 371.58 feet; thence southerly along a line parallel with the west line of said Section 15, a distance of 261.7 feet; thence westerly along a line parallel with said north line of the southwest quarter of the southwest quarter of Section 15, a distance of 150 feet, more or less, to a property corner; thence southerly along a line parallel with the west line of said Section 15, a distance of 646.03 feet, more or less, to a point on the south line of said Section 15; thence westerly along said south line of Section 15, a distance of 686 feet, more or less, to the southwest corner of said Section 15; thence northerly along the west line of Section 15 to the place of beginning excepting from the above described parcel the areas falling in the rights-of-way of Joliet Street and Wilson Street; 
(3)  Additional connection charge. For the privilege of connection to improvement, each of the parcels identified in subsection (2) as receiving a direct benefit from the improvement shall pay to the city, before the approval of any building permit, the sum of fourteen dollars ($14.00) per front foot, multiplied by the frontage of the parcel. For purposes of this subsection, frontage means the footage of any side of a parcel directly adjacent and contiguous to a right-of-way or easement in which the improvement shall be located, irrespective of whether such side of the particular lot or parcel would be customarily referred to as a front, rear or side lot line. 
(e)  Additional connection charges-Garys Mill Road Project. 
(1)  Definition of the improvement. For the purposes of this subsection, the improvement means the Garys Mill Road watermain extension as fully detailed on the plans and specifications for Watermain Extensions 1993-Gates Street, Augusta Avenue, Route 59 and Garys Mill Road as prepared by Robert H. Anderson & Assoc., consisting of eight (8) sheets dated April 26, 1993 and bearing a latest revision date of July 13, 1993; and 
(2)  Direct benefit. The following parcels are deemed to receive a direct benefit from the construction of the improvement: 
All of Lot 1 in J.B. Cole's Survey in the southeast quarter of Section 15, Township 39 North, Range 9 east of the Third Principal Meridian according to the plat recorded as Document No. 656112 in DuPage County, Illinois. 
Also, 
The part of Lot 1 in Brophy Park Subdivision in the southeast quarter of Section 15, Township 39 North, Range 9 east of the Third Principal Meridian in DuPage County, Illinois, described as follows: a parcel of land bounded on the west by the easterly right-of-way line of Illinois State Route 59; on the south by the northeasterly right-of-way line of Garys Mill Road; on the east by the westerly lines of Lot 1 of Forest Preserve District's Garys Mill Road Assessment Plat according to the plat recorded as Document No. R89-115822 in DuPage County, Illinois; and on the north by the south line of Lot 1 in J.B. Cole's survey according to the plat recorded as Document No. 656112 in DuPage County, Illinois. 
Also, 
That part of the southeast quarter of Section 15 and the northeast quarter of Section 22, in Township 39 North, Range 9 east of the Third Principal Meridian, described as follows: Beginning at the intersection of the center line of Garys Mill Road with the westerly line of Fiorini's Assessment Plat, according to said plat recorded as Document No. 940720 and running thence South 1 degree-09'-46" West, on an assumed bearing along a westerly line of said Fiorini's assessment plat, 640.07 feet; thence North 4 degrees-35'-00" East, 197.00 feet; thence North 39 degrees-12'-04" East, 124.78 feet; thence North 8 degrees-35'-00" East, 340.07 feet, to the center line of Garys Mill Road; thence South 85 degrees-25'-00" East, along the center line of Garys Mill Road, 517.20, more or less, to the point of beginning, all in DuPage County, Illinois. 
Also, 
That part of the southwest quarter of Section 15, Township 39 North, Range 9 East of the Third Principal Meridian in DuPage County, Illinois, described as follows: commencing at the southwest corner of said Section 15 and running thence North 88 degrees 51 minutes East along the south line of said Section 1673.2 feet for a place of beginning; thence North 1 degree 09 minutes West 1312.5 feet to the north line of the Patrick Roach Property, as evidenced by old fence and hedge according to a deed recorded as Document No. R76-62094 in DuPage County, Illinois; thence easterly along said north line to a point on the westerly right-of-way line of Illinois State Route 59; thence southerly and southwesterly along said westerly right-of-way line and said right-of-way line extended to a point on said south line of Section 15; thence westerly along said south line of Section 15 to the place of beginning. 
(3)  Additional connection charge. For the privilege of connection to the improvement, each of the parcels identified in subsection (2) as receiving a direct benefit from the improvement shall pay to the city, before the approval of any building permit, or where no such permit is required, prior to commencement of service, the sum of thirty-three dollars ($33.00) per front foot, multiplied by the frontage of the parcel. For purposes of this subsection, frontage means the footage of any side of a parcel directly adjacent and contiguous to a right-of-way or easement in which the improvement shall be located, irrespective of whether such side of the particular lot or parcel would be customarily referred to as a front, rear or side lot line. 
(f)  Additional connection charges-Roosevelt Road Project. 
(1)  Definition of the improvement. For the purposes of this subsection, the improvement means the Roosevelt Road Water Main Extension as fully detailed on the Engineering Plans for 1994 West Chicago Water Main Extension, as prepared by RHA&A, Consulting Engineers, St. Charles, Illinois. 
(2)  Direct benefit. The following parcels are deemed to receive a direct benefit from the construction of the improvement: 
All of Lots 1 and 5, in Hill's Assessment Plant in the southwest quarter of the southwest quarter of the southwest quarter of Section 9, Township 39 North, Range 9, East of the Third Principal Meridian according to the plat thereof recorded as Document No. 910679 in Dupage County, Illinois. 
Also, 
All of that part of a triangular tract of land in Bwinfield Township School Lands Plat No. 4, lying north and northwesterly of the north and northwesterly right-of-way line of Roosevelt Road (Il State Highway 38) and westerly of the west right-of-way line of Town Road in the northeast quarter of the northwest quarter of the northwest quarter of Section 16, Township 39 North, Range 9, East of the Third Principal Meridian in DuPage County, Illinois. 
Also, 
That part of the west half of the northwest quarter of Section 16, Township 39 North, Range 9, East of the Third Principal Meridian, lying north and northeasterly of the north and northeasterly property line conveyed to the United States of America by Document R73-1695, lying east of the east property line conveyed to the Commonwealth Edison Company by Document R61-27207 and lying southwesterly of the southwesterly line of Roosevelt Road as widened by condemnation case 81 ED-21, in DuPage County, Illinois. 
Also, 
All of Lots 13, 14, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 24, 25 and that portion of Lot 26 in West Park Plat in the east half of the northwest quarter of Section 16, Township 39 North, Range 9, East of the third Principal Meridian, according to the plat thereof recorded as Document No. 493483 in DuPage County, Illinois. 
Also, 
All of Lot 1 in GLV Inc. Resubdivision in the northeast quarter of the northwest quarter of Section 16, Township 39 North, Range 9, East of the Third Principal Meridian, according to the plat thereof recorded as Document No. R91-147623 in DuPage County, Illinois. 
Also, 
All of Lots 9, 10, 11, 12, 27, 28, 29 and that portion of Lots 26, 30 in West Park Plat in the west half of the northeast quarter of Section 16, Township 39 North, Range 9, East of the Third Principal Meridian, according to the plat thereof recorded as Document No. 493483 in DuPage County, Illinois. 
Also, 
All of Lots 7 and 8 in West Park Plat in the east half of the northeast quarter of Section 16, Township 39 North, Range 9, East of the Third Principal Meridian, according to the plat thereof recorded as Document No. 493483 in DuPage County, Illinois. 
Also, 
All of Lot 1 in West-Win Meadows 3rd Unit Plat in the southeast quarter of the northeast quarter of Section 16, Township 39 North, Range 9, East of the Third Principal Meridian, according to the plat thereof recorded as Document No. 913179 in DuPage County, Illinois. 
(3)  Additional connection charge. For the privilege of connection to the improvement, each of the parcels identified in subsection (2) as receiving a direct benefit from the improvement shall pay to the city, before the approval of any building permit, or where no such permit is required, prior to commencement of service, the sum of thirty dollars and seventy-three cents ($30.73) per front foot, multiplied by the frontage of the parcel. For purposes of this subsection, frontage means the footage of any side of a parcel directly adjacent and contiguous to a right-of-way or easement in which the improvement shall be located, irrespective of whether such side of the particular lot or parcel would be customarily referred to as a front, rear or side lot line. 
(g)  For those customers who connect to the water system but are not within the corporate limits, the connection fee shall be one-and-a-half (1.5) times those charges set forth in this section. 
(h)  Connection charges—North Avenue Sanitary Sewer Improvements. 
(1)  Definition of improvement. For the purposes of this subsection, the improvement means the North Avenue Sanitary Sewer Improvements, the extension of sanitary sewer service from east of Powis Road to approximately one thousand three hundred (1,300) feet west of Atlantic Drive as fully detailed on the plans and specifications for the project as prepared by Baxter and Woodman, Inc., consisting of five (5) pages, and bearing a latest revision date of November 15, 1990, and as approved for recapture fees pursuant to Ordinance No. 2619; and 
(2)  Direct benefit. The following parcels are deemed to receive a direct benefit from the construction of the improvement: Parcels Identified by Permanent Index Nos. 01-32-203-003 and 01-32-203-004 (approximately twenty (20) acres). 
(3)  Connection charge. In addition to connection and capacity charges, for the privilege of connection to the improvement, the property referenced herein, as receiving a direct benefit from the improvement, shall pay to the city, upon connection to the city sewer or water system or before the approval of any city building permit, the total sum of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00). 
(Ord. No. 1066, § 501, 10-19-70; Ord. No. 1461, § 1, 1-21-80; Ord. No. 1620, § 1, 11-22-82; Ord. No. 1784, §§ 1, 2, 1-7-85; Ord. No. 2712, § 1, 2-7-94; Ord. No. 2764, § 1, 6-20-94; Ord. No. 4037, § 1, 12-1-97; Ord. No. 01-O-0112, § 1, 12-3-2001; Ord. No. 02-O-0123, §§ 1, 5, 11-4-2002; Ord. No. 04-O-0119, § 1, 11-1-2004; Ord. No. 05-O-0062, § 6, 8-1-2005; Ord. No. 05-O-0088, § 1, 11-21-2005)  
Sec. 18-27.1. - Water treatment plant capacity charge. 
For any owner, individual, firm or corporation the privilege of water treatment plant capacity, the following charges shall be paid to the city before approval of any building permit: 
Single-family residential building ..... $600.00 
Multifamily residential building, per unit ..... 400.00 
General business and industrial per building based upon size of water meter installed: 
1 inch ..... $400.00 
1½ inch ..... 900.00 
2 inch ..... 1,300.00 
3 inch ..... 1,600.00 
4 inch ..... 2,400.00 
6 inch ..... 4,700.00 
(Ord. No. 01-O-0112, § 3, 12-3-2001; Ord. No. 02-O-0123, § 3, 11-4-2002)  
Sec. 18-28. - Resale. 
No water or sanitary sewer services shall be resold or redistributed. 
(Ord. No. 1066, § 105, 10-19-70)  
Sec. 18-29. - Continuous service. 
The city shall not be responsible in damages for any failure, interruptions of water of [or] sanitary sewerage service which is without willful default or negligence on the city's part. 
(Ord. No. 1066, § 106, 10-19-70)  
Sec. 18-30. - Discontinuation of water service. 
The city shall have the right to discontinue water service to the customer and may go upon such property for the purpose of shutting off such service on due notice, whenever the payments for service or usage are in arrears and whenever payment for refuse disposal service is in arrears. 
Authorized agents of the city shall at all reasonable hours have access to customer premises for the purpose of reading, operating, repairing, examining, replacing or removing water meters and the water service line (including buffalo boxes and shut off valves) connected to the city's water distribution system. On due notice, the city shall have the right to discontinue water service to the customer whenever access to the premises is denied, whenever the customer fails to remove obstructions that impede reasonable access to the water meter or water service line, and whenever the customer fails to rectify internal plumbing irregularities that prohibit repairs, replacement, or removal of a water meter without the risk of additional damage, and whenever a customer otherwise violates any provision of this Chapter 18. 
(Ord. No. 1066, § 107, 10-19-70; Ord. No. 05-O-0046, § 3, 6-20-2005; Ord. No. 11-O-0059, § 1, 10-3-2011)  
Sec. 18-30.1. - Payment arrangements. 
For customers who encounter a financial hardship and have not consistently been late when paying their water bills or who have an abnormally high water bill as a result of a leak in the water service or plumbing system, the city may allow the customer to pay the bill in equal installments over no longer than a twelve-month period. This period may be extended by the city administrator or his designee upon a showing of extraordinary circumstances. Customers who fail to abide by the terms of the payment arrangement shall have their service discontinued, upon notice being served. 
(Ord. No. 04-O-0105, § 5, 11-15-2004)  
Sec. 18-31. - Pollution of watercourse or natural outlet. 
It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the city or in any area under the jurisdiction of said city, any sanitary sewage, industrial wastes or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided. 
(Ord. No. 1066, § 111, 10-19-70)  
Sec. 18-32. - Protection of potable water. 
It shall be unlawful to make direct connections to any part of the waterworks system with any lines, equipment or vessels containing raw or contaminating chemicals, or sewage or nonpotable water. No connection shall be made between the public waterworks system and a private waterworks system. 
(Ord. No. 1066, § 112, 10-19-70)  
Sec. 18-33. - Water supply mandatory. 
Every building in which plumbing fixtures are installed and are for human use, occupancy or habitation shall be provided with a connection to the public waterworks system. 
(Ord. No. 1066, § 113, 10-19-70)  
Sec. 18-34. - Property service lines; responsibility. 
Each customer shall have a separate property service line from the city main to the water meter. The service line shall include a buffalo box with valve, corporation stop, lockout valve and water meter. 
Property service line maintenance from the city main to the buffalo box located in a street right-of-way or rear yard easement or edge of easement or right-of-way where no buffalo box exists, shall be the responsibility of the city. This responsibility shall include any repairs required to render the service in a good operation [operating] condition. 
A larger property service line required by any increase in water use shall be the customer's responsibility. The maintenance of the buffalo box, roundway and corporation stop shall be the city's responsibility. 
Property service line maintenance from the buffalo box to the building shall be the customer's responsibility. 
In repairing any property service line, the customer shall at his cost put any public way or easement into the same condition as it was prior to said repair. 
Whenever property service lines are abandoned due to the demolition of the existing building or the installation of a new property service line, the property service line shall be disconnected at the city main by shutting off the corporation stop. The cost for the same shall be paid by the customer who is served by the property service lines. 
(Ord. No. 816, § 2, 1-21-63; Ord. No. 1545, § 3, 10-5-81)  
Sec. 18-35. - Distribution system design standards. 
Water distribution systems shall meet the following standards and requirements: 
(1)  Average daily water consumption shall be as follows: 
(a)  One hundred (100) gallons per capita per day for residential development. 
(b)  Four hundred (400) gallons per one thousand (1,000) square feet of floor area for commercial and light industrial development. 
(2)  Maximum day shall be computed on the basis of two (2) times the average day demand. 
(3)  Maximum hour shall be computed on the basis of four (4) times the average day demand. 
(4)  Fire demand shall be computed on a ten-hour duration at the following rates of flow: 
(a)  Residential development one thousand (1,000) gpm. 
(b)  Restricted commercial, school sites and multifamily dwellings one thousand five hundred (1,500) gpm. 
(c)  High-value commercial and industrial development three thousand (3,000) gpm. 
(5)  Distribution main size shall be based upon the occupancy of the properties along the line and by the average daily water consumption of each, plus fire demand. The main shall be of sufficient size to deliver the required flow at a residual pressure of not less than twenty (20) pounds per square inch. The main shall in no case be less than as hereinafter specified. 
(6)  Water mains and fittings constructed of cast iron shall be designed for an internal pressure of one hundred (100) psi working pressure plus water hammer allowance multiplied by a safety factor of two and one-half (2½). External pressures shall comply with American Water Works Association Manual C101-57 for the applicable conditions encountered. The net wall thickness for determining the class of pipe shall be of sufficient thickness to satisfy the above conditions plus an allowance of six hundredths (0.06) inch for foundry tolerance and eight hundredths (0.08) inch for corrosion. 
(7)  Waterworks construction and materials including building services shall conform to the Standard Specifications for Sanitary Sewer and Watermain Construction in Illinois, dated August 1, 1967, and all revision thereto. 
(8)  Distribution systems shall comply with the following: 
(a)  The grid of minor distributor mains supplying residential districts shall have a minimum pipe size of six (6) inches internal diameter, and arranged so that the lengths between intersecting mains do not exceed six hundred (600) feet. Where longer lengths of six-inch mains are necessary, eight-inch or larger intersecting mains shall be used. Minimum pipe size supplying high-value commercial and industrial areas shall be eight (8) inches or larger. Principal supply mains shall be spaced not greater than two thousand five hundred (2,500) feet apart, and shall be of the size shown in the West Chicago Master Water Plan or larger if the type of development warrants. 
(b)  Water mains serving cul-de-sacs or permanent dead-end streets shall be a minimum of six (6) inches; provided however, that if more than ten (10) homes are served from the main in the cul-de-sac or dead-end street, the main shall be a minimum of six-inch diameter and shall be looped through an easement or other right-of-way to another main in the grid. 
(c)  Water mains shall, where practical, generally be located in the parkway between streets and sidewalks on the north and west sides of the street, and shall have a minimum cover of five (5) feet. 
(d)  Gate valves shall be located so that services may be maintained with the least disruption in the case of break or other emergency. In no case shall valves be located more than six hundred (600) feet apart on distribution mains or one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet apart on principal feeder mains. Valves six (6) inches or greater shall be in accordance with A.W.W.A. C500-61 Standard. 
(e)  Hydrants shall be of type and manufacture that is standard with the city. Hydrants shall have a minimum barrel diameter of five (5) inches, one pumper and two (2) hose outlets of which the threads conform with the city's standard. Operating nuts shall open to the left in a counter clockwise direction. Hydrants shall normally be located at street intersections, but in no case shall the space between hydrants exceed four hundred (400) feet in residential districts and three hundred (300) feet in multiple-housing, commercial or industrial developments. Hydrants shall be connected to the water mains with a six-inch pipe and an auxiliary gate valve with cast-iron valve box. Nozzle outlets shall be a minimum of eighteen (18) inches above finished grade. Each hydrant shall be accessible so that a connection can be made between the hydrant and pumper with twenty (20) feet of hose. 
(9)  Connections for extending existing water mains shall be made with a tapping tee and valve unless otherwise permitted by the city. Work shall be so scheduled and timed as to cause the least possible interference with the operation of the existing water distribution system. Water shall not be allowed to flow from the new mains into the existing mains until the new mains have been thoroughly flushed and sterilized. Care should be taken so as not to cause turbulence in the existing mains. 
(10)  Building service connections to the mains shall be made by tapping the water main and installing a corporation cock. Building service taps shall be located no closer than two (2) 
feet from each tap on the same pipe. Service lines shall be a minimum of three fourths-inch type "K" copper tubing from the main to the meter. A shutoff with a buffalo box shall be set in the service line approximately seven (7) feet from the property line. The type and manufacture of the service line fittings shall be as specified to seven (7) feet beyond the property line and shall be installed with the installation of all secondary water mains in all new service areas and subdivisions. 
(Ord. No. 1066, § 301, 10-29-70; Ord. No. 1545, § 4, 10-5-81)  
Sec. 18-36. - Meters. 
Water meters shall be installed on all water services as required for the particular services. The size of water meters shall be established upon the probable demand load. The demand load shall be based upon the number and kind of fixtures or connections installed and on the probable simultaneous use of these fixtures or connections, according to the following table: 
Probable 
Demand Load 
GPM 	Fixture Units 
Installed 
Totals 	Size 
Meter 
Minimum 
(inches) 
20 	0 to 20 	5/8
30 	15 to 30 	¾ 
50 	20 to 60 	1  
75 	60 to 190 	1½ 
150 	180 to 500 	2 compound 
200 	500 to 900 	3 compound 
300 	900 to 1,500 	4 compound 
500 	By approval of city 	6 compound 
 
All meters shall be furnished by the city. All meters will include a remote reading head. The meter will be furnished at the time of application and upon payment of all service charges. The meter will be charged to the customer at the cost of meters to the city, plus a service charge of twenty-five (25) percent. 
Water meter and remote reading head shall be installed by the customer subject to inspection by the city. The water meter shall be installed in the basement or utility room or an accessible location where meter can be removed without the removal of any part of the building structure. The meter shall not be installed in the following locations: Crawl spaces, under kitchen cabinets or sinks, living rooms, under enclosed stairways, locations where meters are subjected to flooding or freezing; coal bins, ventilation shafts and electrical panels or cabinets. The location of the meter shall be not more than twenty-five (25) feet from the exterior remote reading head. The remote reading head shall be installed on the outside of the building in a location so that said meter can be read without obstruction or entering the building or enclosure. 
All meters one (1) inch or less shall be maintained by the city. All water meters greater than one (1) inch shall be maintained by the customer. All meters one and one-half (1½) inches in size shall be tested and repaired every three (3) years. All meters greater than one and one-half (1½) inches shall be tested and repaired every two (2) years. All meters shall measure flow at all rates after testing in accordance with accuracy standards found in the American Water Works Association Standard C700. 
(Ord. No. 1066, § 302, 10-19-70; Ord. No. 1545, § 5, 10-5-81; Ord. No. 2735, §§ 1, 2, 3-7-94)  
Sec. 18-37. - Usage charges. 
(a)  The waterworks usage rates for water furnished to the customers of the city shall be as follows: 
(1)  The minimum charge for each bill, including the first three hundred thirty-three (333) cubic feet or the first two thousand four hundred ninety one (2,491) gallons of water used is based on meter size, as follows: 
Minimum Usage Charge 
Meter size (inches) 	8/1/2019 	8/1/2020 
¾ or less 	$25.00 	$30.00 
1 	$35.00 	$40.00 
1.5 	$45.00 	$50.00 
2 	$150.00 	$150.00 
3 	$300.00 	$300.00 
4 	$525.00 	$525.00 
6 	$1,500.00 	$1,500.00 
8 	$3,000.00 	$3,000.00 
10 	$5,300.00 	$5,300.00 
 
;adv=6;(2)  a.  Additional water usage in excess of thirty-three (333) cubic feet shall be billed at three dollars and thirty-seven cents ($3.37) per one hundred (100) cubic feet effective August 1, 2019 and three dollars and seventy-four cents ($3.74) per one hundred (100) cubic feet effective August 1, 2020. Customers who are not being billed for current usage shall be billed at two dollars and ninety cents ($2.90) per hundred (100) cubic feet. 
b.  Additional water usage in excess of two thousand four hundred ninety-one (2,491) gallons shall be billed at four dollars and fifty cents ($4.50) per one thousand (1,000) gallons effective August 1, 2019 and five dollars and no cents ($5.00) per one thousand (1,000) gallons effective August 1, 2020. Customers who are not being billed for current usage shall be billed three dollars and eighty-eight cents ($3.88) per thousand (1,000) gallons." 
(3)  The aforesaid rates apply to bimonthly billing periods, or as otherwise determined by the city administrator or his designee, and the charge shall be based upon meter readings, provided however, that the minimum charge set forth is as above. The reading device on the meter shall be considered the primary reader and will be used for billing if different than the remote reader. For cases of faulty meters or unmetered service, the minimum charge plus a usage estimate by the director of administrative services or his designee shall establish the charges. All charges provided herein may be billed bimonthly. Failure to bill any charges provided herein on a bimonthly basis shall have no impact on liability for any outstanding usage charges incurred for any period of time. 
(b)  For customers who do not return a portion of their flow or water through the sanitary service, the additional water usage charges as set forth in this section shall be increased by fifteen (15) percent for that portion of the water not returned. 
(c)  For those customers that receive water service from the city but are not within the corporate limits, the usage shall be two (2) times those charges set forth in this section. The customer shall install and maintain the water service and meter installation according to acceptable standards and regulations of the waterworks system as provided in sections 18-35 and 18-36 of this Code. Customers whose property is the subject of a pre-annexation agreement shall not be subject to this surcharge, in that they would be within the corporate limits of the city but for the lack of contiguity with which they have no direct control. 
(d)  If the cost and charges, as set forth herein, are not paid by the billing due date indicated, the city has the right to refuse to furnish to the property any water service and may go upon such property for the purpose of shutting off such service. A ten (10) percent administrative charge of the total amount due the city shall be assessed the user of such service if the charges are not paid by the due date. A reminder notice and bill will be issued after the due date of the bill. The ten (10) percent administrative charge will be added to the bill. 
A shut-off notice will be physically posted at the service address within ten (10) days after the reminder notice has been issued. If a shut-off notice is physically posted, a twenty-five dollar ($25.00) charge to offset the cost associated with physical posting will be assessed. 
Further, the city has the right to set, from time to time, charges to be made in the event all delinquencies are paid to date and water service is re-requested. Such charges as are set forth by the city, from time to time, shall be payable prior to the resumption of water service. 
The city by shutting off such water, does not waive its right to collect the moneys due and owing it by legal action or otherwise. 
The twenty-five dollar ($25.00) service charge will be assessed to all accounts on checks returned to the city for invalid payment. 
(e)  Any person coming within the provisions of this section shall, before being supplied with water service hereunder, install a master water meter at the place and under the direction of the city. 
(f)  Minimum rates for multiple dwellings of three (3) units or over or multiple stores, shops, businesses, etc., shall be increased in direct proportion to the number of separate units serving service. 
(Ord. No. 1066, § 601, 10-19-70; Ord. No. 1186, 11-19-73; Ord. No. 1461, § 2, 1-21-80; Ord. No. 1545, § 6, 10-5-81; Ord. No. 1620, § 2, 11-22-82; Ord. No. 1704, § 1, 12-19-83; Ord. No. 1854, § 1, 12-16-85; Ord. No. 1871, § 1, 5-19-86; Ord. No. 1905, § 1, 11-7-86; Ord. No. 4355, § 1, 10-2-2000; Ord. No. 4386, § 1, 3-5-2001; Ord. No. 01-O-0041, § 1, 7-16-2001; Ord. No. 02-O-0019, §§ 1, 2, 3-18-2002; Ord. No. 02-O-0060, §§ 1—3, 6-3-2002; Ord. No. 04-O-0105, § 4, 11-15-2004; Ord. No. 06-O-0019, § 1, 3-6-2006; Ord. No. 06-O-0056, § 1, 6-5-2006; Ord. No. 08-O0006, § 3, 2-4-2008, eff. 5-1-2008; Ord. No. 12-O-0010, § 2, 5-7-2012; Ord. No. 19-O-0010, § 1, 4-15-2019; Ord. No. 19-O-0018, § 1, 5-20-2019)  
Sec. 18-38. - Standby charges. 
(a)  For all properties which have fire protection system connected to the waterworks system, and all properties which have their own water supply from private wells, but also have a standby service from the waterworks system, there shall be and is hereby established a charge for such standby service as follows: 
Size of connection (inches)     Charge per year 
6 ..... $350.00 
8 ..... 526.00 
10 ..... 772.00 
12 ..... 1,580.00 
(b)  All above charges shall be billed bimonthly. 
(c)  For each standby connection to the waterworks systems of the city to serve one using unit for fire or standby protection, the following charges shall apply: 
Size of connection (inches) 
6 ..... $280.00 
8 ..... 562.00 
10 ..... 1,053.00 
12 ..... 1,667.00 
For each service connection larger than 12-inch—By agreement with the city. 
(d)  The using-unit may install any number of hydrants or standby service on any one (1) connection. 
(e)  Hydrants or standby service shall be used for fire protection only. The costs of labor, material and installation of the connection, from the tap through the building connection, shall be paid by the owner of the using-unit. 
(f)  The materials and installation shall be in accordance with specifications established by the city. 
(g)  All charges herein provided shall be paid by the owner of the using-unit at the time of application for waterworks service connection. 
(h)  When, in the opinion of the superintendent of public works, a water user requires a use of the waterworks system which is unique and outside of the standard uses set forth in this article, he may recommend to the mayor and council an agreement to be entered into by the city and the user. 
(Ord. No. 1066, § 801, 10-19-70; Ord. No. 1461, § 3, 1-21-80; Ord. No. 1620, § 3, 11-22-82; Ord. No. 02-O-0060, § 4, 6-3-2002)  
Sec. 18-39. - Water bills; collection for nonpayment; lien on premises. 
The city shall have a lien upon the premises of real estate for all water rates, charges, or benefits accruing by reason of the furnishing of water to such premises by the city. Such charges or rates are liens upon the real estate upon or for which service is supplied whenever the charges or rates become delinquent as provided by this section fixing a delinquency date. The charges or rates established by contract for a supply of water to another municipality shall not be subject to lien. 
The city may file a notice of such a lien in the office of the recorder of deeds of the county in which such real estate is located. The notice shall conform to the statutory requirements as provided for in Chapter 24 of the Illinois Revised Statutes, as amended. 
The city, in addition to the power of placing and foreclosing on a lien on the subject property, may sue the occupant or user of the real estate in a civil action to recover the money due for water or services rendered, plus reasonable attorneys' fees and costs to be fixed by the court. 
(Ord. No. 1721, § 1, 3-5-84)  
Sec. 18-40. - Water use restrictions. 
(a)  During the period between May 15 and September 15 inclusive, the outside use of unattended running water from a hose or sprinkling system, for the purpose of watering/sprinkling of lawns and gardens, shall be limited in the following manner: 
(1)  Outside use of unattended running water for buildings which bear odd-numbered street addresses is permitted only on the days of the month having an odd number. 
(2)  Outside use of unattended running water for buildings which bear even-numbered street addresses is permitted only on the days of the month having an even number. 
(3)  The following exception to this paragraph (a) is permitted: watering of sod and/or newly seeded lawns for a two-week period following authorization by the water superintendent. 
(b)  In the event of a water supply emergency, the city administrator may cause a city-wide lawn or garden sprinkling restriction. 
(c)  The settlement and compromise of water use violations shall take place in the following manner: 
(1)  Any person accused of violating any provision of this chapter relating to the outdoor use of water will receive two (2) written notices, and may be issued a citation without the filing of a complaint in court against him/her for such violation. 
(2)  Such citation shall be in a form suitable for mailing, shall state the specific section of this chapter that was violated and shall inform the alleged violator that he/she may avoid the filing of a complaint in court charging him/her with such violation upon payment of an amount hereinafter prescribed in full settlement for his/her liability for such violation. 
(3)  Payment shall be due on or before the date set forth in the citation and in any event, not more than fifteen (15) days from the date the violation was committed. Such payment shall be made at the city hall during normal business hours, either in person or by mail with the envelope portion of the citation. 
(4)  In the event that no payment is received during the period set forth in the citation, then the individual issuing the ticket shall cause a notice to appear to be served upon the alleged violator and shall file and prosecute a complaint for the violation in the circuit court of DuPage County, Illinois. 
(5)  The liability of any person for any violation specified in a citation issued pursuant to the provisions of this section may be settled without court action upon payment by the violator of the sum of twenty-five dollars ($25.00), for such violation on or before the date set forth in the citation. 
(6)  Where suit is brought in court to recover the fine due for violation of this section, the amount of the fine required to be paid shall be determined by the court, but shall not be less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense, exclusive of costs. 
(Ord. No. 2306, § 1, 7-2-90; Ord. No. 2539, § 1, 4-20-92)  
DIVISION 2. - CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 18-41. - Generally. 
All plumbing installed within the City of West Chicago, shall be installed in accordance with the Illinois Plumbing Code, 77 Ill. Adm. Code 890. If, in accordance with the Illinois Plumbing Code or in the judgment of the superintendent of water, an approved backflow prevention device is necessary for the safety of the public water supply system, the superintendent of water will give notice to the water customer to install such an approved device immediately. The water customer shall, at his own expense, install such an approved device at a location and in a manner in accordance with the Illinois Plumbing Code, Illinois Environmental Protection Agency and all applicable local regulations, and shall have inspections and tests made of such approved devices upon installation and as required by the Illinois Plumbing Code, Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, and local regulations as follows: 
(1)  General policy. 
a.  Purpose. The purpose of these rules and regulations is: 
1.  To protect the public water supply system from contamination or pollution by isolating within the customer's water system contaminants or pollutants which could backflow through the service connection into the public water supply system. 
2.  To promote the elimination or control of existing cross connections, actual or potential, between the public or consumer's potable water system and nonpotable water systems, plumbing fixtures and sources or systems containing substances of unknown or questionable safety. 
3.  To provide for the maintenance of a continuing program of cross connection control which will prevent the contamination or pollution of the public and consumer's potable water systems. 
b.  Application. These rules and regulations shall apply to all premises served by the public potable water supply system of the city. 
c.  Policy. The owner or official custodian shall be responsible for protection of the public water supply system from contamination due to backflow or backsiphonage of contaminants through the customer's water service connection. If in the judgment of the superintendent or his authorized representative, an approved backflow prevention device is necessary for the safety of the public water supply system, the water utility superintendent shall give notice to the consumer to install such approved backflow prevention device at each service connection to the premises. The consumer shall immediately install such approved device or devices at his own expense; failure, refusal or inability on the part of the consumer to install such device or devices immediately shall constitute grounds for discontinuing water service to the premises until such device or devices have been installed. The consumer shall retain records of installation, maintenance, testing and repair as required in subsection (5)c.4. below for a period of at least five (5) years. The water utility superintendent may require the consumer to submit a cross connection inspection report to the city to assist in determining whether or not service line protection will be required. All cross connection inspections shall be conducted by a cross connection control device inspector certified by the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency. 
(2)  Definitions. 
a.  The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of these regulations: 
1.  "Fixed proper air gap" means the unobstructed vertical distance through the free atmosphere between the water discharge point and the flood level rim of the receptacle. 
2.  "Agency" means the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency. 
3.  "Approved" means backflow prevention devices or methods approved by the Research Foundation for Cross Connection Control of the University of Southern California, Association of State Sanitary Engineers, American Water Works Association, American National Standards Institute or certified by the National Sanitation Foundation. 
4.  "Auxiliary water system" means any water source or system on or available to the premises other than the public water supply system and includes the water supplied by the system. These auxiliary waters may include water from another surveyor's public water supply system; or water from a source such as wells, lakes, or streams, or process fluids, or used water. These waters may be polluted or contaminated or objectionable or constitute a water source or system over which the water surveyor does not have control. 
5.  "Backflow" means the flow of water or other liquids, mixtures, or substances into the distribution pipes of a potable water system from any source other than the intended source of the potable water supply. 
6.  "Backflow prevention device" means any device, method, or type of construction intended to prevent backflow into a potable water system. All devices used for backflow prevention in Illinois must meet the standards of the Illinois Plumbing Code and the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency. 
7.  "Consumer" or "customer" means the owner, official custodian or person in control of any premises supplied by or in any manner connected to a public water system. 
8.  "Consumer's water system" means any water system located on the customer's premises. A building plumbing system is considered to be a customer's water system. 
9.  "Contamination" means an impairment of the quality of the water by entrance of any substance to a degree which could create a health hazard. 
10.  "Cross connection" means any physical connection or arrangement between two (2) otherwise separate piping systems, one (1) of which contains potable water and the other a substance of unknown or questionable safety or quality, whereby there may be a flow from one (1) system into the other. 
Direct cross connection means a cross connection formed when a water system is physically joined to a source of unknown or unsafe substance. 
Indirect cross connection means a cross connection through which an unknown substance can be forced, drawn by vacuum or otherwise introduced into a safe potable water system. 
11.  "Double check valve assembly" means an assembly composed of single, independently acting check valves approved under ASSE Standard 1015. A double check valve assembly must include tight shutoff valves located at each end of the assembly and suitable connections for testing the water-tightness of each check valve. 
12.  "Health hazard" means any condition, device or practice in a water system or its operation resulting from a real or potential danger to the health and well-being of consumers. The word "severe" as used to qualify "health hazard" means a hazard to the health of the user that could be expected to result in death or significant reduction in the quality of life. 
13.  "Inspection" means a plumbing inspection to examine carefully and critically all materials, fixtures, piping and appurtenances, appliances and installations of a plumbing system for compliance with requirements of the Illinois Plumbing Code, 77 Ill. Adm. Code 890. 
14.  "Nonpotable water" means water not safe for drinking, personal, or culinary use as determined by the requirements of 35 Ill. Adm. Code 604. 
15.  "Plumbing" means the actual installation, repair, maintenance, alteration or extension of a plumbing system by any person. Plumbing includes all piping, fixtures, appurtenances and appliances for a supply of water for all purposes, including without limitation lawn sprinkler systems, from the source of a private water supply on the premises or from the main in the street, alley or at the curb to, within and about any building or buildings where a person or persons live, work or assemble. Plumbing includes all piping, from discharge of pumping units to and including pressure tanks in water supply systems. Plumbing includes all piping, fixtures, appurtenances, and appliances for a building drain and a sanitary drainage and related ventilation system of any building or buildings where a person or persons live, work or assemble from the point of connection of such building drain to the building sewer or private sewage disposal system five (5) feet beyond the foundation walls. 
16.  "Pollution" means the presence of any foreign substance (organic, inorganic, radiological, or biological) in water that tends to degrade its quality so as to constitute a hazard or impair the usefulness of the water. 
17.  "Potable water" means water which meets the requirements of 35 Ill. Adm. Code 604 for drinking, culinary, and domestic purposes. 
18.  "Potential cross connection" means a fixture or appurtenance with threaded hose connection, tapered spout, or other connection which would facilitate extension of the water supply line beyond its legal termination point. 
19.  "Process fluid(s)" means any fluid or solution which may be chemically, biologically or otherwise contaminated or polluted in a form or concentration such as would constitute a health, pollutional, or system hazard if introduced into the public or a consumer's potable water system. This includes but is not limited to: 
i.  Polluted or contaminated waters; 
ii.  Process waters; 
iii.  Used waters originating from the public water supply system which may have deteriorated in sanitary quality; 
iv.  Cooling waters; 
v.  Questionable or contaminated natural waters taken from wells, lakes, streams, or irrigation systems; 
vi.  Chemicals in solution or suspension; 
vii.  Oils, gases, acids, alkalis and other liquid and gaseous fluids used in industrial or other processes, or for firefighting purposes. 
20.  "Public water supply" means all mains, pipes and structures through which water is obtained and distributed to the public, including wells and well structures, intakes and cribs, pumping stations, treatment plants, reservoirs, storage tanks and appurtenances, collectively or severally, actually used or intended for use for the purpose of furnishing water for drinking or general domestic use and which serve at least fifteen (15) service connections or which regularly serve at least twenty-five (25) persons at least sixty (60) days per year. A public water supply is either a "community water supply" or a "noncommunity water supply." 
21.  "Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device" means a device containing a minimum of two (2) independently acting check valves together with an automatically operated pressure differential relief valve located between the two (2) check valves and approved under ASSE Standard 1013. During normal flow and at the cessation of normal flow, the pressure between these two (2) checks shall be less than the supply pressure. In case of leakage of either check valve, the differential relief valve, by discharging to the atmosphere, shall operate to maintain the pressure between the check valves at less than the supply pressure. The unit must include tightly closing shutoff valves located at each end of the device, and each device shall be fitted with properly located test cocks. 
22.  "Service connection" means the opening, including all fittings and appurtenances, at the water main through which water is supplied to the user. 
23.  "Survey" means the collection of information pertaining to a customer's piping system regarding the location of all connections to the public water supply system and must include the location, type and most recent inspection and testing date of all cross connection control devices and methods located within that customer's piping system. The survey must be in written form, and should not be an actual plumbing inspection. 
24.  "System hazard" means a condition through which an aesthetically objectionable or degrading material not dangerous to health may enter the public water supply system or a consumer's potable water system. 
25.  "Used water" means any water supplied by a public water supply system to a consumer's water system after it has passed through the service connection and is no longer under the control of the water supply official custodian. 
26.  "Water surveyor" means the owner or official custodian of a public water system. 
(3)  Water system. 
a.  The water system shall be considered as made up of two (2) parts: the public water supply system and the consumer's water system. 
b.  The public water supply system shall consist of the source facilities and the distribution system, and shall include all those facilities of the potable water system under the control of the water utility superintendent up to the point where the consumer's water system begins. 
c.  The source shall include all components of the facilities utilized in the production, treatment, storage, and delivery of water to the public water supply distribution system. 
d.  The public water supply distribution system shall include the network of conduits used to deliver water from the source to the consumer's water system. 
e.  The consumer's water system shall include all parts of the facilities beyond the service connection used to convey water from the public water supply distribution system to points of use. 
(4)  Cross connection prohibited. 
a.  Connections between potable water systems and other systems or equipment containing water or other substances of unknown or questionable quality are prohibited except when and where approved cross connection control devices or methods are installed, tested and maintained to insure proper operation on a continuing basis. 
b.  No physical connection shall be permitted between the potable portion of a supply and any other water supply not of equal or better bacteriological and chemical quality as determined by inspection and analysis by the agency. 
c.  There shall be no arrangement or connection by which an unsafe substance may enter a supply. 
(5)  Survey and investigations. 
a.  The consumer's premises shall be open at all reasonable times to the approved cross connection control device inspector for the inspection of the presence or absence of cross connections within the consumer's premises, and testing of cross connection control devices within the consumer's premises. 
b.  On request by the water utility superintendent, or his authorized representative, the consumer shall furnish information regarding the piping system or systems or water use within the customer's premises. The consumer's premises shall be open at all reasonable times to the water utility superintendent for the verification of information submitted by the inspection consumer to the public water supply custodian regarding cross connection inspection results. 
c.  It shall be the responsibility of the water consumer to arrange periodic surveys of water use practices on his premises to determine whether there are actual or potential cross connections to his water system through which contaminants or pollutants could backflow into his or the public potable water system. All cross connection control or other plumbing inspections must be conducted in accordance with 222 ILCS 320/3(1). 
1.  All cross connections are removed, or approved cross connection control devices are installed for control of backflow and backsiphonage. 
2.  Cross connection control devices shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. 
3.  Cross connection control devices shall be inspected at the time of installation and at least annually by the consumer using a person approved by the Agency as a cross connection control device inspector (CCCDI). The inspection of mechanical devices shall include physical testing in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. 
4.  Testing and records: 
i.  Each device shall be tested at the time of installation and at least annually or more frequently if recommended by the manufacturer. 
ii.  Records submitted to the community public water supply shall be available for inspection by Agency personnel in accordance with 415 ILCS 5/4(e). 
iii.  Each device shall have a tag attached listing the date of most recent test, name of CCDI, and type and date of repairs. 
iv.  A maintenance log shall be maintained with a copy submitted to the West Chicago Water Utility Superintendent and include: 
(a)  Date of each test; 
(b)  Name and approval number of person performing the test; 
(c)  Test results; 
(d)  Repairs or servicing required; 
(e)  Repairs and date completed; and 
(f)  Service performed and date completed. 
(6)  Where protection is required. 
a.  An approved backflow device shall be installed on all connections to the public water supply as described in the Plumbing Code, 77 Ill. Adm. Code 890 and the Agency's regulations 35 Ill. Adm. Code 680. In addition, an approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on each service line to a consumer's water system serving premises, where in the judgment of the water utility superintendent, actual or potential hazards to the public water supply system exist. 
b.  An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on each service line to a consumer's water system serving premises where the following conditions exist: 
1.  Premises having an auxiliary water supply, unless such auxiliary supply is accepted as an additional source by the water utility superintendent and the source is approved by the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency. 
2.  Premises on which any substance is handled which can create an actual premises having sources or systems containing process fluids or waters originating from the public water supply system which are no longer under the sanitary control of the water utility superintendent. 
3.  Premises having internal cross connections that, in the judgment of the water utility superintendent and/or the cross connection control device inspector, are not correctable or intricate plumbing arrangements which make it impractical to determine whether or not cross connections exist. 
4.  Premises where, because of security requirements or other prohibitions or restrictions, it is impossible or impractical to make a complete cross connection survey. 
5.  Premises having a repeated history of cross connections being established or reestablished. 
c.  An approved backflow device shall be installed on all connections to the public water supply as described in the Plumbing Code, 77 Ill. Adm. Code 890 and the Agency's regulations 35 Ill. Adm. Code 653. In addition, an approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on each service line to a consumer's water system serving, but not necessarily limited to, the following types of facilities unless the water utility superintendent determines that no actual or potential hazard to the public water supply system exists: 
1.  Hospitals, mortuaries, clinics, nursing homes. 
2.  Laboratories. 
3.  Piers, docks, waterfront facilities. 
4.  Sewage treatment plants, sewage pumping stations or stormwater pumping stations. 
5.  Food or beverage processing plants. 
6.  Chemical plants. 
7.  Metal plating industries. 
8.  Petroleum processing or storage plants. 
9.  Radioactive material processing plants or nuclear reactors. 
10.  Carwashes. 
11.  Pesticide or herbicide or extermination plants and trucks. 
12.  Farm service and fertilizer plants and trucks. 
(7)  Type of protection required. 
a.  The type of protection required under subsections (6)b.1., (6)b.2., and (6)b.3. of these regulations shall depend on the degree of hazard which exists as follows: 
1.  An approved fixed proper air gap separation shall be installed where the public water supply system may be contaminated with substances that could cause a severe health hazard. 
2.  An approved fixed proper air gap separation or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly shall be installed where the public water supply system may be contaminated with a substance that could cause a system or health hazard. 
3.  An approved fixed proper air gap separation or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly or a double check valve system assembly shall be installed where the public water supply system may be polluted with substances that could cause a pollution hazard not dangerous to health. 
b.  The type of protection required under subsection (6)b.4. of these regulations shall be an approved fixed proper air gap separation or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device. 
c.  Where a public water supply or an auxiliary water supply is used for a fire protection system, reduced pressure principle backflow preventers shall be installed on fire safety systems connected to the public water supply when: 
1.  The fire safety system contains antifreeze, fire retardant or other chemicals; 
2.  Water is pumped into the system from another source; or 
3.  Water flows by gravity from a nonpotable source; or water can be pumped into the fire safety system from any other source; 
4.  There is a connection whereby another source can be introduced into the fire safety system. 
d.  All other fire safety systems connected to the potable water supply shall be protected by a double check valve assembly on metered service lines and a double detector check valve assembly on unmetered service lines. 
(8)  Backflow prevention devices. 
a.  All backflow prevention devices or methods required by these rules and regulations shall be approved by the Research Foundation for Cross Connection Control of the University of Southern California, American Water Works Association, American Society of Sanitary Engineering, or American National Standards Institute or certified by the National Sanitation Foundation to be in compliance with the applicable industry specification. 
b.  Installation of approved devices shall be made in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. Maintenance as recommended by the manufacturer of the device shall be performed. Manufacturer's maintenance manual shall be available on-site. 
(9)  Inspection and maintenance. 
a.  It shall be the duty of the consumer at any premises on which backflow prevention devices required by these regulations are installed to have inspection, tests, maintenance and repair made in accordance with the following schedule or more often where inspections indicate a need or are specified in manufacturer's instructions. 
1.  Fixed proper air gap separations shall be inspected to document that a proper vertical distance is maintained between the discharge point of the service line and the flood level rim of the receptacle at the time of installation and at least annually thereafter. Corrections to improper or bypassed air gaps shall be made within twenty-four (24) hours. 
2.  Double check valve assemblies shall be inspected and tested at time of installation and at least annually thereafter, and required service performed within five (5) days. 
3.  Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assemblies shall be tested at the time of installation and at least annually or more frequently if recommended by the manufacturer, and required service performed within five (5) days. 
b.  Testing shall be performed by a person who has been approved by the agency as competent to service the device. Proof of approval shall be in writing. 
c.  Each device shall have a tag attached listing the date of most recent test or visual inspection, name of tester, and type and date of repairs. 
d.  A maintenance log shall be maintained with a copy submitted to the West Chicago Water Utility Superintendent and include: 
1.  Date of each test or visual inspection; 
2.  Name and approval number of person performing the test or visual inspection; 
3.  Test results; 
4.  Repairs or servicing required; 
5.  Repairs and date completed; and 
6.  Servicing performed and date completed. 
e.  Whenever backflow prevention devices required by these regulations are found to be defective, they shall be repaired or replaced at the expense of the consumer without delay as required by subsection (9)a. 
f.  Backflow prevention devices shall not be bypassed, made inoperative, removed or otherwise made ineffective without specific authorization by the water utility superintendent. 
(10)  Booster pumps. 
a.  Where a booster pump has been installed on the service line to or within any premises, such pump shall be equipped with a low pressure cutoff device designed to shut off the booster pump when the pressure in the service line on the suction side of the pump drops to twenty (20) psi or less. 
b.  It shall be the duty of the water consumer to maintain the low pressure cutoff device in proper working order and to certify to the water utility superintendent, at least once a year, that the device is operable. 
(Ord. No. 2302, § 1, 10-4-93)  
Sec. 18-42. - Required approval. 
That no person, firm or corporation shall establish or permit to be established or maintain or permit to be maintained any connection whereby a private, auxiliary or emergency water supply other than the regular public water supply of the city may enter the supply or distribution system of such municipality, unless such private, auxiliary or emergency water supply and the method of connection and use of such supply shall have been approved by the water utility superintendent and the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency. 
(Ord. No. 2302, § 2, 10-4-93)  
Sec. 18-43. - Survey of potential hazards. 
It shall be the duty of the water utility superintendent to cause surveys and investigations to be made of industrial and other properties served by the public water supply to determine whether actual or potential hazards to the public water supply may exist. Such surveys and investigations shall be made a matter of public record and shall be repeated at least every two (2) years, or as often as the water utility superintendent shall deem necessary. Records of such surveys shall be maintained and available for review for a period of at least five (5) years. 
(Ord. No. 2302, § 3, 10-4-93)  
Sec. 18-44. - Inspection rights. 
The approved cross connection control device inspector shall have the right to enter at any reasonable time any property served by a connection to the public water supply or distribution system of the city for the purpose of verifying the presence or absence of cross connections, and that the water utility superintendent or his authorized agent shall have the right to enter at any reasonable time any property served by a connection to the public water supply or distribution system of the city for the purpose of verifying information submitted by the customer regarding the required cross connection control inspection. On demand the owner, lessees or occupants of any property so served shall furnish to the water utility superintendent any information which he may request regarding the piping system or systems or water use on such property. The refusal of such information, when demanded, shall, within the discretion of the water utility superintendent, be deemed evidence of the presence of improper connections as provided in this division. 
(Ord. No. 2302, § 4, 10-4-93)  
Sec. 18-45. - Discontinuance of water service. 
That the water utility superintendent of the city is hereby authorized and directed to discontinue, after reasonable notice to the occupant thereof, the water service to any property wherein any connection in violation of the provisions of this division is known to exist, and to take such other precautionary measures as he may deem necessary to eliminate any danger of contamination of the public water supply distribution mains. Water service to such property shall not be restored until such conditions have been eliminated or corrected in compliance with the provisions of this division, and until a reconnection fee is paid to the city. Immediate disconnection with verbal notice can be effected when the water utility superintendent is assured that imminent danger of harmful contamination of the public water supply system exists. Such action shall be followed by written notification of the cause of disconnection. Immediate disconnection without notice to any party can be effected to prevent actual or anticipated contamination or pollution of the public water supply, provided that, in the reasonable opinion of the water utility superintendent or the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, such action is required to prevent actual or potential contamination or pollution of the public water supply. Neither the public water supply, the water utility superintendent, or its agents or assigns shall be liable to any customer for any injury, damages or lost revenues which may result from termination of said customer's water supply in accordance with the terms of this division, whether or not said termination was with or without notice. 
(Ord. No. 2302, § 5, 10-4-93)  
Sec. 18-46. - Consumer responsibilities. 
That the consumer responsible for backsiphoned or back pressured material or contamination through backflow, if contamination of the potable water supply system occurs through an illegal cross connection or an improperly installed, maintained or repaired device, or a device which has been bypassed, must bear the cost of cleanup of the potable water supply system. 
(Ord. No. 2302, § 6, 10-4-93)  
Sec. 18-47. - Violations. 
(a)  The water utility superintendent shall deny or discontinue, after reasonable notice to the occupants thereof, the water service to any premises wherein any backflow prevention device required by these regulations is not installed, tested, maintained and repaired in a manner acceptable to the water utility superintendent, or if it is found that the backflow prevention device has been removed or bypassed, or if an unprotected cross connection exists on the premises or if a low pressure cutoff required by these regulations is not installed and maintained in working order. 
(b)  Water service to such premises shall not be restored until the consumer has corrected or eliminated such conditions or defects in conformance with these regulations and to the satisfaction of the water utility superintendent, and the required reconnection fee is paid. 
(c)  Water service to such premises shall not be restored until the consumer has corrected or eliminated such conditions or defects on conformance with these regulations and to the satisfaction of the water utility superintendent. 
(d)  Neither the city, the water utility superintendent, or its agents or assigns shall be liable to any customers of the city for any injury, damages or lost revenues which may result from termination of said customer's water supply in accordance with the terms of this division, whether or not such termination of the water supply was with or without notice. 
(e)  The consumer responsible for backsiphoned material or contamination through backflow, if contamination of the potable water supply system occurs through an illegal cross connection or an improperly installed, maintained or repaired device, or a device which has been bypassed, must bear the cost of cleanup of the potable water supply system. 
(f)  Any person found to be violating any provision of this division shall be served with written notice stating the notice of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violation. 
(g)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this division, in addition to any fine provided, shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss or damage occasioned by the city of such violation, whether the same was caused before or after notice. 
(h)  Any person violating this division shall be fined in an amount not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each violation. Each day in which any such violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2302, § 7, 10-4-93)  
Secs. 18-48—18-50. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - SEWERS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Section 4 of Ord. No. 2895, adopted May 1, 1995, deleted former Art. III and enacted provisions in lieu thereof to read as set out herein. The deleted provisions pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the following ordinances: 
Ord. No. 	Sec. 	Adoption Date 
1066 	114—116 	10-19-70 
1985 	3 	 3-21-88 
2097 	3—8 	11-21-88 
2393 	1—6 	 4- 1-91 
2588 	1 	 9- 8-92 
2637 	1 	 4-19-93 
2712 	2 	 2- 7-94 
2730 	1—3 	 2- 7-94 
2879 	1—5 	 4- 3-95 
 
Cross reference— Sewer dumping prohibited, § 14-80. 
 
Sec. 18-51. - Public system mandatory. 
The owners of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation of other purpose situated within the city and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now located a public sanitary sewer of the city are hereby required at their expense to install toilet facilities therein and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this chapter within ninety (90) days after date of official notice and approved by the council, provided that said sanitary sewer is within three hundred (300) feet of the property line. 
(Ord. No. 2895, § 4, 5-1-95)  
Sec. 18-52. - Private systems. 
It shall be unlawful to construct or repair any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage. 
(Ord. No. 2895, § 4, 5-1-95)  
Sec. 18-53. - Separate systems. 
It shall be unlawful to connect any sewer to a sanitary sewer which receives roof drainage, foundation drainage, surface water or groundwater. 
It shall be unlawful to construct combined sewers or other facilities intended to receive both storm runoff and sewage. Separate sanitary sewers and separate storm sewers shall be provided. 
(Ord. No. 2895, § 4, 5-1-95)  
Sec. 18-54. - Wastewater treatment and pretreatment regulations. 
The following regulations shall apply to all users of the sanitary sewer system. 
(Ord. No. 2895, § 4, 5-1-95)  
Sec. 18-55. - Unlawful discharge and deposit of wastes. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet, watercourse or storm sewer within the city or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city any sewage or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this article. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the city in any area under jurisdiction of the city, any human or animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or discharge, or to cause to be deposited or discharged, to any POTW any solid, liquid or gaseous waste unless through a connection approved by the city. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful to discharge, without an NPDES permit to any natural outlet within the service area of the POTW. 
(Ord. No. 2895, § 4, 5-1-95; Ord. No. 2930, § 2, 9-5-95)  
Sec. 18-56. - Mandatory sewer hook-up. 
(a)  Generally. The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes, situated within the city and abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way in which there is now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary sewer of the city, is hereby required at his expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer within ninety (90) days after notice by the city in a manner approved by the city in compliance with the ordinances of the city. The connection shall be approved by the city and the private disposal system shall be abandoned as provided in section 18-57. 
(b)  Request for exemption. The owner may request an exemption pursuant to section 18-4. 
(Ord. No. 2895, § 4, 5-1-95)  
Sec. 18-57. - Private disposal systems. 
Where a public sanitary sewer is not available or an exemption granted in section 18-4, the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system, complying with the requirements of the DuPage County Health Department, State Department of Public Health and Environmental Protection Act. 
(1)  At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private sewage disposal system, as provided in section 18-56, or an exemption has been revoked pursuant to section 18-4, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with this article, and any septic tanks, cesspools, and similar private sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned. The building sewer shall be connected to said sewer within ninety (90) days of notice and the private sewage disposal system shall be cleaned of sludge and filled with clean backrun gravel and dirt compacted and maintained in a safe condition. 
(2)  The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times at no expense to the city. 
(3)  No statement contained in this article shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2895, § 4, 5-1-95)  
Sec. 18-58. - Building sewer and connection permit. 
(a)  Required, application. It shall be unlawful to make any connection with city sanitary or storm system without having first obtained a permit therefor. Application for such permits shall be made to the building inspector of the city and shall be accompanied by a statement as to the purpose of the connection, the premises to be served, the specifications of the pipe to be connected and of the drain from the house to the sewer line. No permit shall be issued unless the building inspector finds that the ordinances of the city would be complied with in the making of such connection. 
(b)  Connection charge, permit fee, inspection fees. A connection charge for each connection permit shall be in the amount set forth in section 18-59. Such permit shall not be issued until payment has been made to the city of the fees outlined in such section for each building to be served. Additional inspection fee may be charged in conjunction with the connection permit as provided by the building and plumbing code. 
(c)  Work without permit, penalty. Any person who makes an excavation or does any other work without first securing the permit required by this section shall, in addition to any other penalty imposed by this section, pay to the clerk within twenty-four (24) hours of receipt of demand therefor, the sum of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the purpose of paying the fees of the building inspector. Such inspector shall thereupon make an inspection as in other cases. Failure to pay the sum on demand as provided shall constitute separate violation. 
(d)  Inspection. The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the building inspector when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. Each and every part of a sewer connection shall be inspected and approved by the building inspector or his representative before being concealed or backfilled. 
(e)  Filling excavation without written approval. Any person filling in an excavation without having first received the written approval of the building inspector as provided in this section shall, in addition to suffering the fine herein imposed, expose the sewer for inspection by the building inspector at no cost to the city. In any case where the inspector finds the work on any sewer not done in a satisfactory manner as herein provided, he shall serve written notice on the person to whom the permit was issued, stating wherein such work is deficient and ordering said person to remedy such defect within twenty-four (24) hours. In the event such person fails to comply therewith, the inspector shall cause such defect to be corrected at the expense of the person to whom the permit was issued. The sum of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) as herein provided shall be paid to the clerk as a fee for the performance of the inspector, and it shall be the duty of the inspector to inspect any sewer connection or sewer pipe within the city. It shall also be the duty of the inspector to inform the approving authority of any violation of this section and to assist in the prosecution of offenders. 
(f)  Compliance with provisions. All excavations for building sewer installation shall comply with the provisions of this Code relating to excavations in streets and shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city. 
(g)  Reserve capacity of downstream sewerage facilities. A building sewer permit will only be issued and a sewer connection shall only be allowed if it can be demonstrated that the downstream sewerage facilities, including sanitary sewers, pump stations and wastewater treatment facilities, have sufficient reserve capacity to adequately handle the additional anticipated waste load. 
(Ord. No. 2895, § 4, 5-1-95)  
Sec. 18-59. - Sewer connection charges. 
(a)  Scope. This section applies to all connections to sanitary sewers owned by the city. 
(b)  For any owner, individual, firm or corporation the privilege of a connection to the sanitary sewer system for the purpose of extending said system to serve lots, tracts or parcels of land, the property owner shall pay a rate of forty dollars ($40.00) per fixture unit to the city before approval of any building permit. 
(c)  For any owner, individual, firm or corporation the privilege of connection to an existing sanitary sewer, which sewer has been installed by the city or by agreement with others and no recapture charge or special assessment has been paid by the property owner, the property owner shall pay a rate of one hundred twenty-five dollars ($125.00) per fixture unit for up to the first twenty (20), and forty dollars ($40.00) per fixture unit thereafter to the city before approval of any building permit. 
Increasing the number of plumbing fixtures in an existing single-family residence shall be exempt from the above schedule of charges, but there shall be paid to the city those charges as provided in section l8-27(c) of this chapter. 
(d)  For those customers who connect to the water system but are not within the corporate limits, the connection fee shall be one-and-a-half (1.5) times those charges set forth in this section. 
(Ord. No. 2895, § 4, 5-1-95; Ord. No. 01-O-0112, § 2, 12-3-2001; Ord. No. 02-O-0123, §§ 2, 6, 11-4-2002; Ord. No. 05-O-0088, § 2, 11-21-2005)  
Sec. 18-59.1. - Sewer treatment plant capacity charge. 
A capacity charge shall be assessed per connection per population equivalent (P.E.) to all users connecting to the system. The amount of the capacity charge shall be five hundred eighty dollars ($580.00) per P.E. The capacity charge shall annually be adjusted upward by three (3) percent and rounded up to the nearest five dollars ($5.00) to account for inflation. 
(Ord. No. 01-O-0112, § 4, 12-3-2001; Ord. No. 02-O-0123, § 4, 11-4-2002; Ord. No. 05-O-0088, § 3, 11-21-2005)  
Sec. 18-60. - Cost borne by owner. 
All costs and expense incident to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the city for any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. 
(Ord. No. 2895, § 4, 5-1-95)  
Sec. 18-61. - Building sewer maintenance. 
(a)  Maintenance of the sanitary sewer service between the city sewer main and the edge of the street right-of-way or the edge of the rear yard easement shall be the responsibility of the city. Maintenance of the sanitary sewer service between the building and the street right-of-way or rear yard easement shall be the customer's responsibility. 
(b)  Whenever building sewers are abandoned due to the demolition of the existing building or the installation of a new building sewer, the building sewer shall be disconnected at the city main by cutting the pipe and inserting a permanent plug. The cost for this work shall be paid by the customer who is served by the building sewer. 
(Ord. No. 2895, § 4, 5-1-95)  
Sec. 18-62. - Prohibited connections. 
(a)  A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building. In no case shall any person be permitted to maintain any sewer connection connecting a building owned by him to the public sewer across or under the property of another. Each building sewer shall connect to the public sewer directly. Each unit in a building shall have a separate inspection manhole or other means for the city to sample sewage from that unit. 
(b)  Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the building inspector, to meet all requirements of the Code. 
(c)  No connection permit will be required for the removal of stoppage in waste pipes. A permit is required for replacing broken or old sewer lines. 
(Ord. No. 2895, § 4, 5-1-95)  
Sec. 18-63. - Building sewer materials, construction. 
The methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing, and backfilling the trench shall all conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the city. 
(1)  Connection, how made. Approved types of service connections shall be one of the following: 
Type 1. Vitrified clay wye branches installed in the main sewer at the time of construction. Connections to existing wye branches shall be made with an approved type of joint material of the bituminous type or an approved compression coupling. The connection shall be completely watertight. No connection shall be allowed to any damaged wye branch. If damage occurs during the making of the connection, the wye shall be taken out of the main sewer by the plumber and replaced either by another undamaged wye or by straight vitrified clay pipe. If straight pipe is used in the replacement, type 2 connection methods shall be used. Concrete encasement of the wye branch, connection joint, or any other part of the connection shall not be deemed watertight and shall not be allowed as a method of repairing a damaged joint. 
Type 2. Connections of the saddle type installed in the main sewer. Connections of this type shall be made in smooth, round hole, machine-drilled into the main pipe. The fitting used in the connection shall be made in such a manner as to ensure that no protrusion of the fitting into the main sewer pipe shall result. The connector shall fit perfectly the contour of the inside of the sanitary sewer and shall be specifically designed to fit the particular size main sewer pipe into which the connection is made. The machine-drilled hole shall be of such size to provide one-eighth-inch clearance between the outside of the fitting and the hole. The space thus provided shall be completely filled with joint material. The space between the shoulder of the fitting and the face of the main sewer pipe shall be one-eighth-inch thick and this space shall also be completely filled with joint material. 
The joint material used for the type 2 service connection shall be completely waterproof and shall be capable of withstanding any condition of stress or strain likely to be encountered in normal sanitary sewer construction or maintenance. Concrete encasement will not be considered waterproof. 
The fitting shall be manufactured of either cast aluminum alloy, cast iron or vitrified clay pipe and shall be capable of receiving all normally used types of pipe for service connections. 
The type 2 fitting and drilling machine herein described shall be of the type manufactured by Smith & Loveless, Division-Union Tank Car Company, Lexana, Kansas, or the approved equal. Tapping and connection shall be made in the presence of an authorized city inspector. 
Type 1 and 2 connections, when and where used: Type 1 connections may be used in existing sanitary sewers when wye branches previously installed are readily and conveniently available. If existing wye branches cannot be found readily or are not located properly for providing the needed service, type 2 connection shall be made. When new sanitary sewers are constructed, type 1 connections may be made in cases where the connection is made during construction and before backfilling of the sanitary main sewer trench. 
Type 2 connections shall be made in all cases where services are installed subsequent to construction and backfilling operations. No wye branches shall be installed and covered up for future use, except when excessive depth, new subdivision design or other usual conditions exist, and then only with prior approval of the city engineer. 
(2)  Design criteria. The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing, and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of the city. In the absence of Code provisions or on amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the A.S.T.M. and W.P.C.F. Manual of Practice No. 9 shall apply. 
Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. 
In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the building sewer. 
(Ord. No. 2895, § 4, 5-1-95)  
Sec. 18-64. - Reserved.  
Sec. 18-64.1. - Use of sewers—Stormwater and unpolluted waters not allowed. 
(a)  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer. 
(b)  Discharge of storm and unpolluted waters. Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers or to a natural outlet approved by the city. Industrial cooling water [or] unpolluted process waters may be discharged, on approval of the city engineer, to a storm sewer or natural outlet. 
(Ord. No. 2895, § 4, 5-1-95)  
Sec. 18-64.2. - Same—Prohibited discharge standards. 
(a)  General prohibitions. The following discharges into the city sewerage system are prohibited: 
(1)  Interference; 
(2)  Pass through; 
(3)  Any discharge that limits sludge disposal options. 
(b)  Specific prohibitions. The following items are prohibited from discharge into the city sewage system: 
(1)  Any liquids, solids or gases which by reason of their nature or quantity are or may be sufficient either alone or by interaction with other substances to cause fire or be injurious or hazardous in any other way to the POTW or to the operation of the POTW, or any water streams with a closed-cup flash point of less than one hundred forty (140) degrees Fahrenheit or sixty (60) degrees centigrade using test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21 are prohibited. At no time shall two (2) successive readings on a meter capable of reading LEL (lower explosive limit) at a point at the nearest accessible point to the POTW or at any point in the POTW be more than five (5) percent nor any single reading greater than ten (10) percent. Materials for which discharge is prohibited under this subsection include, but are not limited to, gasoline, kerosene, naphtha, benzene, toluene, xylene, ethers, alcohols, ketones, aldehydes, peroxides, chlorates, perchlorates, bromates, polychlorinated biphenyls, polybrominated biphenyls, carbides, hydrides, stoddard solvents. 
(2)  Solid or viscous substances which may cause obstruction to the flow in a sewer or other interference with the operation of the wastewater treatment facilities such as, but not limited to, grease, garbage with particles greater than one-half inch in any dimension, animal guts or tissues, paunch manure, bones, hair, hides or fleshings, entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, spent lime, stone or marble dust, metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings, rags, spent grains, spent hops, waste paper, wood plastics, tar, asphalt residues from refining or processing of fuel or lubricating oil, mud or glass grinding or polishing wastes, or tumbling and demurring stones. 
(3)  Any wastewater which will cause corrosive structural damage to the POTW, but in no case wastewater having a pH less than 5.0 or greater than 10.0. 
(4)  Any wastewater containing incompatible pollutants in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, to injure or interfere with any wastewater treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, cause a violation of the water quality standards of the receiving waters of the POTW, exceed limitation set forth in a national categorical pretreatment standard (when effective) or in section 18-64.3 of this Code or create a public nuisance. 
(5)  Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, or solids which either singly or by interaction with other wastewaters are sufficient to create a public nuisance or in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems or are sufficient to prevent entry into sewers for their maintenance and repair. 
(6)  In no case shall a substance discharged to the POTW cause the POTW to be in noncompliance with sludge use or disposal criteria, guidelines or regulations developed under section 405 of the Act; any criteria guideline or regulations affecting sludge use or disposal developed pursuant to the RCRA, SWDA, the Clean Water Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, the 503 Sludge Regulations; or state criteria applicable to the sludge management method being used. 
(7)  Any substance which will cause the POTW to violate its NPDES permit or the receiving water quality standards. 
(8)  Any wastewater having a temperature at the point of discharge to the POTW which will inhibit biological activity in the POTW treatment plant resulting in interference. In no case shall wastewater be introduced to the POTW which exceeds sixty-five (65) degrees centigrade (one hundred fifty (150) degrees Fahrenheit) at a point of entry to the system or which exceeds forty (40) degrees centigrade (one hundred four (104) degrees Fahrenheit) at the POTW treatment plant. 
(9)  Any pollutants, including compatible pollutants released at a flow or pollutant concentration which [a user knows or has reason to know] will cause interference to the POTW or will pass through the POTW. 
(10)  Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by state or federal regulations. 
(11)  Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease, or oils (animal, vegetable, mineral, or synthetic), whether emulsified or not, in excess of one hundred (100) mg/l for industrial users and two hundred (200) mg/l for food preparation establishments, or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between thirty-two (32) degrees Fahrenheit and one hundred fifty (150) degrees Fahrenheit, and zero (0) degrees centigrade and sixty-five (65) degrees centigrade. Any discharge of petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin in amounts that will cause interference is prohibited. 
(12)  Any garbage that has been improperly shredded. 
(13)  Any wastewater containing BOD or suspended solids of such character and quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to handle such materials at the sewage treatment plant; provided, however, that a user may be permitted by specific, written agreement with the city, which agreement to discharge such BOD or TSS may provide for special charges, payments or provisions for treating and testing equipment. 
(14)  Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters including the NPDES permit of the city. 
(15)  Any discharge exceeding the standard established in 35 Illinois Administrative Code 307. 
(16)  Any slug discharged to the POTW. All categorical and noncategorical industrial users shall notify the POTW immediately of all discharges that could cause problems to the POTW, including any slug loading. 
(17)  Limitations on mercury. The limitation on mercury, established 35 Illinois Administrative Code 307.103, allocated to industry shall not exceed a concentration of 0.0005 mg/l. 
(18)  No waste discharged to the municipal sewer system shall contain cyanide in excess of 0.3 mg/l. 
(Ord. No. 2895, § 4, 5-1-95; Ord. No. 2930, § 3, 9-5-95; Ord. No. 4207, § 2, 5-15-2000; Ord. No. 02-O-0033, § 1, 5-6-2002; Ord. No. 18-O-0034, § 1, 6-18-2018)  
Sec. 18-64.3. - Same—Maximum allowable objectionable substances. 
The city will evaluate each toxic or objectionable substance on a concentration-dilution basis and will establish maximum allowable discharge concentration for each individual person, as shown on the following chart labeled Table A. The city may add, remove, or revise parameters and/or limits as required to meet regulations or to ensure POTW compliance with permit. The limits indicated in Table A are to protect against the following: 
(1)  Decreased sewage plant treatment process efficiencies and degraded effluent qualities exceeding the current requirements of the regulatory agencies. 
(2)  Concentrations of any toxic or objectionable substance in the sewage treatment plant effluent exceeding the current maximum limits established by the regulatory agencies for such plant effluent flows. 
(3)  Any concentrations of toxic or objectionable substances in plant effluent flows which will result in concentrations of such substances in the receiving waters which will exceed the regulatory agency's maximum allowable limits for these substances in the receiving waters. 
(4)  Any concentration which limits or prohibits intended sludge disposal options. 
TABLE A 
Maximum Allowable Objectionable Waste Which May Be Discharged into the Sanitary Sewer System 
Parameter 	Limit 
pH 	Not less than 5.0 nor greater than 10.0 	
Temperature 	150 degrees 	F 	
Arsenic (total) 	2.0 	mg/l 	
Cadmium (total) 	0.4 	mg/l 	
Chromium, hexavalent 	0.9 	mg/l 	
Chromium (total) 	5.0 	mg/l 	
Copper (total) 	2.0 	mg/l 	
Cyanide (total) 	0.3 	mg/l 	
Lead (total) 	2.0 	mg/l 	
Mercury (total) 	0.0005 	mg/l 	
Nickel (total) 	0.9 	mg/l 	
Silver (total) 	1.0 	mg/l 	
Zinc (total) 	3.0 	mg/l 	
BOD (5 day) 	See section 18-68 for allowable limits and section 18-69 for surcharges 	
TSS 	See section 18-68 for allowable limits and section 18-69 for surcharges 	
NH 3 -N 	See section 18-68 for allowable limits and section 18-69 for surcharges 	
Fats, oils, and grease (FOG) - Petroleum and non-food preparation establishments 	100 	mg/l 	
Fats, oils, and grease (FOG) - Food services 	200 	mg/l 	
 
(Ord. No. 2895, § 4, 5-1-95; Ord. No. 4207, § 3, 5-15-2000; Ord. No. 4313, § 1, 8-21-2000; Ord. No. 18-O-0034, § 2, 6-18-2018)  
Sec. 18-64.4. - Same—Allocation of pollutants. 
(a)  The total allocation of the pollutants to each existing industry will be established for the industrial discharges of each pollutant as the number of industries is obtained by sampling and analysis and wastewater discharge permit applications are received, and with specific limitations on discharges established in the individual discharge permits. The city shall reserve the right to limit pollutants not specifically mentioned in Table A on a case-by-case basis in order to meet standards. 
(b)  Discharges from each separate discharge of a user, as measured under the provisions of this Code, shall not contain in excess of the permitted allocation of the pollutants based upon a twenty-four-hour composite sample, with the exception of FOG, cyanide, pH, and hexavalent chromium, which shall be measured on the basis of grab samples. All such samples shall be measured and met at the point of entry to the POTW collection system or "end of pipe" excepting those categorical standards that are required to be met at end of process as set forth in 40 CFR. All analyses shall be performed by methodology as promulgated in the most recent 40 CFR 136. 
(c)  The city may maintain a reserve of ten (10) percent to fifteen (15) percent of the maximum allowable influent limit of each pollutant for new industries or increase with existing industries. The city will recalculate the maximum concentrations from time to time to reflect removal credits allowed, based on using site specific data. 
(Ord. No. 2895, § 4, 5-1-95; Ord. No. 2930, § 4, 9-5-95; Ord. No. 4207, § 4, 5-15-2000; Ord. No. 18-O-0034, § 3, 6-18-2018)  
Sec. 18-64.5. - Same—Incorporation of national categorical pretreatment standards. 
(a)  Upon the promulgation of the national categorical pretreatment standard (NCPS) for a particular user, said standard, if more stringent than the limitations imposed under this Code for sources in that category, shall when effective immediately supersede the limitations and conditions imposed under chapter. 
(b)  New sources shall install and start up technology prior to discharge and achieve compliance within the shortest time feasible, not to exceed ninety (90) days after commencement of discharge. 
(c)  Pursuant to 40 CFR 403.6(c)(2) and (5), the city may convert mass per unit of production limits to equivalent mass per day or connection limits, which equivalent limits shall control as to any affected industrial user (IU) in lieu of the promulgated standards. Such equivalent limits shall be established on a case-by-case basis and shall be set forth in the individual IU permit. 
(Ord. No. 2895, § 4, 5-1-95; Ord. No. 2930, § 5, 9-5-95)  
Sec. 18-64.6. - Same—Final national categorical pretreatment standards. 
All categorical users shall comply with the national categorical pretreatment standards pursuant to 40 CFR chapter I, subpart N, parts 405 through 471, as amended, and all applicable federal, state and/or local statutes, ordinances, codes, rules and regulations, including, but not limited to, any local control authority limits. Where the regulations imposed pursuant to the national categorical pretreatment standards are either more restrictive or less restrictive than any other provision of any applicable federal, state, and/or local statute, ordinance, code, rule or regulation, the regulation which is more restrictive or imposes the higher or more stringent standard shall govern. 
(Ord. No. 2895, § 4, 5-1-95)  
Sec. 18-64.7. - Same—Discharged waters or wastes. 
(a)  If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, which water contains the substances or possesses the characteristics enumerated in this section of the Code and/or which are in violation of the standards for pretreatment provided in 40 CFR 403, and amendments thereto, and which, in the judgment of the city engineer, may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment, or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the superintendent may: 
(1)  Reject the wastes and require the violator to cease and desist discharging said materials into the sewer system immediately; 
(2)  Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers; 
(3)  Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge and also require payment to cover the added costs of handling and treating the waters not covered by the existing sewer charges. If the city permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to review and approval of the city and in accordance with federal regulations (40 CFR 128) entitled "Pretreatment Standards," and all other ordinances and codes pertaining thereto. 
(b)  The provisions of this subsection (b) are subject to any changes made to 40 CFR 403.12(p)(1-4). 
All industrial users shall promptly notify the POTW in advance of any substantial change in the volume or character of pollutants in their discharge, including the listed or characteristic hazardous wastes for which the industrial user has submitted initial notification under 40 CFR 403.12. 
(c)  Industrial users shall notify the POTW, the EPA Regional Waste Management Division Director, and state hazardous waste authorities in writing of any discharge into the POTW of a substance, which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR part 261. Such notification must include the name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR part 261, the EPA hazardous waste number, and the type of discharge (continuous, batch, or other). If the industrial user discharges more than one hundred (100) kilograms of such waste per calendar month to the POTW, the notification shall also contain the following information to the extent such information is known and readily available to the industrial user: An identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the wastes, an estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents in the waste stream discharged during that calendar month, and an estimation of the mass of constituents in the waste stream expected to be discharged during the following twelve (12) months. Such notifications shall take place within one hundred eighty (180) days of the effective date of this article. Industrial users who commence discharging after the effective date of this article shall provide notification no later than one hundred eighty (180) days after the discharge of the listed or characteristic hazardous waste. Any notification under this paragraph need be submitted only once for each hazardous waste discharged. However, notifications of changed discharges must be submitted as described above. 
Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of the previous paragraph of this section during a calendar month in which they discharge no more than fifteen (15) kilograms of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e). Discharge of more than fifteen (15) kilograms of non-acute hazardous wastes in a calendar month, or of any quantity of acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e), requires a one-time notification. 
Subsequent months during which the industrial user discharges more than such quantities of any hazardous waste do not require additional notification. 
In case of any new regulations under section 3001 of RCRA identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste, the industrial user must notify the POTW, the EPA Regional Waste Management Waste Division Director, and state hazardous waste authorities of the discharge of such substance within ninety (90) days of the effective date of such regulations. 
In the case of any notification made under this section, the industrial user shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has determined to be economically practical. 
(Ord. No. 2895, § 4, 5-1-95; Ord. No. 2930, § 6, 9-5-95)  
Sec. 18-64.8. - Same—Pretreatment. 
All industrial users shall provide necessary wastewater pretreatment as required to comply with this article and shall achieve compliance with all applicable pretreatment standards within the time limitations as specified by appropriate statutes, regulations and this article. Any facilities required to pretreat wastewater to a level acceptable to the POTW shall be provided, properly operated and maintained at the user's expense. All industrial users shall obtain all necessary construction operating permits from the IEPA and wastewater discharge permit from the city prior to commencing construction on such facilities. Such pretreatment facilities shall be under the control and direction of an IEPA-certified wastewater treatment operator. Any subsequent significant changes in the pretreatment facilities or method of operation shall be reported to and accepted by the POTW prior to the industrial user's initiation of the changes. 
(Ord. No. 2895, § 4, 5-1-95)  
Sec. 18-64.9. - Same—Excessive discharge. 
No user shall increase the use of process water or in any way attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate pretreatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in the national categorical pretreatment standards (NCPS) (when effective) or in any other pollutant-specific limitations developed by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2895, § 4, 5-1-95)  
Sec. 18-64.10. - Same—Spill containment. 
(a)  Each industrial user shall provide protection from discharge to the POTW of prohibited materials or other substances regulated by this article. Facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at the owner's or user's own cost and expense. 
(b)  All industrial users whose wastewater includes or could include compatible or incompatible pollutants must have detailed plans on file at the city showing facilities and operating procedures to provide protection from accidental and/or slug discharge as required by the city. All industrial users shall complete construction of said facilities by January 1, 1987. No user who begins contributing to or could contribute such pollutants to the POTW after the effective date of this article shall be permitted to introduce such pollutants into the POTW until accidental discharge facilities and procedures, as appropriate, have been approved by the city and installed by the industrial user. Review and approval of such plans and operating procedures shall not relieve the industrial user from the responsibility to modify its facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this article. 
(c)  In the case of an accidental or deliberate discharge of compatible or incompatible pollutants, it shall be the responsibility of the industrial user to notify the POTW of the incident within twenty-four (24) hours of becoming aware of any anticipated or unanticipated bypasses and spills. The notification shall include name of caller, location and time of discharge, type of wastewater, concentration and volume. 
(d)  Within seventy-two (72) hours following such an accidental or deliberate discharge, the industrial user shall submit to the city a detailed written report describing the cause of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Followup reports may be required by the city as needed. Such report, or reports, shall not relieve the industrial user of any expense, loss, damage or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, fish kills, or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such report relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties, or other liability which may be imposed by this article or otherwise. Failure to report accidental or deliberate discharges may, in addition to any other remedies available to the city, result in the revocation of the discharger's wastewater discharge permit. 
(e)  The industrial user shall control production of all discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with all applicable regulations upon reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost or fails. 
(f)  A notice in English and the language of common use shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of a discharge of a prohibited material. Employers shall ensure that all employees who are in a position to cause, discover, or observe such an accidental discharge are advised of the emergency notification procedures. 
(Ord. No. 2895, § 4, 5-1-95; Ord. No. 2930, § 7, 9-5-95)  
Sec. 18-64.11. - Wastewater haulers. 
(a)  Wastewater haulers shall discharge all sanitary and nonsanitary wastes at the designated wastewater hauler dumping station. 
(b)  Wastewater haulers shall have a valid wastewater hauler discharge permit before discharging wastes at the POTW. Each permitted wastewater hauling vehicle shall prominently display a number issued by the city on both doors of the vehicle cab. Such numbers shall be removable only by destruction. Decals for this purpose will be provided by the city to each permitted wastewater hauler. 
(c)  Each wastewater hauling vehicle shall meet the following conditions before permits will be issued under section 300.140(b) of the Act: 
(1)  Until the city provides scales for weighing wastewater hauling vehicles, each truck tank shall have a sight glass calibrated in one hundred-gallon increments. 
(2)  Each vehicle shall be equipped to use the quick-disconnect couplers at the wastewater hauler dumping station. 
(d)  Representative samples of wastewater from both nonindustrial users and industrial users discharged by a wastewater hauler shall comply with the provision of section 18-64.3. 
(e)  Each load delivered to the wastewater dumping station must have a wastewater hauler manifest properly filled out by the scale operator on duty and signed by the wastewater hauler. 
(f)  All procedures for discharging, for cleanliness and for general sanitary operation on the POTW property as prescribed by the city shall be strictly adhered to by all wastewater haulers delivering wastewater to the POTW dumping station. 
(g)  The source or sources of all liquid wastes being hauled to the POTW treatment plant shall be properly documented using the city manifest system. 
(h)  Wastewater from a nonindustrial user shall not be mixed with wastewater from an industrial user. Vehicles hauling wastewater from an industrial user shall not be used to haul wastewater from a nonindustrial user for disposal at the POTW. 
(i)  In addition to remedies available to the city set forth elsewhere in this article, failure of a wastewater hauler to comply with the provisions of this section shall be grounds for revocation of the hauler's discharge permit by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2895, § 4, 5-1-95)  
Sec. 18-65. - Discharge permits—Prohibition of discharges without or contrary to permit. 
It shall be unlawful for any industrial user to discharge wastewater to the city POTW without making application for a permit by the city in accordance with the provision of this article. It shall be unlawful to discharge wastewater to the city POTW contrary to a permit. 
(Ord. No. 2895, § 4, 5-1-95)  
Sec. 18-65.1. - Same—Procedures for receipt and analysis of IU's reports. 
All reports and notices submitted to the city by industrial users in accordance with this article and 40 CFR 403.12 shall be received by the city engineer and referred to the appropriate technical personnel for review. The city shall have sixty (60) days from receipt of each industrial user's submittal to complete its review and make any necessary response. 
(Ord. No. 2895, § 4, 5-1-95)  
Sec. 18-65.2. - Same—Required. 
(a)  Generally. All significant users existing or proposing to connect to or to contribute to the POTW shall obtain a wastewater discharge permit before connecting to or contributing to the POTW. All significant users which are existing sources connected to or contributing to the POTW shall obtain a wastewater discharge permit within ninety (90) days after the effective date of this article. All industrial users which become significant users after promulgation of this article shall apply for a wastewater discharge permit within ninety (90) days after becoming a significant user. (The latter includes, but is not limited to, industrial users regulated by a newly promulgated national categorical pretreatment standard.) New sources (and existing sources that become significant industrial users subsequent to promulgation of categorical standards) are required to include baseline monitoring reports prior to commencement of discharge for new sources and with discharge application for existing sources. Information will include, but not be limited to, data on production, flow and amounts of regulated pollutants and intended methods of pretreatment. 
(b)  Wastewater discharge permit application: 
(1)  Significant users required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall complete and file with the city an application on a form to be prescribed and furnished by the city. 
(2)  Existing significant users shall apply for a wastewater discharge permit within ninety (90) days after the effective date of this article. Proposed significant users which are new sources shall apply at least ninety (90) days prior to discharging to the POTW. In case of conflict between application deadlines for significant users in section 18-65.2(a) and (b)(2), the stricter deadline shall apply. 
(3)  If a significant user does not submit an application for a wastewater discharge permit as required by section 18-65.2 of this article, the use shall be considered in violation of this article and subject to enforcement procedures as set forth in section 18-67 of this chapter. 
(4)  In support of the application, the significant user shall submit, upon request by the city, in units and terms appropriate for evaluation, the following information: 
a.  Name, address and location of the facility including the name of the operator and owner. 
b.  SIC number according to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, Bureau of the Budget, 1972, as amended, or any successor manual, upon the effective date thereof. 
c.  Wastewater constituents and characteristics including, but not limited to, those set forth in section 18-55 of this article as determined by a reliable analytical laboratory. 
d.  Time and duration of discharge. 
e.  Average and maximum wastewater flow rates, in gallons per day, including monthly and seasonal variations, if any. 
f.  Site plans showing all pipe sizes, manholes and location of sanitary and storm sewers leaving the building or premises, together with all connections to lateral sanitary and storm sewers. 
g.  Total number of employees and hours of operation of a plant. 
h.  Proposed or actual hours of operation of pretreatment system and the name of the IEPA-certified pretreatment operator. 
i.  Name of the authorized representative of the significant user. 
j.  Significant user's source of intake water, together with the types of usage and disposal sources of water and the estimated volumes in each category. 
k.  If additional significant user operation and maintenance or pretreatment techniques or installations will be required to meet pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the significant user will provide such additional pretreatment. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established under section 18-64. 
l.  List of any environmental control permits held by or for the facility. 
m.  Any other information as may be deemed by the POTW to be necessary to evaluate the permit application. 
The following additional information is required of all national categorical users but shall be required of any system user if deemed necessary by the control authority for the purpose of protecting the collection system, the POTW, or city staff working in these processes. If the significant user is subject to national categorical pretreatment standards, the following additional information shall be submitted: 
n.  Information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from each of the following: 
1.  Regulated process streams; and 
2.  Other streams as necessary to allow use of the combined waste stream formula of 40 CFR section 403.6(e). 
o.  The significant user shall identify the national categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process and shall: 
1.  Submit the results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process. Both daily maximum and average concentration shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily operation. 
2.  Where feasible, obtain samples through the flow-proportional composite sampling techniques specified in the applicable national categorical pretreatment standard. Where composite sampling is not feasible, a grab sample is acceptable. 
3.  Sample based on the flow of the sampled stream as follows (composite samples are required where feasible): 
i.  Where the flow of the stream being sampled is less than or equal to approximately two hundred fifty thousand (250,000) gpd, the significant user shall take a minimum of three (3) samples within a two-week period. 
ii.  Where the flow of the stream being sampled is greater than approximately two hundred fifty thousand (250,000) gpd, the significant user shall take a minimum of six (6) samples within a two-week period. 
4.  Take the samples immediately downstream from pretreatment facilities if such exist or immediately downstream from the regulated process if no pretreatment exists. If other wastewaters are mixed with the regulated wastewater prior to pretreatment, in order to evaluate compliance with the national categorical pretreatment standards, the significant user shall measure the flows and concentrations necessary to allow use of the combined waste from stream formula of 40 CFR section 403.6(e). Where an alternate concentration has been calculated in accordance with 40 CFR section 403.6(e), this adjusted limit along with supporting data shall be submitted to the POTW. 
5.  Submit only with POTW authorization information which utilizes only historical data, so long as the date provides information to determine the need for industrial pretreatment measures. 
6.  Provide the time, date and place of sampling methods and methods of analysis and certification that such sampling and analysis is representative of normal work cycles and expected pollutant discharges to the POTW. 
p.  The significant user shall provide a statement, reviewed by an authorized representative of the industrial user and certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether national categorical pretreatment standards and/or state and local limits are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance measures (O&M) or additional pretreatment is required for the significant user to meet the national categorical pretreatment standards and/or state and local limits. 
q.  If additional pretreatment or O & M will be required to meet the national categorical pretreatment standards and/or state and local limits, the significant user will provide the shortest schedule which will provide such additional pretreatment or O & M. The completion date in this schedule will not be later than the compliance date established for any applicable national categorical pretreatment standard. 
1.  Where the significant user's national categorical pretreatment standard has been modified by a removal allowance (40 CFR section 403.7) or the combined waste stream formula (40 CFR section 403.6(e)) or net/gross calculations (40 CFR section 403.15) at the time the significant user submits an application, the information required in section 18-65.2(b)(4)p. and q. shall pertain to the modified limits. 
2.  If the national categorical pretreatment standard for the significant user is modified after the discharge application is submitted, the significant user shall make any necessary amendment to information provided as a response to section 18-65.2(b)(4)p. and q, and submit them to the city within sixty (60) days after the modified limit is approved. 
r.  The following conditions shall apply to any schedule submitted in response to section 18-65.2(b)(4)q.: 
1.  The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable national categorical pretreatment standards and/or state and local limits (e.g., hiring and engineer, completing preliminary plans, completing final plans, executing contract for major components, commencing construction, completing construction, etc.). 
2.  No increment referred to in section 18-65.2(a)(4)h.1. [18-65.2(b)(4)r.1.] shall exceed nine (9) months. 
3.  Not later than fourteen (14) days following each date in the schedule and the final date for compliance, the user shall submit a progress report to the POTW including, at a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress to be met on such date and, if not, the date on which it expects to comply with this increment of progress, the reason for delay, and the steps being taken by the industrial user to return the construction to the schedule established. In no event shall more than nine (9) months elapse between such progress reports to the POTW. 
(c)  Review of wastewater discharge permit applications. The city will evaluate the data furnished by the significant user and may require additional information. The evaluation process may, at the discretion of the city, include the inspection of the facilities of the applicant. After evaluation of the date available, the city may issue a wastewater discharge permit. No temporary permit will be issued by the city except as set forth in section 18-65.2(g). 
(d)  Permit conditions. Wastewater discharge permits shall be expressly subject to all provisions of this article and all other applicable regulations, user charges and fees established by the city. Wastewater discharge permits shall contain the following: 
(1)  The wastewater discharge permit shall include the limits on daily maximum and average pollutant loadings from the applicable pretreatment standard (which includes federal, state and local limits) whichever is more stringent. 
(2)  Where the national categorical pretreatment standards and/or state and local limits are modified by a removal allowance (40 CFR section 403.7) or the combined waste stream formula (40 CFR section 403.6(e)) or net/gross calculations (40 CFR section 403.15) or fundamentally different factor variance for nontoxics (40 CFR section 403.13) of the "General Pretreatment Regulations," the limits modified shall be made part of the wastewater discharge permit and shall be adjusted consistent with USEPA guidelines and regulations. 
(3)  Limits on maximum and average flow rate and time of discharge or requirements for flow regulation and equalization for each separate discharge of a user. 
(4)  Requirements for installation and operation of inspection, sampling and monitoring facilities. 
(5)  Specification for monitoring programs which may include sampling locations, frequency of sampling, number, types and standards for testing and reporting schedule. 
(6)  Compliance schedule, if necessary. 
(7)  Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge reports. 
(8)  Requirements to retain for a minimum of three (3) years any records of monitoring activities and results relating to wastewater discharge and for affording the POTW access to said records. 
(9)  Requirements for advance notification to the POTW of any new introduction of wastewater constituents or any substantial discharge in the volume or character of the wastewater constituents being introduced into the wastewater treatment system pursuant to the terms of section 18-65.2(e) of this article. 
(10)  Requirements for notification of slug discharges as defined in this article. 
(11)  Requirements for reporting pretreatment sludge disposal practices. 
(12)  Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the city to ensure compliance with this article and pretreatment requirements and standards. 
(13)  A statement of the civil and criminal penalties for violation and the possibility of incarceration for falsification of information. 
(e)  Change in conditions. In the event the type, quality, or volume of wastewater from the property for which a wastewater discharge permit was previously granted is expected to materially and substantially change as reasonably determined by the permittee or city, the permittee shall give thirty (30) days' notice in writing to the city and shall make a new application to the city. Prior to information previously submitted and unchanged need not be resubmitted by permittee. No permittee shall materially and substantially change the type, quality, or volume of its wastewater beyond that allowed by its permit without prior approval of the city. 
(f)  Duration. Wastewater discharge permits shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five (5) years. The permittee shall file an application for renewal of its permit at least ninety (90) days prior to expiration of the user's permit. The industrial user shall apply, on a form provided by the POTW, for reissuance of the permit. Upon reissuance, any applicable provisions of the wastewater discharge permit shall be incorporated as conditions of the new wastewater discharge permit. The terms and conditions of the permit may be subject to modification by the city during the term of the permit as limitations or requirements as identified in section 18-64 are modified or other just cause exists. The significant user shall be informed of any proposed changes in its permit at least thirty (30) days prior to the effective date of change. Where any changes are made in the significant user's permit, a reasonable time shall be given to achieve compliance. 
(g)  Transfer. Wastewater discharge permits are issued to a specific significant user for the process activity specified in the permit. A wastewater discharge permit shall not be assigned, transferred or sold to a new owner or new user in different premises or to a new change operation in the same or different premises without the approval of the city. If the premises are sold or otherwise transferred by the permittee to a new owner who will maintain the operation in the same premises, then the permit held by the seller shall be reissued by the city to the new owner as a temporary permit; provided, that the new owner shall immediately apply for a new permit in accordance with this article; and further provided, that the temporary permit shall only be effective for ninety (90) days after the date of sale or transfer. The city shall have the same remedies for violation of temporary permits as it has for violation of other discharge permits. 
(Ord. No. 2895, § 4, 5-1-95; Ord. No. 2930, § 8, 9-5-95)  
Sec. 18-65.3. - Same—Denial; appeal procedure. 
(a)  No discharge permit shall be issued by the city to any person whose discharge of material to sewers, whether shown upon his application or determined after inspection and testing conducted by the city, is not in conformity with city ordinances and regulations, or whose application is incomplete or does not comply with the requirements of section 18-65.2(b) or (c) as applicable. The city shall state the reason or reasons for denial in writing, which shall be mailed or personally delivered to the applicant within ten (10) days after denial. 
(b)  If the application is denied by the city, the industrial user may obtain review of the denial by the city council, provided that the industrial user shall give written notice of this request therefor within thirty (30) days after receipt of such denial. The city council shall review the permit application, the written denial and such other evidence, written and oral, and matters as the applicant and city administrator shall present. The decision of the city council shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 2895, § 4, 5-1-95)  
Sec. 18-65.4. - Same—Reporting requirements for permittee. 
(a)  Compliance date report. Within ninety (90) days following the date for final compliance with applicable pretreatment standards, or in the use of a new source, within forty-five (45) days following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user subject to pretreatment standards shall submit to the city a report, on forms provided by the city, indicating the nature and concentration of all pollutants in the discharge from the regulated process which are limited by pretreatment standards and the average and maximum daily flow for these process units in the user facility which are limited by such pretreatment standards. The report shall state whether the applicable pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis; and, if not, what additional user operation and maintenance or pretreatment techniques or installations are necessary to bring the user into compliance with the applicable pretreatment standards. This statement shall be signed by an authorized representative of the industrial user or a corporate officer. 
Baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance with categorical deadlines (ninety-day compliance reports), and periodic compliance reports must be signed by a responsible corporate officer (president, secretary, treasurer, vice-president or a person who performs similar policy making decisions), plant manager, superintendent, partner, general proprietor, or a duly authorized representative designated in writing by a person in responsible charge, and contain the following certification: 
"I certify, under penalty of law, that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations." 
(b)  Periodic compliance reports: 
(1)  Any user, categorical or noncategorical, subject to an applicable pretreatment standard, after the compliance date of such applicable pretreatment standard or, in the case of a new source, after discharge of wastewater to the POTW begins, shall submit to the city on or before the twentieth day of the months of July and January for the preceding two (2) calendar quarters a certified report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the effluent which are limited by such applicable pretreatment standards. In addition, this report shall include a record of measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period. 
(2)  At the discretion of the city, this report shall also include concentrations of BOD/COD/TSS or other pollutants specified by the city. Permittee shall sample and analyze its wastewater for BOD/COD/TSS or other pollutants at the discretion of the city as set forth in the permit issued to permittee. 
(3)  At the discretion of the city and in consideration of such factors as a local high or low flow rate, holidays, budget cycles, the city may agree to alter the months during which the above reports are submitted. 
(4)  The POTW may alter the reporting requirements via the industrial user permit should additional wastestream constituents be determined by the superintendent to be parameters of concern on a case-by-case basis. 
(c)  All industrial users that generate sludges from a pretreatment facility shall be required to submit a report to the POTW which will describe the sludge disposal methods of the industrial user. The report shall state the volume of sludge produced on a daily basis, whether it is on a dry or wet basis, the ultimate method and location of the sludge disposal and the permit number authorizing the disposal. The report shall be submitted with the periodic compliance report unless directed otherwise by the POTW. 
(Ord. No. 2895, § 4, 5-1-95; Ord. No. 2930, § 9, 9-5-95)  
Sec. 18-65.5. - Monitoring facilities. 
(a)  All significant users shall provide and operate at the user's own expense monitoring facilities to allow inspection, sampling, and flow measurement of the building sewer or internal drainage systems. Such monitoring facilities shall be provided at the end of a process and/or at the end of the pretreatment as required for industrial users subject to categorical standards. Pollutant concentrations and other prohibitions will be monitored at the end of the pipe. The monitoring facility will normally be situated on the user's premises but the city may, when such a location would be impractical or cause undue hardship to the user, allow the facility to be constructed in the public street or sidewalk area and located so that it will not be obstructed by landscaping, parked vehicles, or other activities of the user. 
(b)  Whenever required by permit, any significant user shall install a large manhole or sampling chamber for each separate discharge in the building sewer in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the city, installed and maintained at all times at user's expense, which shall have ample room in each sampling chamber to permit the city to take accurate composite samples for analysis. The chamber shall be safely, easily, and independently accessible to authorized representatives of the city twenty-four (24) hours per day, seven (7) days per week. 
(1)  Each sampling chamber shall contain a Palmer-Bowlus, Parshall flume or equivalent unless a weir or similar device is approved by the city with a recording, indicating, and totalizing register for measurement of the liquid quantity or, at the discretion of the city, the metered water supply to the industrial plant may be used as the liquid quantity where it is substantial to the city that the metered water supply and waste quantities are approximately the same, or where a measurable adjustment agreed to by the city is made in the metered water supply to determine the liquid waste quantity. 
(2)  Sampling shall be performed as required by the user's wastewater discharge permit. The city shall have the right to perform its own sampling at any reasonable time. 
(3)  The sampling chamber, metering device, and documentation of the frequency of sampling, sampling methods, and analyses of samples shall be subject, at any reasonable time, to inspection by the city. 
(c)  All measurements, tests, and analyses to which reference is made in this article shall be determined and performed in accordance with 40 CFR section 403.12(g), as amended from time to time. Where sampling and analytical techniques are not contained in said federal register reference, or are inappropriate for a pollutant, sampling and analyses should be performed using validated analytical methods as approved by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2895, § 4, 5-1-95)  
Sec. 18-65.6. - Inspection, sampling and records keeping. 
(a)  The city may inspect the facilities of all industrial users and/or require the completion of an industrial survey form provided by the city to ascertain whether the purposes of this article are being met and if all requirements of the article are being complied with. Persons or occupants of premises in which a discharge source or treatment system is located or in which records are kept shall allow the city or its representative ready access upon presentation of credentials to all parts of said premises where wastewater is generated or chemicals are stored for the purpose of inspection, sampling, examination, and photocopying of records required to be kept by this article, and in the performance of any of their duties. The city shall have the right to set up on the user's property such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling, monitoring, and metering operations of wastewater and sludges. Where a user has security measures in force which would require suitable identification [sic] necessary arrangements with their security guards so that upon presentation of suitable identification, personnel from the city shall be permitted to enter immediately for the purposes of performing their specific responsibilities. Such arrangements shall be made by users with their security guards within thirty (30) days of the passage of this article. 
(b)  The city and industrial users shall maintain records of all information resulting from any monitoring activities required by this article and, in the case of industrial users, shall include: 
(1)  The date, exact place, method, and time of sampling and the names of the person or persons taking the samples; 
(2)  The dates analyses were performed; 
(3)  Who performed the analyses; 
(4)  The analytical techniques/methods uses; and 
(5)  The results of such analyses. 
(c)  The city and industrial users shall maintain such records for a minimum of three (3) years. This period of retention shall be extended during the course of any unresolved litigation regarding the discharge of pollutants by the industrial user or operation of the city pretreatment program or when requested by the USEPA regional administrator or the director of IEPA. 
(Ord. No. 2895, § 4, 5-1-95)  
Sec. 18-65.7. - Confidential information. 
(a)  Information and data relating to an industrial user obtained from reports, questionnaires, permit applications, permits and monitoring programs and from inspections shall be available to the public or other governmental agencies without restriction unless the user specifically requests, and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city, that the release of such information would divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets of the user. All effluent data shall be available to the public without restrictions. 
(b)  When requested by the person furnishing a report, and until such time as the city determines that the requested information is not entitled to confidential treatment, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public, but shall be made available upon written request to governmental agencies for uses related to this article, the national pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) permit, and for use by the state or any state agency in judicial review or enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. 
(c)  Information and date provided to the city which is effluent data shall be available to the public without restriction. 
(d)  The city shall implement measures to prevent the negligent release of confidential information; however, neither the city nor its employees shall be held legally responsible for release of information if they have acted in good faith. 
(Ord. No. 2895, § 4, 5-1-95)  
Sec. 18-66. - Grease, oil and sand interceptors. 
Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the city, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts or any flammable wastes, sand, or other harmful ingredients, except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the City of West Chicago and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. 
(Ord. No. 2895, § 4, 5-1-95)  
Sec. 18-67. - Reserved.  
Sec. 18-67.1. - Enforcement procedures and penalties—Public notification of significant violators. 
The city shall annually publish in the largest local newspaper published in the city a list of industrial users who were in significant noncompliance with pretreatment requirements or standards during the previous twelve (12) months. The notification shall also summarize any enforcement actions taken against the industrial user(s) during the same twelve (12) months. 
(Ord. No. 2895, § 4, 5-1-95)  
Sec. 18-67.2. - Same—Compulsory compliance procedures. 
(a)  Notice of violation and compliance meeting. Should a violation of this article by a user occur, the city shall notify the offending user, in writing, through a "notice of violation" as to the particulars of such violation or violations and set a time and place for a meeting (hereinafter called a "compliance meeting") to be attended by representatives of the city and the user. The purpose of such a meeting shall be to establish such procedures, investigations, studies and compliance measures as the city deems necessary and desirable to control and prevent violation of this article. The user shall cooperate fully with the city in making such investigations and studies. 
(b)  Compliance directive: 
(1)  Following the completion of any procedures, investigations studies as described in section 18-67.2(a) above, the city may issue a compliance directive directing and requiring the user to take such action as may be required to control and prevent violations of the article. 
(2)  If the city has sufficient information at the time of the compliance meeting to determine necessary and desirable compliance measures, it may, at the time of the compliance meeting, issue a compliance directive, directing and requiring the user to take such action, including pretreatment, without further investigation of study. 
(3)  Failure to comply with the compliance directive of the city shall be deemed a violation of the provisions of this article and may be grounds for revocation of the user's wastewater discharge permit and/or grounds for such other actions as may be authorized for violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2895, § 4, 5-1-95)  
Sec. 18-67.3. - Same—Revocation of permit. 
(a)  Conditions for revocation. Any user who violates this article, its permit, the Illinois Environmental Protection Act or the federal act, or regulations promulgated under either act, or any of the following, is subject to having the permit revoked in accordance with the procedure of this section: 
(1)  Failure of a user to factually report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of its discharge as determined by the user's or city analysis. 
(2)  Failure of the user to report significant changes in process activity or wastewater constituents and characteristics. 
(3)  Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises by city representatives for the purpose of inspection or monitoring. 
(4)  Tampering with, disrupting, or destroying city equipment. 
(5)  Failure to report an accidental discharge of a pollutant. 
(6)  Failure to report an upset or user's treatment facilities. 
(7)  Violations of conditions of the permit. 
(b)  Procedures for revocation: 
(1)  The city may order any user who causes or allows any action which is subject to revocation under section 18-67.3(a) above to show cause before the city council or its designee why its permit should not be revoked. A notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and place of hearing to be held by the city council or its designee regarding the violation, the reasons why the action is to be taken, the proposed action, and directing the user to show cause before the city council or its designee why its permit should not be revoked. The notice of the hearing shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, at least ten (10) days before the hearing. Service may be made on any agent or office of the corporation. 
(2)  The city council or its designee may conduct the hearing and take the evidence and may: 
a.  Issue notices of hearings requesting the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of evidence relevant to any matter involved in such hearing. 
b.  Transmit a report of the evidence and hearing, including transcripts and other evidence, together with recommendations to the city council or its designee for action thereon. 
(3)  At any hearing held pursuant to this article, testimony taken must be under oath and recorded stenographically. The transcript, so recorded, will be made available to any member of the public or any party to the hearing upon payment of the usual copying charges thereof. 
(4)  After the city council or its designee has reviewed the evidence, it may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge directing either: 
a.  That the discharge permit be revoked and the service be disconnected, or 
b.  That following a specified time, the permit shall be revoked and sewer service discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices or other related appurtenances have been installed and operated properly to comply with the discharge permit; or 
c.  Direct the user to cease the unauthorized discharge effective after a specified period of time; or 
d.  That such other relief as deemed necessary by the city council or its designee to abate the discharge be granted. Further orders and directives as are necessary may be issued. 
(5)  Following an order of revocation, the user shall cease discharging to the city POTW. Failure to do so shall be evidence of continuing harm to city and provide grounds for the granting of injunctive relief or temporary restraining orders. 
(Ord. No. 2895, § 4, 5-1-95)  
Sec. 18-67.4. - Same—Order to show cause regarding disconnection. 
The city may, upon discovering an ongoing or potential discharge of pollutant to the city POTW which presents or may present a danger to the environment or which threatens to interfere with the operation of the POTW, immediately issue and order to the user to show cause before the city council or its designee why the city should not disconnect service, revoke the wastewater discharge permit or seek injunctive relief to prohibit the discharger from making the discharge. Procedures to be followed by the city council or its designee in said show cause hearing shall be in accordance with section 18-67.3(b) of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2895, § 4, 5-1-95)  
Sec. 18-67.5. - Same—Immediate disconnection of service. 
(a)  Conditions for immediate disconnection of service. Any user is subject to immediate disconnection of service under either of the following conditions: 
(1)  Whenever immediate disconnection is required to halt or prevent any discharge of pollutants to the POTW which reasonably appears to the city to present an imminent endangerment to the health or welfare of persons; or 
(2)  Whenever the user's wastewater permit is revoked. 
(b)  Procedures for immediate disconnection. Notwithstanding sections 18-67.2, 18-67.3, or 18-67.4, the city engineer shall have the authority, after informal notice to the user, to immediately and effectively halt or prevent any discharge of pollutants to the POTW that reasonably appear to present an imminent endangerment to the health or welfare of persons. When the city engineer determines that such an emergency situation exists, he shall issue a verbal order (followed immediately by a written order) to the user stating the problem and requiring immediate cessation of the discharge. The city engineer's actions may include disconnection of wastewater collection service. The city engineer shall obtain the concurrence of the city attorney before initiating action. Methods of informal notice shall include, but not be limited to, any of the following: personal conversation between user and city employees, telephone calls, letters, hand-delivered messages or notices posted at the user's premises or point of discharge. 
(Ord. No. 2895, § 4, 5-1-95)  
Sec. 18-67.6. - Same—Elimination of discharge/reinstatement. 
Any user notified of a disconnection of wastewater treatment service under section 18-67.4 or 18-67.5 and/or revocation of its wastewater discharge permit shall immediately stop or eliminate the discharge. In the event of a failure of the user to comply voluntarily with the disconnection or revocation order, the city shall take such steps deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW system or danger to any individuals. The city engineer shall reinstate the discharge permit and/or the wastewater treatment service upon proof of the elimination of the noncomplying discharge. 
(Ord. No. 2895, § 4, 5-1-95)  
Sec. 18-67.7. - Same—Injunctive relief. 
(a)  The city may institute a civil action for an injunction to restrain violations of this article. 
(b)  The city may, upon discovering an ongoing or potential discharge of pollutants to the city POTW which reasonably appears to present an imminent danger to the health or welfare of persons, seek and obtain from the circuit court of DuPage County a temporary restraining order or preliminary injunction to halt or prohibit such discharge. Prior to the filing of such petition, the user shall be given informal notice of city intention to file such action. Methods of informal notice shall include, but not be limited to, any of the following: personal conversation between discharger and city employees, telephone calls, letters, hand-delivered messages or notices posted at the users premises or point of discharge. Personal contact between city personnel and the discharger shall be attempted, but shall not be condition precedent to city petitioning for and obtaining a temporary restraining order. 
(Ord. No. 2895, § 4, 5-1-95)  
Sec. 18-67.8. - Additional remedies. 
(a)  In addition to remedies available to the city set forth elsewhere in this article, if the city is fined by the state or USEPA for violation of the city NPDES permit or violation of water quality standards as the result of a discharge of pollutants, then the fine, including all city legal, sampling, analytical testing costs and any other related costs, shall be charged to the responsible user. Such charge shall be in addition to, and not in lieu of, any other remedies the city may have under this article, statutes, regulations, at law or equity. 
(b)  If the discharge from any user causes a deposit, obstruction, or damage to any of the city wastewater facilities, the city engineer shall cause the deposit or obstruction to be promptly removed or cause the damage to be promptly repaired. The cost for such work, including materials, labor, and supervision, shall be borne by the user causing such deposit, obstruction, or damage. 
(c)  The remedies provided in this article shall not be exclusive and the city may seek whatever other remedies are authorized by statutes, at law or equity against any person violating the provisions of this article. 
(d)  In addition to any fine levied under sections 18-67.9 and 18-67.10, the city may, where the circumstances of the particular case so dictate, seek injunctive relief to prohibit the user from discharging into the sanitary sewer system or to provide such other affirmative relief as may be appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 2895, § 4, 5-1-95)  
Sec. 18-67.9. - Penalties and costs. 
Any user who is found to have violated an order of the city or who has failed to comply with any provision of this article and the orders, rules and regulations and permits hereunder shall be fined in an amount of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each violation in accordance with the terms and provisions of the Illinois Municipal Code (Illinois Revised Statutes chapter 124, section 11-121-1 et seq). For the purpose of this section, each day in which any such violation shall occur shall be deemed a separate violation, and a separate violation shall be deemed to have occurred for each constituent which has limitation listed in this article found to exceed the limits established in this article during any such day. In addition to the penalties provided herein, the city may recover reasonable attorney's fees, court costs, court report fees, and other expenses of litigation by appropriate suit at law against the user found to have violated this article or the orders, rules, regulations, and permits issued hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 2895, § 4, 5-1-95)  
Sec. 18-67.10. - Falsification. 
Any person who knowingly makes any false statement, representation or certification in any application, record, report, plan or other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this article or wastewater discharge permit, or who falsifies, tampers with or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this article, shall be subject to the penalties and costs provided in section 18-67.9 and shall in addition be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and/or shall be incarcerated in a penal institution other than the penitentiary for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days. 
(Ord. No. 2895, § 4, 5-1-95)  
Sec. 18-68. - Service charges—Basis for wastewater service charges. 
The wastewater service charges for the use of, and for the service supplied by, the wastewater facilities of the city shall consist of the sum of the following components: 
(a)  Billing charge. The billing charge shall apply to all customers of the system to recover the costs of bill preparation and mailing. 
(b)  Basic sewer charge: 
(1)  The basic sewer charge shall be based on water usage as recorded by water meters and/or sewage meters for the purpose of paying the cost associated with the operation, maintenance and replacement of the system. The basic sewer charge will be applicable for wastes having the following average strength waste characteristics: 
a.  A five-day, twenty-degree centigrade biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) of two hundred (200) mg/l; 
b.  A suspended solids (TSS) content of two hundred twenty (220) mg/l; 
c.  An ammonia-nitrogen (NH3-N) content of fifteen (15) mg/l based one hundred (100) gpcpd. 
(c)  Pretreatment charge. The pretreatment charge shall apply to all nonresidential users of wastewater service to cover the costs of the pretreatment program. 
(d)  Surcharge. Where applicable as defined in section 18-69, a surcharge will be levied to all users whose discharges exceed the design concentrations for BOD (two hundred (200) mg/l), TSS (two hundred twenty (220) mg/l), or NH3-N (fifteen (15) mg/l). The surcharge will be based on metered sewage flow for all wastes that exceed one (1) or more of these concentrations. 
(Ord. No. 05-O-0009, § 1, 3-7-2005)  
Sec. 18-68.1. - Same—Measure of flow. 
The volume of flow used for computing the basic sewer charge and surcharge shall be the metered water consumption read to the lowest even increments of one hundred (100) cubic feet or one thousand (1,000) gallons. 
(1)  If the user or other dischargers (industrial, commercial, etc.,) discharging wastes into the public sewers procure any part, or all, of their water from sources other than the public waterworks system, all or a part of which is discharged into the public sewers, the user shall, if directed by the city, install and maintain, at their expense, water meters of a type approved by the city for the purpose of determining the volume of water obtained from these other sources. 
(2)  Metering devices for measuring the volume of waste discharged may be required by the city if these volumes cannot otherwise be determined from the metered water consumption records. 
(3)  Metering devices for determining the volume of waste discharged into the public sewers shall be installed, owned, and maintained by the owner or user following approval and installation, such meters may not be removed without the consent of the director of public works. 
(Ord. No. 05-O-0009, § 1, 3-7-2005; Ord. No. 12-O-0010, § 3, 5-7-2012)  
Sec. 18-68.2. - Billing charge. 
A billing charge of four dollars ($4.00) shall be applied to all users served. 
(Ord. No. 05-O-0009, § 1, 3-7-2005; Ord. No. 08-O0006, § 1, 2-4-2008, eff. 5-1-2008; Ord. No. 19-O-0018, § 2, 5-20-2019)  
Sec. 18-68.3. - Basic sewer charge. 
A basic sewer charge shall be applied based upon metered consumption of water in the amount of four dollars and eighty-two cents ($4.82) per one hundred (100) cubic feet or six dollars and forty-five cents ($6.45) per one thousand (1,000) gallons effective August 1, 2019. These amounts will increase to five dollars and twenty-four cents ($5.24) per one hundred (100) cubic feet or seven dollars and no cents ($7.00) per one thousand (1,000) gallons effective August 1, 2020. 
(Ord. No. 05-O-0009, § 1, 3-7-2005; Ord. No. 07-O-0019, § 4, 3-19-2007; Ord. No. 08-O0006, § 2, 2-4-2008, eff. 5-1-2008; Ord. No. 12-O-0010, § 4, 5-7-2012; Ord. No. 19-O-0018, § 3, 5-20-2019)  
Sec. 18-68.4. - Same—Nonmetered service. 
All nonmetered users of the wastewater facilities shall pay a minimum flat rate charge of fifty-two dollars ($52.00) per quarter adequate to cover the cost of the billing charge and the basic sewer charge. Such flat rate charge is based on the assumption that each nonmetered user generates not more than twenty (20) CCF, or 14.96 KGAL, of domestic wastes every two (2) months. In the event use of wastewater facilities is determined by the city to be in excess of twenty (20) CCF, or 14.96 KGAL, domestic wastes every two (2) months, the city may require such nonmetered user to install city-approved metering devices on the water supply or sewer main to measure the amount of service supplied. The installation costs and maintenance of meters shall be the responsibility of the user, if a sewer meter is used." 
(Ord. No. 05-O-0009, § 1, 3-7-2005; Ord. No. 12-O-0010, § 5, 5-7-2012)  
Sec. 18-68.5. - Pretreatment charge. 
The pretreatment charge to all nonresidential users of wastewater services based upon metered consumption of water shall be nineteen cents ($0.19) per one hundred (100) cubic feet or twenty-six cents ($0.26) per one thousand (1,000) gallons of flow billed effective August 1, 2019. These amounts will increase to twenty-two cents ($0.22) per hundred (100) cubic feet or thirty cents ($0.30) per one thousand (1,000) gallons effective August 1, 2020. 
(Ord. No. 05-O-0009, § 1, 3-7-2005; Ord. No. 12-O-0010, § 6, 5-7-2012; Ord. No. 19-O-0018, § 4, 5-20-2019)  
Sec. 18-69. - Surcharge rate. 
In the event use of the wastewater facilities by nonresidential users is determined by the city to include wastes that exceed design concentrations of average strength domestic waste, the user shall pay a surcharge plus the cost of sampling at twenty dollars ($20.00) per sample. The surcharge per user shall be computed by the following formula: 
	S 	= 	V(0.0062) [A(BOD5 - 200) + B(TSS - 220) + C(NH3—N)— 15] 
			
  Where: 			
			
	S 	= 	Amount of surcharge 
	V 	= 	Wastewater volume in one hundred-cubic feet or one thousand-gallons 
	(0.0062) 	= 	Unit weight of water × 10-6 per one hundred cubic feet 
	(0.00834) 	= 	Unit weight of water x 10-6 per one thousand gallons 
	A 	= 	Unit charge for BOD5 per pound is determined annually 
	BOD5 	= 	Five-day biochemical oxygen demand, mg/l or other oxygen demand if the superintendent determines that BOD does not accurately reflect the characteristics of the waste 
	200 	= 	Allowable BOD5 strength 
	B 	= 	Unit charge for TSS per pound is determined annually 
	220 	= 	Allowable TSS, mg/l 
	C 	= 	Unit charge per pound of NH3-N is determined annually 
	NH3-N 	= 	Ammonia nitrogen oxygen demand, mg/l 
 
The concentration of wastes discharged in excess of average strength wastes shall be used for computing surcharges and shall be established by sewage flow or water metered, and waste sampling. Waste sampling and testing by an approved laboratory shall be completed by the discharger as often as may be deemed necessary by the director of public works and shall be binding as a basis for surcharge. 
(Ord. No. 05-O-0009, § 1, 3-7-2005; Ord. No. 12-O-0010, § 7, 5-7-2012)  
Sec. 18-70. - Measurement of industrial waste flow and strength. 
(a)  Generally. Significant users within ninety (90) days of the date of notification by the city shall install and maintain at their expense acceptable water meters or flow metering devices and samplers and manholes as required to determine waste characteristics discharged to the public waters. 
(b)  Flow metering devices. Flow metering devices, installed in monitoring manholes on service lines, will be required for measurement of the volume of waste discharged to the sewers when volumes cannot otherwise be determined from metered water consumption records. This determination shall be made by the city. 
(c)  Waste samplers. The user shall install and maintain waste samplers and hire an approved laboratory to complete waste testing when directed by the city. Waste sampling and testing shall be completed by the user as often as may be deemed necessary by the city. The city shall reserve the right to sample and test all users at any time and bill the users for all involved costs. 
(Ord. No. 05-O-0009, § 1, 3-7-2005)  
Sec. 18-71. - General provisions bills. 
The rates or charges for service shall be payable no more frequently than bimonthly. The owner of the premises, the occupant thereof and the user of the service shall be jointly and severally liable to pay for the service to such premises and the service is furnished to the premises by the city only upon the condition that the owner of the premises, occupant and user of the service are jointly and severally liable thereof to the city. 
(1)  All sewer bills are due and payable no more frequently than thirty (30) days after billing date. If the costs and charges, as set forth herein, are not paid by the billing due date indicated, the city has the right to seal off any sewer line or pipe connecting to the city sanitary sewer main from the user, from whom the costs and charges are due. A ten (10) percent late fee on the total amount due the city shall be assessed the user of such sanitary sewer line or pipe connection to the city sanitary sewer main if the charges are not paid by the billing due date. A past due notice and bill will be issued after the due date of the bill. The ten (10) percent late fee will be added to the bill. 
(2)  A shut-off notice will be physically posted at the service address within ten (10) days after the past due notice has been issued. If a shut-off notice is physically posted, a twenty-five dollar ($25.00) charge to offset the cost associated with physical posting will be assessed. 
(3)  The city has the right to set, from time to time, a fee to restore service in the event all delinquencies are paid to date and sewer service is re-requested. Such fee as is set forth by the city from time to time shall be payable prior to the resumption of sewer service. 
(4)  The city, by sealing off such sewer pipe, does not waive its right to collect the moneys due and owing it by legal action or otherwise. 
A service charge will be assessed for any customer payment that is returned to the city, for any reason, including insufficient funds. The city reserves the right to refuse future payment by check in the event that a payment is returned for any reason, including insufficient funds. 
(Ord. No. 05-O-0009, § 1, 3-7-2005; Ord. No. 18-O-0058, § 1, 12-3-2018)  
Secs. 18-72, 18-73. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 05-O-0009, § 1, adopted Mar. 7, 2005, deleted §§ 18-68—18-73, and enacted new provisions as set out herein. The former §§ 18-68—18-73 pertained to similar subject matter. For complete derivation see the Code Comparative Table at the end of this volume.  
Sec. 18-74. - Access to records. 
The United States Environmental Protection Agency or its authorized representative shall have access to any books, documents, papers and records of the city applicable to the city system of user charges for the purpose of making audit, examinations, excerpts, and transcriptions thereof to ensure compliance with the terms of the special and general conditions to any federal grant. 
(Ord. No. 2895, § 4, 5-1-95)  
Sec. 18-75. - Lien—Notice of delinquency. 
(a)  Whenever a bill for sewer service remains unpaid for ninety (90) days after billing date, for quarterly service, the city administrator may file with the county recorder of deeds a statement of lien claim. This statement shall contain the legal description of the premises served, the amount of the unpaid bill, and a notice that the city claims a lien for this amount as well as for all charges subsequent to the period covered by the bill. 
(b)  If the user whose bill is unpaid is not the owner of the premises and the city administrator has notice of this, notice shall be mailed to the owner of the premises, if his address be known to the administrator, whenever such bill remains unpaid for ninety (90) days after billing date for a quarterly bill. 
(c)  The failure of the city administrator to record such lien or to mail such notice of the failure of the owner to receive such notice shall not affect the right to foreclose the lien for unpaid bills as mentioned in the foregoing section or to discontinue service by shutting off the water supply. 
(Ord. No. 2895, § 4, 5-1-95)  
Sec. 18-76. - Same—Foreclosure. 
Property subject to a lien for unpaid charges shall be sold for nonpayment of the same, and the proceeds of the sale shall be applied to pay the charges, after deducting costs, as is the case in the foreclosure of statutory liens. Such foreclosure shall be by bill in equity in the name of the city. The city attorney is hereby authorized and directed to institute such proceedings in the name of the city in any court having jurisdiction over such matters against any property for which the bill has remained unpaid ninety (90) days after billing date, in the case of a quarterly bill. 
(Ord. No. 2895, § 4, 5-1-95)  
Sec. 18-77. - Revenues; water and sewerage fund. 
(a)  All revenues and moneys derived from the operation of the sewage system shall be deposited in the sewerage account of the combined water and sewerage fund. All such revenues and moneys shall be held by the city administrator separate and apart from his private funds and separate and apart from all other funds of the city. All funds without any deductions whatever shall be delivered to the city administrator not more than ten (10) days after receipt of the same, or at such more frequent intervals as may, from time to time, be directed by the mayor and city council. 
(b)  The city administrator shall receive all such revenues from the sewerage system and all other funds and moneys incident to the operation of such system as the same may be delivered to him and deposit the same in the amount of the fund designated as the water and sewerage fund of the city. The administrator shall administer such fund in every respect in the manner provided by statute of the Illinois Municipal Code, effective 1961, as amended. Revenues generated by the user charge system shall be set aside in a separate account and applied towards the payment of operation, maintenance and replacement expense of the treatment works. 
(Ord. No. 2895, § 4, 5-1-95)  
Sec. 18-78. - Accounts. 
The city administrator shall establish a proper system of accounts and shall keep proper books, records, and accounts in which complete and correct entries shall be made of all transactions relative to the sewerage system, and at regular annual intervals he shall cause to be made an audit by an independent auditing concern of the books and show the receipts and disbursements of the sewerage system. 
(Ord. No. 2895, § 4, 5-1-95; Ord. No. 18-O-0058, § 1, 12-3-2018)  
Sec. 18-79. - Notification of rates. 
The rates attributable to sewer treatment services shall be published on the city's website. 
(Ord. No. 2895, § 4, 5-1-95; Ord. No. 18-O-0058, § 1, 12-3-2018)  
Chapter 19 - ELECTRICITY AGGREGATION PROGRAM  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 13-O-0014, § 3, adopted March 4, 2013, set out provisions intended for use as §§ 19-1—19-5. To preserve the style of this Code, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included under a new Article I. 
 
Sec. 19-1. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings indicated, unless their context requires otherwise: 
"Act" shall mean the Illinois Power Agency Act, 20 ILCS 3855/1-92, as may be amended from time to time. 
"Customer" shall mean recipients of residential and small commercial retail electric loads as provided in the Act. 
"Electricity aggregation program" shall mean a program pursuant to the Act for the aggregation of residential and small commercial retail electric loads located within the corporate limits of the City of West Chicago that provides customers with the opportunity to opt out of participating in that program as provided in the Act. 
(Ord. No. 13-O-0014, § 3, 3-4-2013)  
Sec. 19-2. - Aggregation of electrical load. 
(a)  The corporate authorities of the City of West Chicago are authorized to operate an electricity aggregation program pursuant to the Act and for that purpose may solicit bids and enter into service agreements to facilitate the sale and purchase of electricity and related services and equipment for those loads aggregated pursuant to the electricity aggregation program as provided in the Act. 
(b)  The corporate authorities of the City of West Chicago may exercise the authority to operate the electricity aggregation program jointly with any other municipality or county and, in combination with two or more municipalities or counties, may initiate a process to jointly authorize the electricity aggregation program by a majority vote of each particular municipality or county as required by the Act. 
(Ord. No. 13-O-0014, § 3, 3-4-2013)  
Sec. 19-3. - Opt-out program. 
(a)  The electricity aggregation program shall operate as an opt-out program whereby customers who do not wish to participate in the electricity aggregation program may opt out pursuant to the Act. 
(b)  The city administrator or his designee, on behalf of the City of West Chicago, shall fully inform customers in advance, as provided in the Act, that customers have the right to opt-out of the electricity aggregation program. The disclosure provided to the customers shall comply with the requirements of the Act and shall prominently state all charges to be made and shall include full disclosure of the cost to obtain service pursuant to Section 16-103 of the Public Utilities Act, how to access service, and the fact that service under Section 16-103 of the Public Utilities Act, is available to customers without penalty if they are currently receiving service under Section 16-103 of the Public Utilities Act. 
(c)  Upon notification from any customer that the customer wishes to opt out of the electricity aggregation program, that customer shall be excluded from the electricity aggregation program. 
(d)  Except for those customers who opt out of the electricity aggregation program pursuant to this section 19-3 and the Act, the electricity aggregation program shall automatically apply for each person owning, occupying, controlling, or using an electrical load center proposed to be aggregated in the corporate limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 13-O-0014, § 3, 3-4-2013)  
Sec. 19-4. - Adoption of plan of operation and governance for the electricity aggregation program. 
(a)  The corporate authorities of the City of West Chicago, with the assistance from the Illinois Power Agency as required pursuant to the Act, shall develop and approve a plan of operation and governance for the electricity aggregation program. 
(b)  Before adopting the plan of operation required under section 19-4(a) and the Act, the corporate authorities shall hold at least two public hearings on the proposed plan. Before the first public hearing, the corporate authorities shall publish notice of the public hearings once a week for two consecutive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the City of West Chicago. The notice shall summarize the plan of operation and state the date, time, and location of each public hearing. 
(c)  The plan of operation and governance for the electricity aggregation program shall: 
(1)  Provide for universal access to all applicable residential customers and equitable treatment of applicable residential customers, and 
(2)  Describe demand management and energy efficiency services to be provided to each class of customers, and 
(3)  Meet any requirements established by law concerning aggregated service offered pursuant to the Act. 
(Ord. No. 13-O-0014, § 3, 3-4-2013)  
Sec. 19-5. - Solicitation of bids. 
The process for soliciting bids for electricity and other related services and awarding proposed agreements for the purchase of electricity and other related services for the electricity aggregation program shall be conducted pursuant to the Act. 
(Ord. No. 13-O-0014, § 3, 3-4-2013)  
APPENDIX A - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the city's zoning ordinance, as adopted by Ord. No. 2010, § 1, on Oct. 19, 1992. The former zoning ordinance, deriving from Ord. No. 1426, adopted June 4, 1979, was deleted in its entirety pursuant to § 1 of Ord. No. 2010. For a listing of amendments, please refer to the Code Comparative Table, beginning on page 1894. Amendments to the zoning ordinance are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original Ord. No. 2010. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
 
ARTICLE I. - TITLE 
This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the "Zoning Ordinance of the City of West Chicago, Illinois".  
ARTICLE II. - AUTHORITY 
This ordinance is prepared pursuant to authority conferred by Chapter 24 of the Illinois Revised Statutes, 1991 as amended.  
ARTICLE III. - PURPOSE 
 
3.1. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this zoning ordinance is to guide development in accordance with existing and future needs and in order to protect, promote and improve the public health, safety, morals, convenience, order, appearance, prosperity and the general welfare of the citizens of West Chicago. These regulations are made in accordance with the Comprehensive Plan. More specifically, this ordinance is intended to assist in achieving the following objectives: 
(A)  To encourage the development of buildings and uses on appropriate sites in order to maximize community-wide social and economic benefits while accommodating the particular needs of all residents, and to discourage development on inappropriate sites; 
(B)  To protect and enhance the character and stability of sound existing residential, commercial and industrial areas, and to gradually eliminate nonconforming uses and structures; 
(C)  To conserve and increase the value of taxable property throughout this municipality; 
(D)  To ensure the provision of adequate light, air and privacy for the occupants of all buildings; 
(E)  To provide adequate and well-designed parking and loading space for all buildings and uses, and to reduce vehicular congestion on the public streets and highways; 
(F)  To provide for efficient administration and fair enforcement of all regulations set forth herein; and 
(G)  To clearly and concisely explain the procedures for obtaining variances, special use permits, amendments and the like.  
ARTICLE IV. - DEFINITIONS 
 
4.1. - Construction of terms. 
In construing the intended meaning of terminology used in this ordinance, the following rules shall be observed: 
(A)  Words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them unless the context clearly indicates otherwise; terms not defined shall have their standard English dictionary meanings. 
(B)  Words denoting the masculine gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders. 
(C)  Words used in the present tense shall include the future tense. 
(D)  Words used in the singular number shall include the plural number; and the plural, the singular. 
(E)  The term "shall" is mandatory; the term "may" is discretionary. 
(F)  The term "this municipality" shall mean the City of West Chicago, Illinois. 
(G)  The words "lot," "parcel," "tract," "plot" and "site" shall be synonymous. (See definition of "plot.") 
(H)  The words "extend," "enlarge," and "expand" shall be synonymous. (See definition of "enlarge.") 
(I)  The words "abutting," "adjacent" and "contiguous" shall be synonymous. (See definition of "abutting.") 
(J)  References to sections shall be deemed to include all subsections within that section; but a reference to a particular subsection designates only that subsection. 
(K)  A general term that follows or is followed by enumerations of specific terms shall not be limited to the enumerated class unless expressly limited. 
Selected definitions: 
Abandoned: To give up one's rights or interests in property. 
Above ground service facility: An ancillary above ground structure, such as a cabinet, vault, tower, transformer, or other such similar equipment which has an above ground surface volume greater than twenty-four (24) cubic feet, a linear size greater than four (4) feet in any one dimension, or has a footprint in square feet greater than five (5) percent of the maximum lot coverage permitted for the lot on which the structure is located that is utilized by a public utility provider to provide a public utility. 
Abutting: Having a common lot line or district line. 
Access way: A curb cut, ramp, driveway or other means for providing vehicular access to an off-street parking or loading area. 
Accessory building/structure: A structure located on the same lot with the principal structure, detached or attached, and is subordinate and customarily incidental to the use of the principal structure. Accessory structures include, but are not limited to, detached garages, sheds, decks, and patios. 
Administrator: The official, or his/her representative, appointed in a manner set forth in the City Code. 
Adult bookstore and/or video store: An establishment having as a significant or substantial portion of its stock in trade books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, and/or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, tapes, records or other form of visual or audio representations which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult business use: Any commercial use of property of which a significant or substantial portion involves an activity distinguished or characterized by its emphasis on matters depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, including but not limited to the operation of an adult bookstore and/or video store, adult mini-motion picture theater, adult motion picture theater, adult motion picture arcade, adult motel, adult card, gift or novelty store, or adult entertainment cabaret. 
Adult card, gift, and/or novelty store: An establishment having as a significant or substantial portion of its stock in trade items, such as cards, games, articles of clothing and novelties which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult entertainment cabaret: A public or private establishment which, live or on motion pictures, features: 
(a)  Topless and/or bottomless dancers, strippers, and/or male or female impersonators; or 
(b)  Entertainers who not infrequently display specified anatomical areas; or 
(c)  Entertainers who by reason of their appearance or conduct perform in a manner which is designed primarily to appeal to the prurient interest of the patron or entertainers who engage in, or engage in explicit simulation of, specified sexual activities. 
Adult mini-motion picture theater: An enclosed building, or any portion or portions thereof, having a capacity from six (6) to fifty (50) persons, where, for any form of consideration (including a coin or token inserted into a coin or token operated projector, video screen, or other image producing device), patrons may view films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or similar photographic or electronic reproductions in which a significant or substantial portion of the total presentation time is devoted to the showing of materials that are distinguished by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult motel: A hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment which: 
(a)  Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration; provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other electronic or photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; and has a sign visible from the public right-of-way which advertises the availability of such transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic or electronic reproductions; or 
(b)  Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than eight (8) hours; or 
(c)  Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to sub-rent the room for a period of time that is less than eight (8) hours. 
Rent and sub-rent, when used in reference to an adult motel, shall mean the act of permitting a sleeping room to be occupied for any form of consideration. 
Adult motion picture arcade: An establishment in which electronic, electrical, or mechanical still or slide projectors, video screens, closed-circuit television transmissions or other image-producing devices operable by insertion of a coin or token or for other consideration are maintained for presentation of images to five (5) or fewer persons at a single time per such device and where the images presented are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult motion picture theater: An enclosed building with a capacity of fifty (50) or more persons where, for any form of consideration, patrons may view closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or similar electronic or photographic reproductions in which a significant or substantial portion of the total presentation time is devoted to the showing of materials that are distinguished by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Aisle: A vehicular traffic way within an off-street parking area, used as a means of access/egress from parking spaces. 
Alley: A public right-of-way which affords a secondary means of vehicular access to abutting premises that fronts on a nearby street. 
Alter: To change the size, shape or use of a structure. 
Amendment: A change in the provisions of this ordinance (including those portions incorporated by reference), properly effected in accordance with state law and the procedures set forth herein. 
Animal care facility: An animal control center or animal shelter, maintained by or under contract with any state, county, or municipality, whose mission and practice is, in whole, or significant part, the rescue and placement of animals in permanent homes or rescue organizations. 
Animal rescue organization: Any not-for-profit organization which has tax-exempt status under Section 501(c)(3) of the United States Internal Revenue Code, whose mission and practice is, in whole or in significant part, the rescue and placement of animals in permanent homes. This term does not include any entity, which is, or is housed on the premises of, a breeder or broker, obtains dogs from a breeder or broker in exchange for payment or compensation, or resells dogs obtained from a breeder or broker and provides payment or compensation to such breeder or broker. 
Annual. A plant that completes its life cycle in one (1) year. 
Appeal: A procedure whereby any person aggrieved by any decision or order of the administrator in any matter related to the interpretation or enforcement of this ordinance may seek relief from the plan commission/zoning board of appeals. 
Asphaltic concrete: A mixture of petroleum by-products and gravel used for paving to form a smooth, permanent surface. "Asphaltic concrete" does not mean "oil and chip." 
Attached: As applied to buildings, "attached" means having a common wall and/or a common roof. 
Automobile: A type of motor vehicle whose principal use is the transportation of passengers and has a gross vehicle weight of less than or equal to 10,000 pounds. 
Awning: Any roof-like structure made of cloth, metal or other material attached to a building and erected over a window, doorway, etc. in such a manner as to permit its being raised or retracted to a position against the building when not in use. 
Balcony: A platform that projects from the exterior wall of a building above the ground floor, is exposed to the open air and has direct access to the interior of the building, that is not supported by posts or columns extending to the ground. A balcony that is enclosed is considered an addition to the principal structure. 
Banks and financial institution: An establishment for receiving, keeping, lending or issuing money at or near the prime interest rate. 
Banquet hall: A business whose primary activity is catering prearranged private events under the control of an individual or organization, including but not limited to, banquets, graduations, meetings, parties associated with service organizations, weddings, or similar events. 
Basement: A story having one-half (½) or more of its height below the average level of the adjoining ground. 
Bed and breakfast establishment: An owner-occupied residence providing short-term overnight accommodations available to the general public for compensation. Bed and breakfast establishments shall not include hotels, motels, rooming houses, lodging rooms, or food service establishments. 
Berm. An earthen mound designed to provide screening of undesirable views, noise reduction, etc. 
Billboard: Any single or double-faced street graphic that is permanently fixed or placed on particular premises and that is used for the display of messages or advertising not associated with the establishment located on said premises. A billboard typically has a provision for changing the message/advertising thereon. 
Block: An area of land entirely bounded by streets, highways, barriers or ways (except alleys, pedestrian ways or exterior boundaries of a subdivision unless exterior boundary is in street, highway or way), or bounded by a combination of streets, public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights-of-way, waterways or corporate boundary lines. 
Board of appeals: The board of zoning appeals of this municipality. 
Buffer. A combination of physical space and vertical elements, such as plants, berms, fences or walls, the purpose of which is to separate and screen conflicting land uses. 
Buffer strip: An area of land, undeveloped except for landscaping, fences, etc., used to protect a use situated on one (1) lot from the deleterious effects of the use on the adjacent lot. 
Building: Any covered structure permanently affixed to land and designed or used to shelter persons or chattels. 
Building height: The vertical distance measured from the average grade at the front wall of a building to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof or to the deck line of mansard roof, or to the mean height level between eaves and ridge for gable, hip or gambrel roofs. Chimneys, towers, cooling towers and similar projections (other than signs) shall not be included in calculating building height. 
Building line: The line nearest the front of and across a lot, delineating the minimum open space required between the front of a structure and the street right-of-way. 
Bulk: Any one (1) or any combination of the following structural or site design characteristics: 
(A)  Size and height of structure; 
(B)  Location of exterior walls at all levels in relation to lot lines, streets or other structures; 
(C)  Lot area; 
(D)  Yards or setbacks. 
Canopy: A roof-like structure similar to an awning, except that it cannot be raised or retracted to a position against the building. 
Carport: A roofed structure not completely enclosed by walls, the primary purpose of which is to provide shelter for motor vehicles. 
Centerline: 
(A)  The centerline of any right-of-way having a uniform width; 
(B)  The original centerline where a right-of-way has been widened irregularly; 
(C)  The new centerline whenever a road has been relocated. 
Changeable copy sign: A sign which has provision for changing the message thereon manually, mechanically, or electronically. 
Clinic: An establishment wherein licensed physicians or dentists practice medicine or dentistry but where overnight lodging for sick or injured persons is not provided. 
Club/lodge: A nonprofit association of persons who are bona fide members organized for some purpose(s) and paying regular dues and whose facilities are restricted to members and their guests; not including a group organized solely or primarily to render a service customarily carried on as a commercial enterprise. 
Commercial use/establishment: Any use or establishment wherein goods are purchased or sold whether to the consuming public (retail) or to other businesses (wholesale). 
Commercial vehicle: A vehicle designed for transportation of commodities, merchandise, produce, freight, animals, or passengers, and operated in conjunction with a business or home occupation. 
Community residence: A group home or specialized residential care home serving unrelated persons with disabilities which is licensed, certified or accredited by appropriate local, state or national bodies. Community residence does not include a residence which serves persons as an alternative to incarceration for a criminal offense, or persons whose primary reason for placement is substance or alcohol abuse or for treatment of a communicable disease. 
Comprehensive plan: The plan or any portion thereof adopted by this municipality to guide and coordinate the physical and economic development of the community. The comprehensive plan includes, but is not limited to, plans and programs regarding the location, character and extent of highways; bridges; public buildings or uses; utilities; schools; residential, commercial or industrial land uses; parks; drainage facilities; etc. 
Conforming: In compliance with the applicable provisions of this ordinance. 
Construction and demolition debris: Non-hazardous materials resulting from construction, remodeling, repair and demolition of structures, buildings, roads and utilities, which material shall include, but not be limited to, bricks, concrete, other masonry material, soil, rock, wood (including painted, treated and coated wood and wood products), wall coverings, drywall, plaster, plumbing fixtures, furniture, appliances, fixtures, non-asbestos insulation, roofing shingles, other roof coverings, asphalt pavement, glass, plastics, electrical wiring and components containing non-hazardous substances, piping, metals, rebar and cardboard. 
Construction and demolition debris recycling: The sorting, storing, stacking, separating, processing, handling, recycling, loading and unloading, and transferring of construction and demolition debris, which use shall include outside storage, including but not limited to, the storage of equipment, trucks, roll-off containers and boxes, and outside maintenance of trucks and equipment, and which activities may take place and be conducted outside of enclosed buildings. 
Construction sign: A temporary sign identifying the architects, contractors, developer, engineers, realtor, or any other related individual or firm involved with a project, and/or announcing the character of the project. 
Convenience store: A shopping establishment selling a limited stock of food and related items to the general public. A convenience store may be located in an automobile service station or may be freestanding. 
Corrective action order: A legally binding order issued by the administrator in accordance with the procedures set forth herein to effect compliance with this ordinance. 
Crematorium: A facility containing a furnace for reducing deceased human bodies to ashes by burning. 
Day care center: See "Nursery school," per state standards. 
Deciduous. A plant with foliage that is shed annually. 
Deck: An accessory structure that may be attached or unattached to the principal structure, which is open to the sky and provides a platform which is raised above the ground. 
Detached: As applied to buildings, "detached" means surrounded by yards on the same lot as the building. 
Develop: To erect any structure or to install any improvements on a tract of land or to undertake any activity (such as grading) in preparation therefor. 
Development identification sign: A freestanding sign, which by means of a symbol or name, identifies a subdivision, business park, or multiple-family complex. 
Deviation: A relaxation, by the city council, of the strict application of the requirements of (a) this Appendix A, in connection with the granting of a special use pursuant to section 5.5(C)(2) hereof, and (b) the subdivision regulations (Appendix B) in connection with the approval of planned unit developments pursuant to section 5.5(C)(1) hereof. 
Dimensions: Refers to lot depth, lot width and total lot area. 
Directional and informational signs: A sign erected for the convenience of the public, such as identifying entrances, exits, parking areas, no-parking areas, restrooms, public telephones, walkways and similar features or facilities. 
District, zoning: A portion of the territory of this municipality wherein certain uniform requirements or various combinations thereof apply to structures, lots and uses under the terms of this ordinance. 
Driveway: A minor way commonly providing vehicular access to garage or off-street parking area. Any hard surfaced area directly adjacent and parallel to a driveway shall be considered part of the driveway. 
Driveway, ribbon: A driveway that is made of two (2) parallel strips of pavement with a landscape strip in between. 
Drive-in restaurant: An establishment principally used for the sale of fast order food. Fast order food means food that is: 
(A)  Primarily intended for immediate consumption; 
(B)  Available after a short waiting time; and 
(C)  Packaged or presented in such a manner that it can be readily eaten outside the premises where it is sold. 
Drive-in theater: A tract of land developed with facilities for projecting motion pictures on an outdoor screen for viewing on the patrons' automobiles parked on the premises. 
Dwelling: A building or portion thereof designed or used primarily as living quarters for one (1) or more families, but not including hotels, motels or other accommodations for the transient public. 
Dwelling, multiple-family: A building or portion thereof containing three (3) or more dwelling units. 
Dwelling, single-family: A detached dwelling containing one (1) dwelling unit and intended for the occupancy of one (1) family. 
Dwelling, two-family: A dwelling containing two (2) dwelling units. 
Dwelling unit: One (1) or more rooms designed or used as living quarters by one (1) family. A "dwelling unit" always includes a bathroom and a kitchen. 
Easement: A right to use another person's real property for certain limited purposes. 
Enclosed: As applied to a building, "enclosed" means covered by a permanent roof and separated on all sides from adjacent open space or other buildings by fixed exterior walls with openings only for insect screens, windows and doors. 
Enlarge: To increase the size (floor area, height, etc.) of an existing principal structure or accessory use, or to devote more land to an existing use. 
Erect: To build, construct. 
Establishments: Either of the following: 
(A)  An institutional, business, commercial or industrial activity that is the sole occupant of one (1) or more buildings; or 
(B)  An institutional, business, commercial or industrial activity that occupies a portion of a building such that: 
(1)  The activity is a logical and separate entity from the other activities within the building and not a department of the whole; and 
(2)  The activity has either a separate entrance from the exterior of the building or a separate entrance from a common and clearly defined entryway that has direct access to the exterior of the building. 
Evergreen. A plant with foliage that persists and remains green throughout the year. 
Existing: Actually constructed or in operation on the effective date of this ordinance. 
Family: Either: (a) Two (2) or more persons, each related to the other by blood, marriage, or adoption, together with usual domestic servants and not more than one (1) bona fide guest, all living together as a single housekeeping unit and using common kitchen facilities (that is, a related family); or (b) four (4) or fewer persons, all of whom are not necessarily related to each of the others by blood, marriage, or adoption, all living together as a single housekeeping unit and using common kitchen facilities (that is, an unrelated family). For purposes of this zoning ordinance, however, an unrelated family shall not include persons living together in a community residence or nursing home. 
Fence. A structure used as a boundary, screen, separation, means of privacy, protection or confinement. 
Fence, decorative: That type of fence which is made of wood, iron or other similar material, excluding fences made of wire mesh and wire fabric (such as chain link), not exceeding more than four (4) feet in height and is essentially for decorative purposes only and whose sole intention is not to be used as an enclosure, barrier or means of protection or confinement. 
Fence, natural: That type of fence which consists of natural growth, such as shrubs, hedges, evergreens and the like, which are thirty (30) inches in height or more and/or spaced less than ten (10) feet apart. 
Fence, open. An open fence is one where visibility at right angles to any surface thereof is not reduced by more than fifty (50) percent. 
Fence, solid. A fence, including gates, which conceals open storage of materials and/or operations conducted behind fenced areas from view of adjoining properties. 
Fence, temporary: That type of fence that is intended to be non-permanent in nature by means of the type of fencing used, the method of its installation, or the limited duration of its use. 
Floor area, gross: The sum of the gross horizontal area of the several floors of a building, measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the center of the common walls of attached buildings. Gross floor area includes basement floors; attic floor space; halls, closets, stairwells; space devoted to mechanical equipment; and enclosed porches. 
Floor area ratio: (FAR) means the gross floor area of the building or buildings on the zoning lot divided by the area of such zoning lot; or in the case of a planned development, by the net site area. 
Flush-mounted sign: Any sign attached to or erected against any wall, awning, canopy or marquee with the exposed face of said sign in a plane approximately parallel to the place of the wall, etc. and not projecting more than eighteen (18) inches. 
Foundation, permanent: Means a closed perimeter formation consisting of materials such as concrete or concrete block which extends into the ground below the frost line. 
Freestanding sign: Any sign anchored to the ground or supported by two (2) or more posts, columns, or other vertical structures or supports, and not attached to or dependent for support from any building. 
Frontage: The linear extent of the lot abutting a public right-of-way or the linear extent of the lot abutting a public parking area if the lot has no frontage abutting a public right of way. 
Funeral establishment: A building or part thereof used for human funeral services, including chapels, embalming, autopsies, storage of caskets, funeral urns and other related funeral supplies, and the storage of funeral vehicles, but does not include facilities for cremation. 
Garage, private: Means an accessory building or an accessory portion of the principal building including a carport, which is intended for and used for storing the private passenger vehicles of the family or families residing upon the premises, and in which no business, service or industry connected with automobile vehicles is carried on. 
Gazebo: A detached accessory building consisting of a freestanding, covered, open-air structure designed for recreational use and not human habitation. A gazebo that is attached directly to the principal structure is considered an addition to the principal structure. 
Government facility: A building, structure or parcel of land owned and operated by a unit of government. 
Greenhouse, commercial. See "Nursery." 
Greenhouse, non-commercial. A building with transparent walls and roof, usually of glass, for the cultivation of plants under controlled conditions, not including on-site retail sale. 
Ground cover. A plant that grows near the ground densely and spreads. Generally an herbaceous perennial, sometimes a woody shrub or vine. 
Hazardous/noxious substance: Any solid, liquid, or gaseous matter including but not limited to gases, vapors, dusts, fumes, and mists containing properties that by chemical means are inherently harmful and likely to destroy life or impair health or capable of causing injury to the well-being of persons or damage to property. 
Health, fitness and exercise center: A primarily membership based facility where various types physical fitness activities are performed. Said facilities may also include ancillary uses for their patrons such as, but not limited to, fitness classes, locker rooms, saunas, salon, spa and day care. Said centers shall not include municipal or privately owned recreation centers or personal training and group exercise facilities. 
Hedgerow: A row of shrubs and/or trees that occur in a row, like a hedge. Sometimes purposely planted for wind control in agricultural areas. More commonly an area along a road or field boundary which, left uncut, has grown up with various plants, seeded by wind, water, birds or other natural methods. 
Hereafter: Any time after the effective date of this ordinance. 
Holiday sign: A temporary sign, in the nature of decorations, clearly customary and commonly associated with federal, state, local, or religious holiday and contains no commercial message. 
Home occupation: Any business, profession or occupation conducted for gain entirely within a dwelling or on residential premises. 
Hospital: An institution devoted, on an around-the-clock basis, to the maintenance and operation of facilities for the diagnosis, treatment or care of members of the general public suffering from disease, injury or other abnormal physical conditions. The term "hospital" as used in this ordinance includes sanitariums but excludes institutions operating solely for the treatment of insane persons, drug addicts and alcoholics, and convalescent/nursing homes. 
Household equipment: Any device designed for a commercial application but which is used for private purposes only (not for hire) which serves as an accessory purpose on a residential zoning lot including, but not limited to, snow removal equipment, lawn and garden equipment, and generators (not to exceed five thousand (5,000) watts). 
Institution: A facility that provides a public service and is operated by a federal, state, or local government, public or private utility, public or private school or college, public agency, religious organization, or tax exempt organization. 
Institutional sign: A freestanding or flush-mounted sign, which by symbol or name identifies a permitted institutional use and may also provide the announcement of services or activities to be held therein. 
Intensify: To increase the level or degree of use. 
Intersection: The point at which two (2) or more public rights-of-way (generally streets) meet. 
Junk yard: A tract of land, including any accessory structures thereon, that is used for buying, selling, exchanging, storing, baling, packing, disassembling or handling waste or scrap materials. Such scrap materials include vehicles, machinery and equipment not in operable condition (or parts thereof) and metals, glass, paper, plastics, rags and rubber tires. A lot on which three (3) or more inoperable vehicles are stored shall be deemed a junk yard. A "junk yard" includes an automobile wrecking yard. This definition does not apply to businesses or manufacture districts where vehicles are being stored awaiting repair. 
Kennel: Any structure or premises or portion thereof on which more than three (3) household domestic animals over four (4) months of age are kept. 
Landscape. An area of land including preserved natural vegetation on which have been located lawns, trees, shrubs, other plants, water areas and other features including, but not limited to, walks, signs, lighting, parking lots, patios, decorative walls and fences. 
Landscape architect. A professional who has graduated from an accredited university program in landscape architecture. 
Landscape designer. An individual with experience in landscape design. 
Landscape screen/buffer, full. Maximum landscape buffer between two (2) conflicting land uses. 
Landscape screen/buffer, partial. Selective landscape screening between similar land uses. 
Landscape yard. An area of ground required to be landscaped for the purpose of screening and buffering a development site. 
Large community residence: Large community residence means a community residence serving eight (8) to twenty (20) persons with disabilities. 
Light manufacturing: The assembly, fabrication or processing of goods and materials using processes that ordinarily do not create noise, smoke, fumes, odors, glare, or health or safety hazards, outside of the building or lot where such assembly, fabrication or processing takes place, where such processes are housed entirely within a building. Light manufacturing generally includes processing and fabrication of finished products predominantly from previously prepared materials and includes processes that do not require extensive floor areas or land areas. Light manufacturing shall not include any use that is otherwise listed specifically in any zoning district as a permitted or special use. 
Loading space: An off-street space used for the temporary parking of a commercial vehicle while loading or unloading merchandise or materials. 
Lot: A tract of land intended as a unit for the purpose (whether immediate or future) of transfer of ownership or development. A "lot" may or may not coincide with a "lot of record" or zoning lot. 
Lot, corner: A lot having at least two (2) adjacent sides that abut a street for their full length. 
Lot, reverse corner: A corner lot where the street side lot line is substantially a continuation of the front lot line of the first lot to its rear. 
Lot, through: A lot having a pair of approximately parallel lot lines that abut two (2) approximately parallel streets. Both such lot lines shall be deemed front lot lines. 
Lot area: The area of a horizontal plane bounded by the front, side, and rear lines of a lot. 
Lot coverage: The portion of a lot that is occupied by driveways, buildings and structures, including accessory buildings or structures such as detached garages, sheds, decks, patios and porches, but excluding walkways and swimming pools. The above items reduce the surface available for rainwater absorption. 
Lot depth: The average horizontal distance between the front line and the rear lot line of a lot. 
Lot line, corner side: A corner lot boundary abutting a street that is not deemed the front lot line. 
Lot line, front: The lot boundary abutting the street. For corner lots, the shortest lot boundary abutting one of the streets shall be deemed the front lot line. 
Lot line, rear: An interior lot line which is more distant from and most nearly parallel to the front lot line. 
Lot line, side: Any boundary of a lot which is not a front lot line, corner side lot line, or a rear lot line. 
Lot of record: A lot properly platted and recorded in the office of the DuPage County Recorder of Deeds. 
Lot size requirements: Refers to the lot area, width and depth requirements of the applicable district. 
Lot width: The mean horizontal width of a lot measured at right angles to the side lot lines measured at the building line. 
Lot, zoning: A single tract of land located within a single block, which (at the time of filing for a building permit) is designated by its owner or developer as a tract to be used, developed or built upon as a unit, under single ownership or control. Therefore, a zoning lot may or may not coincide with a lot of record. 
Maintenance: The routine upkeep of a structure, premises or equipment, including the replacement or modification of structural components to the extent necessary to keep said structure in sound condition. 
Marquee: Any permanent roof-like structure projecting beyond a building or extending along and projecting beyond the wall of the building, generally designed and constructed to provide protection from the weather. 
Massage: Any method of pressure on or friction against, or stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating or stimulating of the external soft parts of the body with the hands or with aid of any mechanical electrical apparatus or appliances with or without rubbing alcohol, liniments, antiseptics, oils, powder, creams, lotions, ointments or other similar preparations used in this practice, under such circumstances that it is reasonably expected that the person to whom treatment is provided, or some third party on such persons behalf, will pay money or give other consideration or any gratuity therefore. 
Massage establishment: Any establishment having a source of income or compensation derived from the practice of massage and which has a fixed place of business where any person, firm, association or corporate engages in or carries on any massage related activities. 
Message: A communication of identification or advertising information visually perceived. Said communication may consist of words, abbreviations, numbers, symbols, pictures, geometric shapes, etc. 
Mobile/portable signs: A term commonly used to mean any graphic not designed to be permanently or temporarily attached to a building or part thereof or to be anchored to the ground. Such graphics primarily include, but are not limited to, signs attached to wood or metal frames designed to be self-supporting and movable; paper, cardboard or canvas signs wrapped around supporting poles; hand-held signs; and signs on parked vehicles visible from the public right-of-way (except signs identifying the related business when the vehicle is being used in the normal day-to-day operation of the business). 
Motor vehicle: A self-powered machine which includes automobiles, recreational vehicles, trucks, motorcycles, buses and other street legal licensed vehicles designed for roadway use. 
Motor vehicle body shop: Any building or portion thereof, used for the repair or straightening of a motor vehicle body or frame, or painting of motor vehicles. Maintenance, service and engine repair may be performed as an ancillary function of the body work. 
Motor vehicle care center: Any building or portion thereof, designed for light maintenance and servicing of motor vehicles including tune-ups, oil changes, brakes, tire replacement and balancing, detailing, audio system and security installation, muffler replacement, transmission work and lubrication. 
Motor vehicle laundry: Any building or portion thereof, containing facilities for washing more than one (1) motor vehicle at any one (1) time, using production line methods with a chain conveyer, blower, steam cleaning device, or other mechanical devices; or providing space, water, equipment, or soap for the complete or partial hand-washing of such motor vehicles, whether by operator or by customer. 
Motor vehicle repair shop: Any building or portion thereof, used for the repair or replacement of engines, transmissions, differentials, drive trains, or any parts thereof, in addition to the replacement of parts, service and incidental repairs to motor vehicles, but not including any operations specified under motor vehicle body shop. 
Motor vehicle sales, internet based: Any building or portion thereof, and parcel of land where new and/or previously owned motor vehicles are sold to the general public via internet based sales only. Internet based motor vehicle sales may include limited service of motor vehicles, up to twenty-five (25) percent of the floor area of the building. Any motor vehicle on the premises for sale shall not be visible from the public right-of-way or be displayed in a manner that advertises that the vehicle is for sale. 
Motor vehicle sales, new: Any building or portion thereof, and parcel of land where new, from the factory motor vehicles are sold to the general public. New motor vehicle sales may include limited service on vehicles up to twenty-five (25) percent of the floor area of the building and used motor vehicle sales, up to twenty-five (25) percent of the new vehicle inventory. 
Motor vehicle sales, used: Any building or portion thereof, and parcel of land where previously owned motor vehicles are sold to the general public. Used motor vehicle sales may include limited service of motor vehicles. 
Motor vehicle service station: Any building or portion thereof, used for dispensing or sale of motor vehicle fuels, lubricating oil or grease, tires, batteries, or minor motor vehicle accessories. Services offered may include the installation of tires, car washing, batteries and minor accessories, minor motor vehicle repairs, and greasing of individual motor vehicles. All work must be done in an enclosed building. Motor vehicle service stations may also include as accessory uses, convenience stores and/or restaurant facilities. 
Motorcycle: A type of motor vehicle with three (3) wheels or less that is unenclosed and equipped with a saddle for the operator. 
Native plant. A plant which is known to have originated in and is characteristic of Illinois. 
Nonconforming: As applied to a lot of record, structure or, use, "nonconforming" means (1) lawfully existing on the effective date of this ordinance, but (2) not in compliance with the applicable provisions thereof. 
Nuisance: Any thing, condition or conduct that endangers health or unreasonably offends the senses or obstructs the free use and comfortable enjoyment of property or essentially interferes with the comfortable enjoyment of life. 
Nursery: A tract of land on which trees, shrubs and other plants are raised for transplanting and sale, and including any structure in which said activities are conducted. 
Nursery school: An establishment for the part-time care and/or instruction at any time of day of five (5) or more unrelated children of pre-elementary school age. 
Nursing home: A licensed public or private home or institute which provides maintenance, personal care, and nursing for three or more persons who by reason of physical illness or infirmity are incapable of maintaining a private, independent residence. 
Office: Any building or portion thereof in which the business (usually clerical and administrative affairs) of a commercial/service enterprise or professional person is transacted. 
Off-premises advertising sign: See "billboard." 
Ornamental tree. A deciduous tree planted primarily for specific decorative qualities of its foliage, blossom, fruit, bark, etc. May be any size at maturity but will tend to be smaller than a shade tree. 
Outside storage: That component of a facility that involves the permanent or continuous keeping, displaying, or storing, outside of a building, of any unfinished goods, materials, merchandise, equipment, or vehicles on a lot or tract for more than twenty-four (24) hours. Such activity shall include the storage of vehicles and vehicle parts, including detached truck trailers, though excluding employees' private passenger vehicles and registered vehicles in daily use. "Outside storage" does not apply to permanently affixed structures such as fuel tanks or to automobiles/motorcycles parked for sale or rental on automobile/motorcycle sales or rental lots. 
Parking area/lot, off-street: Land that is improved in accordance with this ordinance and used primarily for the storage of passenger motor vehicles, free of charge or for compensation. An "off-street parking area," depending on the circumstances of its use, may be either a principal use or an accessory use. 
Parkway. The publicly owned space between a property boundary and the street, generally planted with grass and street trees. 
Patio: An open, hard surfaced area entirely supported by the underlying soil or revised grade of the underlying soil and intended for outdoor sitting, dining, socializing, or recreational use by people." 
Pawn shop: Any premises, place, building or part of building in which a person carries on the business of taking goods and chattels and pays money for or advances money upon the same, with or under any undertaking, agreement or condition, express, implied or reasonably to be inferred from the nature or character of the dealing or the usage in respect thereof, that the said goods or chattels in whole or in part may be afterwards redeemed or repurchased upon any terms whatsoever. 
Perennial. A plant whose life cycle is more than two (2) years. 
Permitted use: Any use which is or may be lawfully established in a particular district(s), provided it conforms with all the requirements applicable to said district(s). 
Person: Any individual, firm, association, organization or corporate body. 
Person with a disability means any individual whose disability: 
(A)  Is attributable to mental, intellectual or physical impairments or a combination of mental, intellectual or physical impairments; and 
(B)  Is likely to continue for a significant amount of time indefinitely; or and 
(C)  Results in functional limitations in three (3) or more of the following areas of major life activities: 
(1)  Self care; 
(2)  Receptive or expressive language; 
(3)  Learning; 
(4)  Mobility; 
(5)  Self direction; 
(6)  Capacity for independent living; 
(7)  Economic self-sufficiency; and 
(D)  Reflects the person's need for a combination and sequence of special interdisciplinary or generic care; treatment or other services which are of a life-long or extended duration. 
Personal training and group exercise facility: A facility with an exercise based environment used exclusively for small group classes where a professional fitness trainer is directly involved in the prescription and instruction of an exercise regimen for each class. Said facilities shall not include municipal or privately owned recreation centers or health, fitness and exercise centers. 
Pet shop: A retail establishment which sells any or all of the following to the general public: pets, pet accessories, and pet supplies. Pet shops can house an accessory veterinary clinic and/or an accessory indoor grooming facility. No pet shop shall sell, deliver, offer for sale, barter, auction, give away, or otherwise transfer or dispose of cats or dogs. Nothing in this section shall prohibit pet stores from collaborating with animal care facilities or animal rescue organizations to offer space for such entities to showcase adoptable dogs and cats. 
Planned unit development: A tract of land which is planned as a whole for development under single ownership or control in accordance with the planned unit development ordinance, and which, by virtue of such unified planning and development, provides greater amenities, convenience or other benefits (especially open space) than would normally be had through the development of diverse smaller tracts under multiple ownership. A planned unit development may contain one (1) type of use or a variety of uses. 
Planning commission: The planning commission of this municipality. 
Plot: A parcel of land consisting of one (1) or more lots or portions thereof which is described by reference to a recorded plat or by metes and bounds. 
Porch: An open-sided structure covered by a roof or eaves that projects from the exterior wall of a building and that has direct access to an entrance of the building. A porch is considered an addition to the principal structure. 
Prairie. A grassland or meadow, usually with native plant species; or a planting of grasses and wildflowers characteristic of the native Illinois prairie. 
Premises: A lot and all the structures and uses thereon. 
Principal building/structure/use: The main structure erected on or the main use occupying a lot, as distinguished from an accessory (subordinate) structure or use. 
Projecting sign: Any sign which is supported by an exterior wall of a building or suspended beneath any awning, canopy or marquee with the exposed face of said sign in a place approximately perpendicular to the plane of the wall, etc., and projecting more than eighteen (18) inches. 
Property line: See "lot line." 
Property regulation sign: A sign such as no trespassing, no hunting, no fishing, etc. 
Public utility: Gas, steam, electricity, telecommunications, video services, stormwater drainage, or other similar service provided by underground, surface, or overhead means of conveyance to the public, excluding utilities provided from a government facility. 
Public utility provider: Any person, firm, corporation, board or commission duly authorized to furnish a public utility under governmental regulations to the public, excluding units of government. 
Reconstruct: As applied to nonconforming structures, "reconstruct" means to rebuild after partial or total destruction. 
Recreational vehicle: A type of vehicle used primarily for recreational pleasure. Examples include, but are not limited to the following: 
(a)  Travel trailer: A trailer designed to provide temporary living quarters for recreational, camping or travel use. 
(b)  Motor home: A motor vehicle that is designed as a mobile dwelling. 
(c)  Pickup camper: A removable enclosed structure that is designed to be mounted to a motor vehicle and used as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping or travel use. 
(d)  Snowmobile: A motor vehicle that is designed for travel on snow or ice. 
(e)  Watercraft: Any type of motor vehicle that is designed for travel on water. 
Refuse: Garbage (food wastes) and trash, but not sewage or industrial wastes. 
Relocate: To move a street graphic to another portion of the premises or to different premises. 
Replace: To substitute a street graphic for an existing street graphic. 
Resale shop: A building or part of a building in which goods, wares, merchandise, substances, articles or things may be accepted by donation or on consignment and offered for sale directly to the public. 
Retail establishment: A building or part of a building in which goods, wares, merchandise, substances, or articles are offered for sale directly to the public at retail value and may include minor food processing and packaging in connection with the sale of food products. 
Right-of-way, public: A strip of land which the owner/subdivider has dedicated to this municipality or to another unit of government for streets and alleys. 
Roof line: The top edge of the roof or the top of the parapet, whichever forms the top line of the building silhouette on the side of the building where the street graphic is located. 
Roof-mounted sign: Any sign erected or maintained above the roof line of any building. 
Rooming house: A building in which sleeping quarters (but not meals or cooking facilities) are provided by pre-arrangement for compensation on a weekly or longer basis for three or more persons who are not members of the keeper's family. For the purpose of this zoning ordinance, the term "rooming house" shall also mean lodging house, and a rooming house shall not include a community residence or nursing home. 
Salvage and recycling facility: A facility whose principal function is to buy, sell, collect, temporarily store, sort, disassemble and process waste scrap metal from vehicles, machinery and other metallic sources for the purposes of recycling, reuse or disposal. 
Sanitarium: See "hospital." 
Sanitary landfill: A tract of open land used for the permanent disposal of refuse in accordance with the requirements of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency. At a "sanitary landfill" the refuse is periodically covered with topsoil. 
Screen. A method of reducing the impact of visual intrusions through the use of plant materials, berms, fences and/or walls or any combination thereof. Screening blocks that which is unsightly or offensive with a more harmonious element. 
Screening: Trees, shrubs, walls, solid fences, etc. used as a means of visual and noise control. 
Self-service storage facility: Any real property designed and used for the purpose of renting or leasing individual storage spaces to occupants who are to have access to such for the purpose of storing and removing personal property. Such storage spaces are to be rented pursuant to a written rental agreement. As defined herein, self-service storage facilities may include those with a manager's apartment but exclude storage-to-go businesses. 
Senior housing (assisted and supportive living residences): Residential dwellings that resemble multi-family apartment structures that offer private rooms with kitchenettes and common living and dining areas for individuals that may need assistance or have functional limitations. Services vary, but often include: assistance with activities of daily living; administration of medicine; first aid and medical care for minor ailments; and round-the-clock protective oversight. 
Senior housing (independent living residences): Senior apartments are multifamily residential apartments designed for persons aged fifty-five (55) years and older. These properties may or may not offer meal service to residents and typically offer a limited array of supportive care services and/or service coordination. 
Setback: The minimum horizontal distance between a lot line and (a) the nearest wall of a building or side of a structure facing such lot line, or (b) the edge of the area of operation of a principal use involving no building or structure. 
Setback line: See "building line." 
Shade tree. A deciduous (or rarely, an evergreen) tree planted primarily for its high crown of foliage or overhead canopy. 
Shopping center identification sign: A freestanding sign which identifies a grouping of commercial uses and/or buildings either under single, joint or separate ownership, designed and developed to offer a safe, efficient and attractive shopping area, usually with common off-street parking areas, a pedestrian mall, controlled access and uniform, compatible signing. 
Shrub. A woody plant, smaller than a tree, which consists of a number of small stems from the ground or small branches near the ground. May be deciduous or evergreen. 
Shrub, low. Any shrub that attains a mature height of four (4) feet or less when left unpruned. 
Shrub, tall. Any shrub that attains a mature height of more than four (4) feet when left unpruned. 
Sign or street graphics: Any object, device, display or structure or part thereof that is used to advertise, identify, display or attract attention to any object, person, institution, organization, business, product, service or event related to the premises on which the sign is situated by any means including words, letters, figures, designs, symbols, fixtures, colors or illumination. 
Sign area: The area of not more than two (2) imaginary squares or rectangles that would completely enclose all parts of a sign including the background. 
Sign area allowance: The total of the areas of all flush-mounted signs that a particular establishment is permitted to display under the terms of this ordinance. 
Sign permit: A permit issued by the administrator to regulate the erection, expansion, alteration, relocation or reconstruction on street graphics in all parts of this municipality except in areas of special controls. 
Sign, multi-faced: A sign with two or more connected faces where the interior angle formed by any two of the faces is ninety (90) degrees or less, where each face is designed or intended to be viewed from a different direction. 
Small community residence: Small community residence means a community residence serving eight (8) or fewer persons with disabilities in a family-like atmosphere. 
Special use: A use that has unusual operational, physical or other characteristics which distinguish it from the permitted uses of a district, but which may be made compatible with the intended overall development within a district. Special uses commonly must meet special standards not necessarily applicable to permitted uses in the district and are allowed only by permit. 
Special use permit: A permit issued in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance to regulate development of a special use. 
Specified anatomical areas: 
(a)  Less than completely or opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus or female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola; and/or 
(b)  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely or opaquely covered. 
Specified sexual activities: 
(a)  Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal; 
(b)  Acts or representations of acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation or erotic or sexual oriented torture, beating or infliction of pain; 
(c)  Fondling, kissing or erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breasts; and/or 
(d)  Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any activity set forth in subsections (a) through (c) above. 
Stable: A structure situated on the same lot as a dwelling and designed or used for housing horses for the private use of occupants of the dwelling but not for hire. 
Stop order: A type of corrective action order used by the administrator to halt work in progress that is in violation of this and other ordinances. 
Street: A public or private way for motor vehicle travel. The term "street" includes a highway, thoroughfare, parkway, throughway, road, pike, avenue, boulevard, land, place, drive, court and similar designations, but excludes an alley or a way for pedestrian use only. 
Street frontage: See "frontage." 
Street, private: Any street providing access to abutting property that is not maintained by and dedicated to this municipality or other public entity. 
Street tree. A tree planted in close proximity to a street in order to provide a canopy over the street, to give the street a sense of spatial definition and human scale, to provide shade and soften the street environment. 
Stringent: Binding, exacting. 
Structure: Anything constructed or erected on the ground or attached to something having a fixed location on the ground. All buildings are structures, but not all structures are buildings. 
Structure, temporary: Any structure that is not attached to a permanent foundation. 
Temporary sign: Any sign, banner, pennant, valance or advertising display, including inflatable displays, constructed of cloth, canvas, light fabric, cardboard, wallboard, or other light materials, with or without frames, not intended or designed for permanent display. 
Temporary use permit: A permit issued in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance and valid for not more than one (1) year, which allows the occupation of a temporary structure or the operation of a temporary enterprise. 
Topography: The relief features or surface configuration of an area. 
Trailer: A non-self-powered street legal licensed vehicle that is towed by a motor vehicle and is designed for roadway use. 
Tree. A large, woody plant having one (1) or several self-supporting stems or trunks and numerous branches. May be deciduous or evergreen. 
Truck: A type of motor vehicle whose principal use is the transportation of goods and has a gross vehicle weight greater than ten thousand (10,000) pounds. 
Turf grass. Grasses planted, by seeding or sodding, to establish a lawn, which is usually maintained by mowing. 
Use: The purpose or activity for which land or a structure hereon is designed, arranged, intended, occupied or maintained. 
Utility station: A primary facility for the mass creation, processing, distribution, collection, or bulk storage of a public utility such as a power or steam plant, refinery, telecommunications exchange facility, or other similar facilities, excluding government facilities. 
Utility substation: A secondary facility utilized in the further distribution or collection of a public utility to and/or from the utility station and the public, such as an electrical substation, gas regulator substation, storage well or tower, pump house, switching station, or other similar facilities, excluding government facilities. 
Variance or variation: A relaxation of the strict application of this Appendix A as applicable to a particular lot, structure or use pursuant to section 5.3-6 hereof. 
Veterinarian clinic: A building or portion thereof designed or used for the care, observation or treatment of domestic animals, which may include ancillary boarding within an enclosed structure. 
Visibility triangle: An area bound by imaginary lines measured to points twenty-five (25) feet from the intersection of and parallel to any pavement edges or curbs associated with public rights-of-way improved with a street or alley, private driveways (excluding any private driveways associated with a single family residence), or private drive aisles, with a third line connecting said points. 
Wetlands. Those areas periodically inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration under normal circumstances sufficient to support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, wet meadows, ponds and similar areas as defined by the Corps of Engineers. 
Wholesale: Refers to the sale of goods or services by one (1) business to another business. 
Window sign: Any sign painted on, affixed to, or suspended behind a window pane (including a television or computer monitor) so as to attract the attention of persons outside the building. A permanent window sign is one that is intended to remain on display for thirty (30) days or more; a temporary window sign is one that is intended to remain on display for a shorter time period. 
Yard: Open space that is unobstructed except as specifically permitted in this ordinance and that is located on the same lot as a principal building. 
Yard, actual corner side: A yard that is bounded by the actual front yard, rear lot line, side of the principal structure and any right-of-way excluding an alley. 
Yard, actual front: A yard that is bounded by the side lot lines, front lot line and front of the principal structure. 
Yard, actual interior side: A yard that is bounded by the actual front yard, actual rear yard, side lot line and the side of the principal structure. 
Yard, actual rear: A yard that is bounded by the actual corner side yard, interior side lot line, rear lot line and the rear of the principal structure. 
Yard, required corner side: A yard that is bounded by the required front yard, rear lot line, required corner side yard setback line and any public right-of-way excluding an alley. 
Yard, required front: A yard that is bounded by the side lot lines, front lot line and the required front yard setback line. 
Yard, required interior side: A yard that is bounded by the required front yard, the required rear yard, the side lot line, the required side yard setback line, and is not adjacent to any public right-of-way other than an alley. 
Yard, required rear: A yard that is bounded by the required corner side yard, interior side lot line, rear lot line and the required rear yard setback line. 
Zoning map: The map(s) and any amendments thereto designating zoning districts and incorporated into this ordinance by reference. 
(Ord. No. 2733, § 1, 4-4-94; Ord. No. 2962, §§ 1, 2, 12-18-95; Ord. No. 4138, § 1, 12-21-98; Ord. No. 4225, § 1, 2-21-2000; Ord. No. 4408, § 1, 4-16-2001; Ord. No. 01-O-0090, § 1, 8-20-2001; Ord. No. 01-O-0118, § 1(Exh. B), 1-7-2002; Ord. No. 02-O-0084, § 1, 6-17-2002; Ord. No. 03-O-0039, § 1(A)—(I), 5-19-2003; Ord. No. 03-O-0040, § 1(A)—(C), 6-16-2003; Ord. No. 03-O-0074, § 1, 10-6-2003; Ord. No. 04-O-0055, § 1, 6-21-2004; Ord. No. 04-O-0074, §§ 1, 2, 7-19-2004; Ord. No. 05-O-0031, § 1, 5-2-2005; Ord. No. 05-O-0067, § 8, 9-19-2005; Ord. No. 05-O-0078, § 1, 10-17-2005; Ord. No. 07-O-0024, §§ 1, 2, 3-19-2007; Ord. No. 08-O-0010, §§ 1, 2, 2-18-2008; Ord. No 08-O-0067, § 2, 8-5-2008; Ord. No. 08-O-0079, § 19, 3-16-2009; Ord. No. 09-O-0017, § 1, 3-16-2009; Ord. No. 10-O-0093, § 1, 10-18-2010; Ord. No. 11-O-0025, §§ 2, 3, 5-16-2011; Ord. No. 12-O-0008, § 1, 4-16-2012; Ord. No. 12-O-0037, § 1, 9-17-2012; Ord. No. 13-O-0027, § 1, 8-19-2013; Ord. No. 14-O-0019, § 1, 6-16-2014; Ord. No. 16-O-0018, § 1, 4-18-2016; Ord. No. 17-O-0002, §§ 1, 2, 1-16-2017; Ord. No. 18-O-0022, § 1, 5-21-2018; Ord. No. 18-O-0031, §§ 1—3, 6-18-2018; Ord. No. 19-O-0008, § 1, 3-18-2019)  
ARTICLE V. - ZONING ADMINISTRATION 
 
5.1. - Zoning administrator.  
5.1-1. - Responsibilities. 
The zoning administrator is hereby authorized and directed to administer and initiate enforcement of the provisions of this ordinance. This includes, but is not limited to, the following duties: 
(A)  To review and pass upon applications for certificates of zoning compliance; 
(B)  To inspect all land, structures and uses to determine compliance with this ordinance; and where there are violations, to initiate appropriate corrective action; 
(C)  To review and forward to the zoning board of appeals all applications for variances; 
(D)  To review and forward to the plan commission all applications for map amendments, text amendments, planned unit developments, and special use permits for public hearings and recommendations; 
(E)  To maintain up-to-date records of this ordinance including, but not limited to, district maps, certificates of zoning compliance, special use permits, temporary use permits, variances, interpretative decisions, amendments and all related matters; 
(F)  To review the provisions of this ordinance to determine whether revisions are needed and to make recommendations on these matters to the plan commission at least once per year; 
(G)  To annually publish any revisions of this ordinance including the zoning district map and any amendments thereto; and 
(H)  To provide information to the general public on matters related to this ordinance.  
5.1-2. - Records. 
The administrator shall be responsible for recording all of the proceedings and examinations of the zoning board of appeals; and shall indicate the absence of any member, the vote or abstention of each member on each question and any official action taken. A copy of every rule, variance, order or decision of the board shall be filed and shall be a public record. 
The administrator shall be responsible for recording all of the proceedings and examinations of the plan commission; and shall indicate the absence of any member, the vote or abstention of each member on each question and any official action taken. A copy of every decision of the commission shall be filed and shall be a public record. The administrator shall be responsible for the preparation of the finding of fact.  
5.1-3. - Minor variances. 
The intent of this provision is to allow for an expedited review of variances that are deemed to be minor in nature, such as a surveying error or change in zoning regulations, and would not create a negative impact on the surrounding community. The zoning administrator shall be responsible for the review and determination of all minor variance applications. The zoning administrator shall have the authority to approve a minor variance of ten (10) percent or less as to setbacks or bulk regulations of the West Chicago Zoning Code. 
An application for a minor variance is required. Said application may be obtained from the City of West Chicago Community Development Department. 
After the zoning administrator receives a completed application, and any other documentation as may be deemed necessary, the administrator shall provide the applicant with a decision, in writing, based on the findings of fact for a variance set forth in section 5.4-4 within twenty-one (21) days after receiving a complete application. If the minor variance is denied or the zoning administrator, in his sole discretion, determines further consideration is required, the applicant may submit an application for a formal variance to be considered by the city's zoning board of appeals. 
(Ord. No. 05-O-0067, § 19, 9-19-2005)  
5.2. - Certificates of zoning compliance. 
Upon the adoption of this ordinance, no land shall be developed, no new use or structure shall be established or erected and no existing use or structure shall be enlarged, extended, altered, relocated or reconstructed until a certificate of zoning compliance has been issued. The administrator shall not issue a certificate of zoning compliance unless he determines that the proposed work conforms to the applicable provisions of this ordinance.  
5.2-1. - Application. 
Every applicant for a certificate of zoning compliance shall submit to the administrator, in graphic and/or in narrative form, all of the following items: 
(A)  Items of Information. 
(1)  Name, address and phone number of the applicant. 
(2)  Name, address and phone number of the owner or operator of the proposed structure or use, if different from (1). 
(3)  Nature of the proposed use, including type of activity, manner of operation, number of occupants or employees and other related information. 
(4)  Location of the proposed use or structure and its relationship to existing adjacent uses or structures. 
(5)  Area and dimensions of the site for the proposed structure or use. 
(6)  Existing topography of the site (USGS ten-foot contour date is acceptable). 
(7)  Existing and proposed screening, landscaping and erosion control features on the site, including the parking area. 
(8)  Height and setbacks of the proposed structure. 
(9)  Number and size of proposed dwelling units, if any. 
(10)  Location and number of proposed parking/loading spaces and access ways. 
(11)  Identification and location of all existing and proposed utilities, whether public or private. 
(12)  Any other information that the administrator may require. 
(B)  Relationship to building permits. Upon the effective date of this ordinance, the Building Official shall not issue any building permit for the erection, enlargement, extension, alteration or reconstruction of any structure unless the applicant for such permit presents to the Building Official a copy of the certificate of zoning compliance pertaining to such work.  
5.2-2. - Corrective action orders. 
Whenever the zoning administrator finds, by inspection or otherwise, that any lot, structure or use or work thereon is in violation of this ordinance, he/she shall so notify the responsible party and shall order corrective action.  
5.2-3. - Contents of order. 
The order to take corrective action shall be in writing and shall include: 
(A)  A description of the premises sufficient for identification. 
(B)  A statement indicating the nature of the violation. 
(C)  A statement of the remedial action necessary to effect compliance. 
(D)  The date by which the violation must be corrected. 
(E)  A statement that the alleged violator is entitled to a conference with the administrator if he/she so desires. 
(F)  The date by which an appeal of the corrective action order must be filed and a statement of the procedure for so filing. 
(G)  A statement that failure to obey a corrective action order shall result in revocation of the certificate of zoning compliance and may result in the imposition of fines.  
5.2-4. - Service of order. 
A corrective action order shall be deemed properly served upon the owner, occupant or operator of the offending lot, structure or use if it is: 
(A)  Served personally; 
(B)  Sent by certified or registered mail to his/her last known address; or 
(C)  Posted in a conspicuous place on or about the affected premises.  
5.2-5. - Stop orders. 
Whenever any work is being done in violation of a certificate of zoning compliance or the zoning ordinance, the administrator's corrective action order may state that the violation must cease immediately. In such cases, the corrective action order is equivalent to a stop order.  
5.2-6. - Emergency measures. 
Notwithstanding any other provisions of the ordinance, whenever the administrator determines that any violation of this ordinance poses an imminent peril to life or property, he may institute, without notice or hearing, any necessary proceedings alleviate the perilous condition. But at the earliest possible time notice shall be served. Costs including attorney fees to be paid by violator.  
5.2-7. - Complaints. 
Whenever any violation of this ordinance occurs, or is alleged have occurred, any person may file a complaint to the administrator. The administrator shall record such complaints, immediately investigate and if necessary, institute appropriate corrective action.  
5.2-8. - Penalty. 
Whoever violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with or resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of this code shall be fined in accordance with section 1-8 of the City of West Chicago Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 03-O-0040, § 2, 6-16-2003) 
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS [2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 01-O-0099, § 2, adopted Oct. 15, 2001 amended by deleting App. A, §§ 5.3—5.5 and enacted a new App. A, §§ 5.3—5.6 as set out herein. The former App. A, §§ 5.3—5.5 pertained to similar subject matter. For complete derivation see the Code Comparative Table at the back of this volume. 
 
5.3. - Appeals. 
The zoning board of appeals shall hear and decide appeals from an administrative order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the zoning administrator or other authorized official of the city having jurisdiction under the zoning code. 
(Ord. No. 01-O-0099, § 2, 10-15-2001)  
5.3-1. - Initiation of appeal. 
Any person, firm or corporation, or by any office department, board, bureau, or commission aggrieved by any decision or order of the zoning administrator in any matter related to the interpretation or enforcement of any provision of this ordinance may appeal to the zoning board of appeals. 
(Ord. No. 01-O-0099, § 2, 10-15-2001)  
5.3-2. - Filing; record transmittal. 
Appeals shall be made within forty-five (45) days of the decision by filing with the administrator and the zoning board of appeals a written notice specifying the grounds for appeal. Not more than five (5) working days after the notice of appeal has been filed, the administrator shall transmit to the zoning board of appeals all records of the case and reasons for the decision. 
(Ord. No. 01-O-0099, § 2, 10-15-2001)  
5.3-3. - Stay of further proceedings. 
An appeal stays all further action on the matter being appealed unless the administrator certifies to the board, after the notice of appeal has been filed with him, that for reasons stated in the certificate, a stay would cause imminent peril to life or property. 
(Ord. No. 01-O-0099, § 2, 10-15-2001)  
5.3-4. - Public hearing; notice. 
The zoning board of appeals shall hold a public hearing on every appeal after the filing of the appeal notice. At the hearing any interested party may appear and testify, either in person or by authorized agent. Notice indicating the location of property, time, date and place of the hearing and briefly describing the issue to be decided shall be given not more than thirty (30) nor less than fifteen (15) days before the hearing to the party or parties seeking the appeal, and by publication in a newspaper of general circulation within this municipality. 
(Ord. No. 01-O-0099, § 2, 10-15-2001)  
5.3-5. - Decision by the zoning board of appeals. 
The zoning board of appeals shall render a decision within sixty (60) days after the hearing. The board may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify or amend the decision or order appealed from, to the extent and manner that they deem appropriate. In so doing, the board of appeals has all the power of the administrator and shall notify the council of their action. 
(Ord. No. 01-O-0099, § 2, 10-15-2001)  
5.3-6. - Rehearing after denial. 
No rehearing shall be held on a denied appeal for a period of six (6) months from the date of such denial made by the zoning board of appeals. 
(Ord. No. 01-O-0099, § 2, 10-15-2001) 
PLAN COMMISSION  
5.4. - Variations. 
A variation is a relaxation of the requirements of this zoning code as applicable to a particular lot, structure or use. The city council may, by ordinance, grant certain variations from this zoning code after receiving the recommendation of the zoning board of appeals. The zoning board of appeals shall hold a public hearing and make a recommendation with a findings of fact to the council on every application for a variation to the zoning code. 
(Ord. No. 01-O-0099, § 2, 10-15-2001)  
5.4-1. - Types of variations. 
Variations from the regulations of this code shall be heard and recommended by the zoning board of appeals and shall be decided by the city council in the following instances only and in no others: 
(A)  To permit the extension of a district to include an entire lot where the boundary line of the district divides a lot. 
(B)  To permit any yard of less dimension than required by the applicable regulations. 
(C)  To permit any building or structure to exceed the floor area ratio, height and bulk limitations imposed by the applicable regulations. 
(D)  To permit the use of a lot for a use otherwise prohibited solely because of the insufficient area of the lot, but in no event shall the area of the lot be less than ninety (90) percent of the required lot area in the R-5, R-6, Commercial and Manufacturing Zoning Districts and in no event shall the area of the lot be less than eighty (80) percent of the required lot area in the ER-1, ER-2, R-2, R-3 and R-4 Zoning Districts. 
(E)  To reduce the applicable off-street parking or loading facilities required by not more than twenty (20) percent of the required number. 
(F)  To increase the maximum distance that required parking spaces are permitted to be located from the use served. 
(G)  To permit the same off-street parking facilities to qualify as a required facility for two (2) or more uses, provided the substantial use of such facility by each user does not take place at approximately the same hours of the same days of the week. 
(H)  To permit any fence, wall or hedge of less or greater dimension than required by the applicable regulations. 
(I)  To permit the location, construction and continued maintenance of fences within the front yard not to exceed six (6) feet in height. 
(J)  To permit any signage to exceed the maximum number, height and area limitations. 
(K)  To permit variations for flood-prone areas. 
(L)  To permit the following variations, in addition to those otherwise authorized by this section, with respect to structures located in a designated historic district, provided that no such variation shall be granted until the applicant has obtained a certificate of appropriateness from the historic preservation commission with respect thereto: 
(1)  To permit the continued maintenance, enlargement, alteration, repair and/or replacement of a nonconforming building or structure. 
(2)  To permit the construction, maintenance and use of signage that would otherwise be prohibited by the applicable regulations, with exception of the following: roof-mounted signs, neon signs located outside of the principal building, billboards, flashing signs (that portion of the sign displaying time and temperature shall be exempt from this provision), animated signs, beacons and moving signs. 
(M)  To permit the construction, continued maintenance, alteration or expansion of driveways and parking areas in residential zoned districts. 
(N)  To permit the reduction of the minimum area that may constitute a separate or detached part of a zoning district, by not more than twenty (20) percent of the required size. 
(O)  To permit the reduction of the minimum width of a driveway, by no more than twenty (20) percent of the required width. 
(P)  To permit the use of a lot for a use otherwise prohibited solely because of the insufficient width of the lot, but in no event shall the width of the lot be less than ninety (90) percent of the required lot width in the R-5, R-6, Commercial and Manufacturing Zoning Districts and in no event shall the width of the lot be less than eighty (80) percent of the required lot width in the ER-1, ER-2, R-2, R-3 and R-4 Zoning Districts. 
(Ord. No. 01-O-0099, § 2, 10-15-2001; Ord. No. 02-O-0084, § 2, 6-17-2002; Ord. No. 03-O-0115, § 1, 12-15-2003; Ord. No. 05-O-0067, § 9, 9-19-2005; Ord. No. 06-O-0022, § 1, 4-17-2006; Ord. No. 17-O-0002, §§ 3, 4, 1-16-2017)  
5.4-2. - Application. 
Every application for a variation shall be filed with the zoning administrator. The zoning administrator shall transmit said application to the zoning board of appeals. The application shall contain sufficient information to allow the board to make an informed decision and shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(A)  Name, address and phone number of the applicant. 
(B)  Location of the structure/use for which the variation is sought. 
(C)  Description of adjacent structures and uses. 
(D)  The specific variation being requested. 
(Ord. No. 01-O-0099, § 2, 10-15-2001)  
5.4-3. - Public hearing; notice. 
The zoning board of appeals shall hold a public hearing on each request for a variation within forty-five (45) days after the application for a variation is submitted to them. At the hearing any interested party may appear and testify, either in person or by authorized agent. Notice indicating the location of property, the time, date and place of the hearing and the nature of the proposed variation shall be given not more than thirty (30) days nor less than fifteen (15) days before the hearing: 
(A)  By certified mail return receipt requested of all persons residing within two hundred fifty (250) feet of property; and a certified mailing sent to all persons at the addresses appearing on a roll prepared by the County Clerk of DuPage County, listing to whom the tax bills are sent concerning parcel(s) of property which are within two hundred fifty (250) feet of the subject property will satisfy this requirement. 
(B)  By publication in a newspaper of general circulation within this municipality. 
(C)  A public hearing notice sign shall be posted on the premises in a manner and number prescribed by the zoning administrator. 
(Ord. No. 01-O-0099, § 2, 10-15-2001; Ord. No. 12-O-0008, § 3, 4-16-2012)  
5.4-4. - Findings of fact. 
The zoning board of appeals shall recommend a variation only if it shall make a findings of fact based upon evidence presented that: 
(A)  The particular physical surroundings, shape or topographical condition of the specific property involved would result in a particular hardship upon the owner, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience or loss of revenue, if the strict letter of the regulations were carried out. 
(B)  The condition upon which the requested variation is based would not be applicable, generally, to other property within the same zoning classification. 
(C)  The alleged difficulty or hardship has not been created by any person presently having an interest in the property. 
(D)  The granting of the variation will not be detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to other property or improvements in the neighborhood in which the property is located. 
(E)  The proposed variation will not impair an adequate supply of light and air to adjacent property, substantially increase the congestion in the public streets, increase the danger of fire, endanger the public safety or substantially diminish or impair property values within the neighborhood. 
(F)  The proposed variation complies with the spirit and intent of the restrictions imposed by this zoning code. 
(Ord. No. 01-O-0099, § 2, 10-15-2001)  
5.4-5. - Recommendation by zoning board of appeals. 
The zoning board of appeals shall render a report, including a recommendation and findings of fact, on every request for a variation request within sixty (60) days after the public hearing. The board may recommend such conditions and restrictions upon the premises benefitted by a variation as may be necessary to prevent injurious effects therefrom upon other property in the neighborhood and to better carry out the general intent of this code. The recommendation and findings of fact shall clearly indicate the board's reasons for granting or denying any requested variation. 
(Ord. No. 01-O-0099, § 2, 10-15-2001)  
5.4-6. - Action by city council. 
The city council may adopt by ordinance, upon report of the zoning board of appeals, without further public hearing, any proposed variation or may refer it back to the board for further consideration. The city council may require additional conditions and restrictions upon the premises benefitted by a variation as may be necessary to prevent injurious effects therefrom upon other property in the neighborhood and to better carry out the general intent of this code. Any proposed variation which fails to receive the approval of the board shall not be passed except by the favorable vote of two-thirds of all aldermen. 
(Ord. No. 01-O-0099, § 2, 10-15-2001)  
5.4-7. - Rehearing after denial. 
No rehearing shall be held on a denied application for variation for a period of six (6) months from the date of such denial made by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 01-O-0099, § 2, 10-15-2001) 
CITY COUNCIL  
5.5. - Special uses. 
This zoning code is based upon the division of the city into districts in each of which are permitted uses that are mutually compatible. In addition to such permitted, compatible uses, however, it is recognized that there are other, special uses which it may be necessary or desirable to allow in a given district but which, due to their potential influence upon neighboring uses or public facilities, need to be carefully regulated with respect to location or operation for the protection of the community. The city council may, by ordinance, grant certain special uses described in this zoning code after receiving the recommendation of the zoning board of appeals. The zoning board of appeals shall hold a public hearing and make a recommendation with a findings of fact to the council on every application for a special use. 
(Ord. No. 01-O-0099, § 2, 10-15-2001)  
5.5-1. - Types of special uses. 
Special uses classified in this zoning code fall into two (2) categories as follows: 
(A)  Uses either municipally operated or operated by publicly regulated utilities or uses traditionally affected by public interest. 
(B)  Uses entirely private in character which, due to their particular locational needs, may or may not be compatible with adjacent uses. The purpose of the special use is to ensure that all granted special uses comply with the purpose and intent of the zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 01-O-0099, § 2, 10-15-2001)  
5.5-2. - Application. 
Every application for a special use shall be filed with the zoning administrator. The zoning administrator shall transmit said application to the zoning board of appeals. The application shall contain sufficient information to allow the board to make an informed decision and shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(A)  Name, address and phone number of the applicant. 
(B)  Location of the property for which the special use is sought. 
(C)  Description of adjacent structures and uses. 
(D)  The special use requested. 
(Ord. No. 01-O-0099, § 2, 10-15-2001)  
5.5-3. - Public hearing; notice. 
The zoning board of appeals shall hold a public hearing on every special use application after the application is submitted to them. At the hearing any interested party may appear and testify, either in person or by authorized agent. Notice indicating the location of property, the time, date and place of the hearing and the nature of the proposed special use shall be given not more than thirty (30) nor less than fifteen (15) days before the hearing: 
(A)  By certified mail return receipt requested of all persons residing within two hundred fifty (250) feet of the property; a certified mailing sent to all persons at the addresses appearing on a roll prepared by the County Clerk of DuPage County, listing to whom the tax bills are sent concerning the parcel(s) of property which are within two hundred fifty (250) feet of the subject property will satisfy this requirement; 
(B)  By publication in a newspaper of general circulation within this municipality; and 
(C)  A public hearing notice sign shall be posted on the premises in a manner and number prescribed by the zoning administrator. 
(Ord. No. 01-O-0099, § 2, 10-15-2001; Ord. No. 12-O-0008, § 4, 4-16-2012)  
5.5-4. - Findings of fact. 
The zoning board of appeals shall recommend a special use only if it shall make a findings of fact based upon evidence presented that the special use: 
(A)  Is necessary for the public convenience at that location or, in the case of existing nonconforming uses, a special use permit will make the use more compatible with its surroundings; 
(B)  Is so designed, located and proposed to be operated that the public health, safety and welfare will be protected; 
(C)  Will not cause substantial injury to the value of other property in the neighborhood in which it is to be located; and 
(D)  The proposed special use is designated by this code as a listed special use in the zoning district in which the property in question is located. 
(Ord. No. 01-O-0099, § 2, 10-15-2001)  
5.5-5. - Recommendation by zoning board of appeals. 
The zoning board of appeals shall render a decision on a request for a special use permit within sixty (60) days after the hearing. The board may recommend such conditions or restrictions upon the special use permit as may be deemed necessary to secure the general objectives of this zoning code, and notify the city council of their recommendations with their findings of fact. 
(Ord. No. 01-O-0099, § 2, 10-15-2001)  
5.5-6. - Action by city council. 
The city council may adopt by ordinance, upon report of the zoning board of appeals, without further public hearing, any proposed special use or may refer it back to the board for further consideration stating the reasons for referral. 
(A)  No special use shall be granted by the city council unless the proposed special use shall meet the requirements set forth in the findings of fact. 
(B)  Following the recommendations of the zoning board of appeals the city council may provide such conditions or restrictions upon the construction, location and operations of a special use including, but not limited to, provisions for the protection of adjacent property, the expiration of such special use after a specific period of time, off-street parking and loading, as may be deemed necessary to secure the general objectives of this zoning code and to reduce injury to the value of the property in the neighborhood. 
(C)  Any proposed special use which fails to receive the approval of the zoning board of appeals shall not be passed except by the favorable vote of two-thirds of all aldermen then holding office. 
(D)  In case of a written protest against any proposed amendment or decision of the regulations or districts, signed and acknowledged by the owners of twenty (20) percent of the frontage proposed to be altered, or by the owners of twenty (20) percent of the frontage immediately adjoining or across an alley there from, or by the owners of twenty (20) percent of the frontage directly opposite the frontage proposed to be altered is filed with the clerk of the municipality, the amendment shall not be passed except by a favorable vote of two-thirds of the aldermen then holding office. In such cases, a copy of the written protest shall be served by the protester or protesters on the applicant for the proposed amendment and a copy upon the applicant's agent, if any, by certified mail at the address of such applicant and agent shown in the application for the proposed amendment. 
(Ord. No. 01-O-0099, § 2, 10-15-2001)  
5.5-7. - Rehearing after denial. 
No rehearing shall be held on a denied application for special use for a period of six (6) months from the date of such denial made by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 01-O-0099, § 2, 10-15-2001)  
5.5-8. - Expiration. 
In the event the city council establishes no time limitation within which the proposed special use is to be exercised, then the permit shall expire in one (1) year if it is not operational. Nothing shall preclude an applicant from reapplying for the same special use permit upon expiration. An extension may be granted with approval of the city council. 
Upon making a determination that a special use permit has been revoked due to failure to meet the conditions and restrictions imposed on the special use, or due to other requirements of this zoning code, the administrator shall send written notice of said determination to the owner of the subject property by certified mail, return receipt requested. 
(Ord. No. 01-O-0099, § 2, 10-15-2001)  
5.6. - Amendments. 
The city council may amend this zoning code in accordance with state law and the provisions of this section. Proposed alterations of district boundaries or proposed changes in the status of uses shall be deemed proposed amendments. Amendments may be proposed by the city council, the administrator, the zoning board of appeals, the plan commission or any party in interest. 
(Ord. No. 01-O-0099, § 2, 10-15-2001)  
5.6-1. - Application. 
Every proposal to amend this ordinance shall be filed with the administrator. The administrator shall transmit said proposal, together with comments or recommendations, to the plan commission for a public hearing. 
(Ord. No. 01-O-0099, § 2, 10-15-2001)  
5.6-2. - Public hearing; notice. 
The plan commission shall hold a public hearing on every amendment proposal after said proposal has been submitted. At the hearing any interested party may appear and testify, either in person or by authorized agent. Notice indicating the location of property, the time, date and place of the hearing and the nature of the proposed amendment shall be given not more than thirty (30) nor less than fifteen (15) days before the hearing: 
(A)  For map amendments. By certified mail return receipt requested of all persons residing within two hundred fifty (250) feet of the property. A certified mailing sent to all persons at the addresses appearing on a roll prepared by the County Clerk of DuPage County, listing to whom the tax bills are sent concerning parcel(s) of property which are within two hundred fifty (250) feet of the subject property will satisfy this requirement. 
(B)  For map and text amendments. By publication in a newspaper of general circulation within this municipality; and 
(C)  For map amendments there shall be an additional notice posted on the premises at least fifteen (15) days prior to the public hearing in the manner and number prescribed by the zoning administrator. This sign will be provided by the city and shall be removed and returned to the office of the zoning administrator before the city council can take final action on the proposed amendment. 
(Ord. No. 01-O-0099, § 2, 10-15-2001)  
5.6-3. - Findings of fact. 
Within sixty (60) days after the public hearing, the plan commission shall submit their advisory report to the city council. The report shall state the plan commission's recommendations regarding adoption of the proposed amendment and their reasons therefore. If the effect of the proposed amendment would be to alter district boundaries or to change the status of any use, the plan commission shall include in their advisory report findings of fact concerning each of the following matters: 
(A)  Existing use(s) and zoning of the property in question. 
(B)  Existing use(s) and zoning of other lots in the vicinity of the property in question. 
(C)  Suitability of the property in question for uses already permitted under existing regulations. 
(D)  Suitability of the property in question for the proposed use. 
(E)  The trend of development in the vicinity of the property in question, including changes (if any) which may have occurred since the property was initially zoned or last zoned. 
(F)  The effect the proposed rezoning would have on implementation of the comprehensive plan. 
(G)  Impact on surrounding properties. 
(H)  Impact on health, safety and welfare of the community. 
(Ord. No. 01-O-0099, § 2, 10-15-2001)  
5.6-4. - Action by city council. 
The city council shall act on every proposed amendment following submission of the plan commission's advisory report. Without further public hearing, the city council may pass or reject in whole or in part, any proposed amendment or may refer it back to the plan commission for further consideration by simple majority vote of all the members then holding office stating the reasons for referral. The city council shall approve all amendments by ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 01-O-0099, § 2, 10-15-2001)  
5.6-5. - Protest. 
In case of a written protest against any proposed amendment or decision of the regulations or districts, signed and acknowledged by the owners of twenty (20) percent of the frontage proposed to be altered, or by the owners of twenty (20) percent of the frontage immediately adjoining or across an alley there from, or by the owners of twenty (20) percent of the frontage directly opposite the frontage proposed to be altered is filed with the clerk of the municipality, the amendment shall not be passed except by a favorable vote of two-thirds ( 2/3 ) of the aldermen of the municipality then holding office. In such cases, a copy of the written protest shall be served by the protester or protesters on the applicant for the proposed amendment and a copy upon the applicant's agent, if any, by certified mail at the address of such applicant and agent shown in the application for the proposed amendment. 
(Ord. No. 01-O-0099, § 2, 10-15-2001)  
ARTICLE VI. - ZONING DISTRICTS GENERALLY 
 
6.1. - Establishment. 
For the purpose of this zoning code, the city is hereby organized into fourteen (14) districts. The zoning district and the minimum area that may constitute a separate or detached part of a zoning district shall be as follows: 
(A)  ER-1 Estate Residential, forty thousand (40,000) square feet. 
(B)  ER-2 Estate Residential, five (5) acres. 
(C)  R-1 Single-Family district, five (5) acres. 
(D)  R-2 Single-Family district, five (5) acres. 
(E)  R-3 Single-Family district, five (5) acres. 
(F)  R-4 Single-Family district, five (5) acres. 
(G)  R-5 Single-Family district, five (5) acres, must be adjacent to an existing R-5 Single-Family district. 
(H)  R-6 Multiple-Family district, two (2) acres. 
(I)  B-1 Central Business district, must be adjacent to Central Business District. 
(J)  B-2 Commercial/Business district, one (1) acre. 
(K)  B-3 Regional Commercial district, five (5) acres. 
(L)  Airport district, one thousand two hundred (1,200) acres. 
(M)  Manufacturing, ten (10) acres. 
(N)  Office, Research and Light Industrial district, five (5) acres. 
(Ord. No. 2733, § 3, 4-4-94; Ord. No. 4123, § 1, 9-22-98; Ord. No. 05-O-0078, § 2, 10-17-2005)  
6.2. - Official zoning map. 
The boundaries of the zoning districts as designated are hereby established as shown on the maps entitled "Official Zoning Map of West Chicago, Illinois," which maps accompany and are a part [of] this zoning code and shall have the same force and effect as the Official Zoning Map, together with all notations, references and other information shown thereon, were fully set forth and described herein.  
6.3. - District boundaries. 
When uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of the various districts as shown on the Official Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply: 
(A)  District boundary lines are either the centerlines of railroads, highways, streets, alleys or easements, or the boundary lines of sections, quarter sections, divisions of sections, tracts or lots, or such lines extended, unless otherwise indicated. 
(B)  In areas not subdivided into lots and blocks, wherever a district is indicated as a strip adjacent to and paralleling a street or highway, the depth of such strips shall be in accordance with the dimensions shown on the Official Zoning Map measured at right angles from the centerline of the street or highway, and the length of frontage shall be in accordance with dimensions shown on the section, quarter section or division lines, or the map centerlines of streets, highways or railroad rights-of-way unless otherwise indicated. 
(C)  Where a lot held in one (1) ownership and of record on the effective date of this section is divided by a district boundary line, the entire lot shall be construed to be within the more restricted district.  
6.4. - Zoning of public rights-of-way. 
All streets, alleys, and public rights-of-way, if not otherwise specifically designated, shall be deemed to be in the same zone as the property immediately abutting upon such alleys, streets, and public rights-of-way. Where the centerline of a street, alley, or public right-of-way serves as a district boundary, the zoning of such areas, unless otherwise specifically designated, shall be deemed to be the same as that of the abutting property up to such centerline. 
(Ord. No. 16-O-0048, § 1, 12-19-2016)  
6.5. - Zoning of unclassified and annexed land. 
Any land whose classification is not shown on the official zoning map and land hereafter annexed to the city shall be automatically classified in the ER-1, Estate Residential District until differently classified by amendment. Streets, alleys and public rights-of-way shall comply with subsection 6.4, unless designated otherwise by ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 3040, § 1, 9-16-96; Ord. No. 16-O-0048, § 1, 12-19-2016)  
6.6. - General prohibition. 
No structure or part thereof shall be erected, used, occupied, enlarged, altered, relocated or reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance. Similarly, no lot or part thereof shall be used, occupied or developed except in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance.  
6.7. - Unlisted uses prohibited. 
Whenever any use is not specifically listed as permitted or special within a particular zoning district, such use shall be deemed prohibited in that district. However, if the zoning administrator finds that the unlisted use is similar to and compatible with the listed uses, the administrator may allow such use. If the petitioner does not agree with the decision of the zoning administrator, an appeal of that decision may be made to the zoning board of appeals.  
6.8. - Temporary uses. 
The zoning administrator shall have the power to grant permits authorizing temporary land uses. 
(A)  An applicant shall provide evidence, such as a site plan, substantiating the following: 
1.  The requested use will not have a detrimental effect on adjacent properties and will be in general harmony with surrounding uses. 
2.  That the requested use will not create excessive traffic hazards on adjacent streets and that traffic control, if necessary, shall be provided at the expense of the applicant. 
(B)  The following temporary uses may be permitted within the stated limitations: 
1—5.  Reserved. 
6.  Seasonal outside sales. On the property and part of a grocery store or home improvement store. Such use shall be ancillary to the existing business on the property and shall only include merchandise customarily sold by the business. Hazardous/noxious substances shall not be permitted as part of seasonal outside sales. Mobile outside vendors shall not be permitted as part of temporary outside sales. Such use shall last no less than fourteen (14) consecutive days nor more than four (4) months in any twelve-month period. Such display area shall be on a paved surface but shall not utilize any parking spaces required by Article XIII or disrupt the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic. The display area shall be set back a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet from any property line. All signage shall be confined indoors unless approved by a temporary sign permit. 
7.  Sidewalk sales in commercial districts. Such sales shall be permitted four (4) times per calendar year for a maximum of three (3) days at a time. The materials shall be arranged so that a minimum of four (4) feet of sidewalk clearance is preserved. 
8.  Christmas tree sales. In commercial and industrial districts only. Such sales may last up to thirty (30) days. If displayed on a sidewalk, trees shall be arranged so that a minimum of a four-foot wide walkway is preserved. Such display area shall not exceed eight thousand (8,000) square feet, shall be set back five (5) feet from any property line, shall not be located within a visibility triangle, and shall not interfere with vehicular traffic. 
9.  Portable on demand storage containers may be placed on a paved surface on private property not more than four (4) times, for a total of thirty (30) days in any one (1) calendar year. 
10.  Occasional use of travel trailers, camping trailers, truck campers and similar vehicles for not more than seven (7) days out of a thirty (30) day period twice per year as sleeping quarters shall be permitted. No connections or use for living quarters will be allowed, listed as follows: connections to sewer, connection to water other than for filling or maintenance of equipment, cooking with equipment. 
11.  Trailers used as construction offices or construction storage shall be permitted on a construction site during the period in which the building and/or subdivision is under construction. Upon issuance of the final occupancy permit for a single building project or the occupancy permit for the final building in a subdivision, all construction trailers shall be removed. 
12.  Garage or yard sales shall be allowed three (3) times per calendar year for a maximum of three (3) days at a time and shall not require a temporary use permit. 
(Ord. No. 01-O-0118, § 3, 1-7-2002; Ord. No. 02-O-0084, § 13, 6-17-2002; Ord. No. 03-O-0040, § 3, 6-16-2003; Ord. No. 04-O-0045, § 1, 5-17-2004; Ord. No. 08-O-0010, §§ 3, 4, 2-18-2008; Ord. No. 10-O-0062, § 1, 7-19-2010)  
6.9. - Meeting minimum zoning requirements. 
Except as specifically provided elsewhere in this ordinance, every lot must meet the minimum dimensions and minimum setback requirements of the district in which it is located independently; that is, without counting any portion of an abutting lot:  
6.10. - Consolidation. 
A plat of consolidation meeting the requirements of the subdivision ordinance will be required for all applications involving more than one (1) parcel of property.  
6.11. - Access required. 
No building shall be erected on any lot unless such lot abuts, or has permanent easement of access to, a public street or a private street that conforms to the standards set forth in the Land Subdivision Control Ordinance of this municipality. The permanent easement of access must have been of record prior to adoption of this ordinance.  
6.12. - Front setbacks—Corner/through lots. 
Every lot with multiple frontages (such as corner or through lots) shall meet the front setback requirements of the district in which it is located, excluding R-5, on every side having frontage. 
(Ord. No. 03-O-0040, § 4, 6-16-2003)  
6.13. - Front setbacks in certain built-up areas. 
Except as specifically provided otherwise, in all residential zoning districts and in the B-2 business district and B-3 regional commercial district, where lots having fifty (50) percent or more of the frontage on one (1) side of a street between intersections (that is, in one (1) block) are developed with buildings, and the front setbacks of those lots do not differ by more than ten (10) feet, the minimum required front setbacks on that block shall be on the average of the existing front setbacks; provided, however, that in any built-up area, no front setback less than fifteen (15) feet shall be permitted nor shall any front setback greater than fifty (50) feet be required.  
6.14. - Intrusions into yards. 
To the extent indicated below, the following features of principal buildings may intrude into required yards without thereby violating the minimum setback requirements. 
		Yard 
Allowed Intrusion in Feet 
		F 	CS 	S 	R 
(A) 	Cornices, chimneys, planters, bay windows, or similar architectural features 	2 	2 	2 	2 
(B) 	Fire escapes 	4 	4 	4 	4 
(C) 	Porches 	0 	0 	0 	0 
(D) 	Balconies 	4 	4 	0 	4 
(E) 	Canopies, roof overhangs 	4 	4 	4 	4 
 
(Ord. No. 2733, § 4, 4-4-94; Ord. No. 01-O-0091, § 1, 8-20-2001; Ord. No. 04-O-0074, § 3, 7-19-2004)  
6.15. - Exceptions to height limits. 
Necessary appurtenances. Chimneys, church spires, parapet walls, cooling towers, elevator bulkheads, fire towers, antennas or other necessary appurtenances commonly constructed above the roof line shall be permitted to exceed the maximum height limitations of the district in which they are located if they comply with all other pertinent ordinances of this municipality. 
Airport hazard areas. Notwithstanding any other provision of this ordinance, all structures erected within any airport hazard area, as defined by state law, shall conform to the location, height and identification requirements imposed by the Illinois Department of Aeronautics pursuant to "An Act Relating to Airport Zoning" (Illinois Revised Statutes, Chapter 15½, Sections 48-1—48.37) and "An Act in Relation to Zoning to Eliminate Airport Hazards" (Illinois Revised Statutes, Chapter 15½, Sections 48.101—48.112). 
Windmills. Noncommercial windmills used to generate electricity for individual private residences may exceed the height limitations of the residential zoning district. Incidental sale of surplus energy to a public utility shall be permitted. 
(Ord. No. 05-O-0078, § 3, 10-17-2005)  
6.16. - Sewers, septic tanks. 
In all districts, property owners of all buildings and places where people live, work or assemble shall provide for the sanitary disposal of all sewage in accordance with city requirements. The administrator shall not issue any certificate of zoning compliance unless, following consultation with the municipal engineer, he is satisfied that this requirement is met.  
6.17. - Accessory structures. 
(A)  "Accessory use" includes patios/decks (whether attached to or detached from the principal structure), sheds, and gazebos and is any building, structure or use that is: 
(1)  Subordinate in size and purpose to the principal structure or use that it serves; 
(2)  Necessary or contributing to the comfort and convenience of the occupants (whether individuals or a commercial enterprise) of the principal structure or use served; 
(3)  Located on the same lot as the principal structure or use served. 
(B)  If an accessory use (other than a patio/deck) is directly attached to the principal structure, it shall be considered part of such principal structure. 
(C)  Any accessory use shall be deemed permitted in a particular zoning district if such accessory use is: 
(1)  Accessory to a principal structure or use that is allowed in that zoning district as of right (permitted uses) or by virtue of the fact that a special use permit has been granted; and 
(2)  In compliance with the restrictions set forth in this ordinance and shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet, six (6) inches in height. 
(3)  For single-family residences: total allowable square footage for sheds and detached garages on a zoning lot shall not exceed seven hundred sixty-eight (768) square feet. 
(D)  Patios: 
(1)  Shall not be located within twenty (20) feet of the front lot line or corner side lot line. 
(2)  Shall not be located within ten (10) feet of the rear lot line. 
(3)  Shall not be located within a required interior side yard. 
(4)  Shall be counted towards the lot coverage limitations for the zoning district in which they are located. 
(5)  Shall comply with the above requirements when constructed accessory to a swimming pool. 
(6)  Shall not be used as a parking space. 
(E)  Decks: 
(1)  Shall not be located within ten (10) feet of the rear lot line. 
(2)  Shall not be located within a required interior side yard, an actual corner-side yard, or an actual front yard. 
(3)  Shall be counted towards the lot coverage limitations for the zoning district in which they are located. 
(4)  Shall comply with the above requirements when constructed accessory to a swimming pool. 
(Ord. No. 04-O-0074, § 4, 7-19-2004; Ord. No. 05-O-0067, § 18, 9-19-2005; Ord. No. 08-O-0010, §§ 5—7, 2-18-2008) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 08-O-0010, § 5, amended the title of this section. Section 6.17 was formerly entitled, "Accessory uses."  
6.18. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 04-O-0074, § 5, adopted July 19, 2004, repealed § 6.18, which pertained to permitted accessory uses and derived from Ord. No.01-O-0091, § 2, adopted Aug. 20, 2001.  
6.19. - Private garages. 
(A)  Detached private garages in residential districts shall be permitted in accordance with the following limitations: 
(1)  A maximum height not to exceed fifteen (15) feet, six (6) inches. 
(2)  For single-family residential zoning districts: No more than one (1) detached garage per lot with a maximum size of seven hundred sixty-eight (768) square feet. The total square footage of all accessory structures under roof including, but not limited to, sheds and garages shall not exceed seven hundred sixty-eight (768) square feet per lot. 
(3)  For multiple-family residential zoning district: A maximum size of five hundred fifty (550) square feet of garage space per dwelling unit. 
(B)  Detached private garages in commercial and industrial districts shall be permitted in accordance with the following limitations: 
(1)  A maximum height not to exceed fifteen (15) feet, six (6) inches. 
(2)  A maximum size of ten (10) percent of the building square footage, not to exceed two thousand (2,000) square feet. 
(3)  Shall comply with all setback requirements of the zoning district. 
(Ord. No. 01-O-0091, § 3, 8-20-2001; Ord. No. 02-O-0084, § 3, 6-17-2002)  
6.20. - Lot coverage. 
(A)  Maintenance of yards, courts and other open spaces. The maintenance of yards, courts and other open space and minimum lot area legally required for a building shall be a continuing obligation of the owner of such building or the property on which it is located, as long as the building is in existence. Furthermore, no legally required yards, courts or other open space or minimum lot area allocated to any building shall, by virtue of change of ownership or for any other reason, be used to satisfy yard, court, open space or minimum lot area requirement for any other building. 
(B)  Division of zoning lots. No improved zoning lot shall hereafter be divided into two (2) or more zoning lots unless all improved zoning lots resulting from each such division conform with all the applicable bulk regulations of the zoning district in which the property is located. 
(C)  Location of required open space. All yards, courts and other open spaces allocated to a building or dwelling group shall be located on the same zoning lot as such building or dwelling group. 
(D)  Required yards for existing buildings. No yards now or hereafter provided for a building existing on the effective date of this section, shall subsequently be reduced below, or further reduced below if already less than, the minimum yard requirements of this zoning code for equivalent new construction.  
6.21. - Rezoning of public and semipublic areas. 
An area indicated as public park, recreational area, public school site, cemetery or other similar open space may not be used for any other purpose than that designated, and when the use of the area is discontinued, it shall automatically be zoned the most restricted adjoining district until appropriate zoning is authorized by the city council.  
6.22. - Existing special uses. 
Where an existing use is classified as a special use at the effective date of this ordinance, it shall be considered a legal special use, without further action of the city council, the administrator and the plan commission.  
6.23. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 5 of Ord. No. 2962, adopted Dec. 18, 1995, repealed § 6.23. Formerly said section pertained to authorized variations, subdivision regulations, and derived, unamended, from § 1 of Ord. No. 2010, adopted Oct. 19, 1992.  
6.24. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 2 of Ord. No. 01-O-0118, adopted Jan. 7, 2002, deleted § 6.24. Formerly said section pertained to primary thoroughfare setbacks and derived from Ord. No. 2733, § 5, adopted Apr. 4, 1994.  
6.25. - Refuse containers. 
All refuse generated by uses located within any zoning district, excluding all single family residential dwellings and multi-family residential dwellings with fewer than four (4) total dwelling units, shall be stored in approved refuse containers that are visually screened on all sides with a solid screen fence. All multi-family residential dwellings utilizing a refuse container greater than one (1) cubic yard in volume shall visually screen the container on all sides by a solid screen fence. 
(Ord. No. 01-O-0118, § 4, 1-7-2002; Ord. No. 02-O-0084, § 14, 6-17-2002; Ord. No. 12-O-0008, § 5, 4-16-2012)  
6.26. - Principal structures. 
Only one (1) principal structure may be erected on any one (1) lot. 
(Ord. No. 01-O-0118, § 4, 1-7-2002; Ord. No. 02-O-0084, § 14, 6-17-2002)  
6.27. - Outside vending—Continuous. 
(A)  Permanently enclosed outside sales. Home improvement and grocery stores are allowed an enclosed and unroofed area attached to the store for permanent display of landscaping materials, etc. Such area shall comply with all building setbacks and shall be enclosed by a fence of a height not exceeding twenty-five (25) feet. Materials stored within the outside sales area shall not be stacked higher than the screening fence. 
(B)  Mobile outside vendors. Any person selling or offering for sale merchandise or services from a vehicle or otherwise, upon private property. Such activity shall be permitted in the M district only. Mobile outside vendors shall include pushcart vendors and mobile food wagons. Such uses shall be permitted if they serve only the business on the property; those offering goods for sale to the general public are prohibited. 
(C)  Fund-raising. Organizations may conduct fund-raising activities on private property with the permission of both the business owner and property owner on whose lot the activity is to take place. Such activities shall last no longer than seventy-two (72) continuous hours. 
(D)  Sidewalk display. Home improvement and grocery stores of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet or larger may place items for sale on the front sidewalk. Such display may be permanent. However, the materials shall be arranged so that a minimum of a four-foot wide walkway is preserved; pedestrian and vehicle traffic shall not be hindered in any manner. The area utilized for such display shall not be wider than fifty (50) percent of the width of the building front. Signage shall be debited from the business's overall allowable wall signage. 
(E)  Automobile service station display. Gas stations may continuously display merchandise outside of the building, provided such display area is located along the building front or within a row of pumps. Items placed along the building front shall be stacked below the window, and items placed within a row of pumps shall be stacked no higher than six (6) feet. Such display shall not interfere with vehicle traffic. Signage shall be debited from the business's overall allowable wall signage. 
(Ord. No. 03-O-0040, § 5, 6-16-2003)  
ARTICLE VII. - SUPPLEMENTARY USE AND BULK REGULATIONS 
 
7.1. - Fences. 
(A)  Permit required: No fence except a natural fence shall be erected or placed upon any property without first obtaining a fence permit. Application for a fence permit shall be filed with the superintendent of building inspections, on forms supplied by the city, and shall require a plat of survey or approved site plan showing the specific location, material, type and height of proposed fence. 
(B)  Fence construction standards: 
(1)  Location: Each fence shall be located completely within the boundaries of the lot on which it is located, including all posts, bases and other structural parts. 
No permanent fence shall be constructed or erected within any public street or alley right-of-way unless authorized by the City Council. Fences erected on public easements shall be so constructed that drainage shall not be obstructed and, in the event that such fence must be removed for maintenance or other work in such easement, removal and any replacement of such fence shall be the responsibility of the property owner. 
(2)  Clearance from Utilities at Grade. All fences shall maintain the following clearances: 
a.  Three (3) feet from any side of a utility pedestal. 
b.  Six (6) feet from the access side and three (3) feet from the side of any transformer. 
(3)  Height: the height of a fence shall be measured from the average ground level one (1) foot from each side of said fence. 
(4)  Construction: Fences shall be designed and constructed to resist normal horizontal wind pressure. Fence material shall consist of one of the following: 
a.  Wood, chemically treated or naturally resistant to decay. 
b.  Noncorrosive metal, not less than eleven (11) gauge. 
c.  Concrete. 
d.  Masonry. 
e.  Plastic, manufactured as permanent fencing material. 
(5)  No barbed wire, razor wire or other sharp or hazardous materials shall be attached to or integrated into any fence unless approved as part of a special use permit for outdoor storage. No equipment or devices that deliver an electrical shock shall be attached to or integrated into any fence. 
(6)  Finished side: All fences shall be constructed with the finished surface facing neighboring property and any support posts placed to the inside, except in such cases where the posts are an integral part of the fence design which enhances the aesthetic appearance of the fence. 
(7)  All gates that include a mechanical or electronic self-closing device shall be equipped with an approved automatic opening system in the event a person, vehicle or other object becomes caught in the gate. 
(C)  District regulations: 
(1)  Residential districts. 
a.  Only decorative fences shall be permitted in actual front yards and shall not exceed four (4) feet in height, except within a visibility triangle. 
b.  Fences shall be permitted in interior and corner side yards, provided that the fence does not extend beyond the front line of the building or structure and shall not exceed six (6) feet in height, except within a visibility triangle. 
c.  Fences shall be permitted in rear yards and shall not exceed six (6) feet in height, except within a visibility triangle or in a rear yard extending along any state highway or railroad right-of-way, in which case the fence shall not exceed eight (8) feet in height. 
d.  Privacy fences immediately adjacent to patios or first floor decks shall not exceed six (6) feet in height, as measured from the top of the patio or deck. A privacy fence immediately adjacent to a deck other than a first floor deck shall not exceed five (5) feet in height, as measured from the top of the deck. Said privacy fences shall not exceed a total of ten (10) lineal feet and shall not require a permit. 
e.  Fences within a front yard visibility triangle shall not exceed three (3) feet in height. Fences within a corner side yard visibility triangle shall not exceed four (4) feet in height. 
(2)  Commercial and manufacturing districts. 
a.  Fences shall be permitted in interior side yards, corner side yards and rear yards and shall not exceed eight (8) feet in height, except within a visibility triangle. 
b.  Fences shall be permitted in actual front yards and shall not exceed four (4) feet in height in commercially zoned districts and six (6) feet in height in manufacturing zoned districts, except within a visibility triangle. 
c.  Fences within a front yard visibility triangle shall not exceed three (3) feet in height. Fences within a corner side yard visibility triangle shall not exceed four (4) feet in height. 
(D)  Required fences: 
(1)  Where a rear or side lot line of any business or manufacturing zoned district is adjacent to a side or rear lot line or right-of-way in an adjacent residentially zoned district, an approved opaque fence shall be provided and shall be eight (8) feet in height within such business or manufacturing use yard. 
(2)  Where outside storage is authorized through the provisions of the zoning ordinance, that portion of any open yard or space used for storage, including the overnight parking of vehicles, shall be fully enclosed by an approved fence and shall be at least six (6) but no more than ten (10) feet in height. 
(E)  Exceptions: The provisions of this section shall not apply to fences owned or maintained by the city or to fences constructed and maintained by any other governmental body or agency for the purpose of public safety. 
(F)  Temporary fences. 
(1)  Shall only be utilized for a construction, demolition, or site grading related activity. 
(2)  Shall be constructed of material in compliance with section 7.1(B)(4) or other material as approved by the city's building official. 
(3)  Shall be removed within fourteen (14) days of the completion of the construction, demolition, or site grading related activity or upon expiration of the permit authorizing said fence. 
(Ord. No. 2733, § 6, 4-4-94; Ord. No. 4224, § 1, 2-21-2000; Ord. No. 03-O-0040, §§ 6, 7, 6-16-2003; Ord. No. 11-O-0025, § 4, 5-16-2011; Ord. No. 14-O-0019, § 2, 6-16-2014)  
7.2. - Home occupations. 
(A)  A home occupation is an accessory use by the occupant(s) of a dwelling unit in which goods are produced or traded, or services are rendered as an economic enterprise. Such use shall be clearly incidental or subordinate to the residential use of a dwelling. 
(B)  Home occupations do not include garage or yard sales. Garage or yard sales are limited to three (3) times during each calendar year. 
(C)  Home occupations are permitted as an accessory use to a residence only when all of the following criteria are met: 
(1)  Area of use. Home occupations shall be entirely contained within the interior of a residence or located in garages or accessory structures on the site. No visible evidence of the business shall be apparent from the street nor surrounding area. Family day-care homes will be allowed to have an outside play area which shall be fenced. A home occupation shall use no more than twenty (20) percent of the total dwelling unit floor area. Those home occupations which require occasional meetings using more than twenty (20) percent of the floor space may be permitted, providing such meetings do not occur more frequently than once per month. 
(2)  Employees. The home occupation shall be conducted by family members residing on the premises with no assistance from other individuals or groups. 
(3)  Sales, repairs and leasing. 
Sales. The commercial exchange of tangible goods or other items constituting a sale between the proprietor of a home occupation and members of the general public shall not be permitted on the premises of a home occupation. Members of the general public shall not include persons in the home by prior individualized invitation. 
Repairs. The repair of items out of a home occupation may occur only when the delivery and pick-up of the item is conducted by the proprietor of the home occupation or by employees of the home occupation as defined in this section. 
Leasing. The exchange of items in a lease agreement between the proprietor of the home occupation or an assistant and a customer shall not occur on the premises of a home occupation. 
(4)  Traffic and parking. No parking in the public right-of-way shall occur as a result of this home occupation except for occasional meetings. If parking for a home occupation occurs in a manner of frequency causing disturbance to the normal traffic flow for the neighborhood, the occupation shall be considered a business best handled in a commercial district rather than as a home occupation. 
(5)  Changes to exterior. The appearance of a dwelling as a residence shall not be altered to the extent that attention is drawn to the structure as a commercial or business operation. Alterations of building material, size or color; lighting fixtures or intensity; parking area; or any other exterior change should not cause the structure to lose its residential character nor should it detract from the residential character of the neighborhood. 
(6)  Nuisance controls. A home occupation shall not create excessive noise, dust or dirt, heat, smoke, odors, vibration and glare or bright lighting which would be over and above that created by a single-residential dwelling. The production, dumping or storage of combustible or toxic substances shall not be permitted on site. Additionally, a home occupation shall not create interference or fluctuations of radio or television transmission. 
(7)  Visitation. A home occupation may attract patrons, students or any business-related individuals only between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. At any time during the day or evening, the parking standards in this chapter shall apply to the activity generated by the home occupation, excluding family day-care homes; a home occupation shall also not generate more than six (6) arrivals and six (6) departures per day by vehicles. Family day-care operations shall not generate more than twelve (12) arrivals and twelve (12) departures per day by vehicles. These standards shall not be construed so as to prohibit occasional group gatherings, recitals or demonstrations. However, such gatherings shall not occur more frequently than once per month and must be held within the visitation hours specified in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 12-O-0008, § 7, 4-16-2012)  
7.3. - Lighting controls. 
Any light used for the illumination of signs, parking areas, swimming pools or for any other purpose shall be arranged in such a manner as to direct the light away from neighboring residential properties and away from the vision of passing motorists. (See lighting in parking section)  
7.4. - Swimming pools. 
(A)  Pools used for swimming or bathing shall be in conformity with the requirements of this section, provided however, these regulations shall not be applicable to any such pool less than twenty-four (24) inches deep or having a surface area less than two hundred fifty (250) square feet except when such pools are permanently equipped with a water recirculating system. 
(B)  A wall of a private swimming pool shall not be located less than ten (10) feet from any rear or side property line or ten (10) feet from side lot line abutting a street or ten (10) feet from any principal structure. A swimming pool shall not be located in any front yard. 
(C)  Electric wiring. An eighteen (18) foot electrical wire clearance must be maintained from the nearest point of the pool to the power line. All wiring around pools must conform and be maintained to meet all present city electrical codes.  
7.5. - Greenhouses and plant nurseries. 
In any district where tree and plant nurseries and greenhouses are permitted, the establishment of such uses shall be subject to the following requirements: 
(A)  Commercial. The establishment of such uses shall be subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  No exterior storage of any fertilizer, compost, manure or other odor or dust producing substance shall be permitted within fifty (50) feet of any property line. Such storage shall be screened in compliance with the restrictions in section 11.2-1(C)(2). 
(2)  Greenhouse heating plants shall be in an enclosed building and shall not be less than fifty (50) feet from any property line. 
(3)  Along any side or rear lot line, there shall be provided and maintained a planting or other appropriate screen of such size and density as to provide visual screening from adjacent properties. 
(B)  Non-commercial. Such uses are allowed as accessory uses in all residential districts, provided that they meet all bulk regulations for accessory uses as listed in each residential district. 
(C)  Along any side or rear lot line, there shall be provided and maintained a planting or other appropriate screen of such size and density as to provide visual screening from adjacent residential properties. 
(Ord. No. 03-O-0115, § 2, 12-15-2003)  
7.6. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 02-O-0117, § 4, adopted Oct. 7, 2002 repealed 7.6. The former 7.6 pertained to car lots and derived from Ord. No. 2733, § 7, adopted Apr. 4, 1994.  
7.7. - Kennels. 
(A)  The lot on which any kennel is situated shall have a minimum area of three (3) acres. 
(B)  Every kennel shall be located at least two hundred (200) feet from the nearest dwelling and at least one hundred (100) feet from any lot line.  
7.8. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 08-O-0010, § 8, adopted February 18, 2008, repealed § 7.8, which pertained to travel trailers and recreational vehicles. See also the Code Comparative Table.  
7.9. - Auto service stations. 
(A)  All gasoline pumps and other service facilities shall be located at least twenty-five (25) feet from any street right-of-way line, side lot line or rear lot line. 
(B)  Every access way shall be located at least two hundred (200) feet from the principal building of any fire station, school, public library and church at least thirty (30) feet from the corner of the lot when the lot is at the intersection of public streets. 
(C)  All trash receptacles, except minor receptacles adjacent to the gasoline pumps, shall be screened from view. 
(D)  Whenever the use of a service station has been discontinued for twelve (12) consecutive months, or for eighteen (18) months during any three-year period, the administrator shall order that all underground storage tanks be removed or filled with material approved by the fire chief. 
(E)  Prohibited activities in gas stations include, but are not limited to, the following: trailer renting and leasing, motor vehicle body repair, undercoating, painting, tire recapping, engine rebuilding, motor vehicle dismantling, upholstery work and other such activities whose adverse external physical effects would extend beyond the property line. 
(F)  All repair and other ancillary work conducted at automobile body shops, automobile repair shops, automobile care centers and automobile service stations shall be conducted in a completely enclosed building. Vehicles stored as part of any repair or other ancillary work shall be located on a paved surface that is visually screened from surrounding properties and shall not consume any required parking spaces. Vehicles stored at any automobile body shop shall be stored for no longer than twenty-one (21) days while being repaired. Vehicles stored at an automobile repair shop shall be stored for no longer than five (5) days while being repaired. Vehicles stored at any automobile care center shall be stored for no longer than one (1) day while being repaired or having any other ancillary work done to the vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 01-O-0118, § 5, 1-7-2002)  
7.10. - Use of commercial truck trailers for storage. 
Under no circumstances may a commercial truck trailer be placed on any lot for the purpose of serving as a place for storage.  
7.11. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 12-O-0008, § 6, adopted April 16, 2012, repealed § 7.11, which pertained to refuse containers multifamily units and derived from Ord. No. 2010, adopted Oct. 19, 1992.  
7.12. - Antennas and towers for personal wireless services. 
(A)  Permit required: Antennas and/or towers for personal wireless services shall not be installed without first obtaining a permit from the zoning administrator, in accordance with the requirements of this section. 
(B)  Purpose: The purpose and intent of this section is to provide for the placement and construction of antennas and towers for personal wireless services so as: to encourage the location of towers in the manufacturing and general business districts, and away from residential areas; to encourage the colocation of personal wireless service facilities and minimize the number of towers; to minimize adverse visual impact on residential areas; and to comply with the requirements, spirit and intent of Federal law. 
(C)  Definitions: For the purposes of this section, the following terms shall have the meanings as set forth below: 
Antenna shall mean any exterior device mounted on a tower, building or structure and used for transmitting or receiving communications for personal wireless services. 
FAA shall mean the Federal Aviation Administration. 
FCC shall mean the Federal Communications Commission. 
Personal wireless services shall mean commercial mobile services, common carrier wireless exchange access services, and unlicensed wireless services (i.e. telecommunications services using duly authorized devices which do not require individual licenses, but not including direct to home satellite services). 
Support equipment shall mean any electrical and mechanical equipment associated with an antenna and any brackets or other materials used to structurally attach an antenna to a tower or building. 
Tower shall mean any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one (1) or more antennas for personal wireless services. 
(D)  Location of antennas and towers: 
(1)  Districts: Antennas and towers for personal wireless services complying with the requirements of this section may be installed on lots in the following districts: 
a.  B-2 General Business District. 
b.  B-3 Regional Shopping District. 
c.  M Manufacturing District. 
d.  ORI Office Research and Light Industrial District. 
In addition, antennas and towers complying with the requirements of this section may be located on lots owned by the city, a unit of local government, the state, or the federal government, in any district. Further, antennas for personal wireless services complying with the requirements of this section may be installed on lots in the portions of the R-6 Residential District which are not included in any historic district. 
(2)  Lots: No new tower shall be permitted on any lot unless the applicant demonstrates to the zoning administrator that no existing tower or structure can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna. Evidence submitted to demonstrate that no existing tower or structure can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna may consist of any of the following: 
a.  No available existing tower or structure is located within the geographic area required to meet applicant's engineering or technological requirements. 
b.  No available existing tower or structure is sufficient in height to meet applicant's engineering or technological requirements. 
c.  No available existing tower or structure has sufficient structural strength to support applicant's proposed antenna and related equipment. 
d.  The applicant's proposed antenna would cause electromagnetic interference with the antenna on any available existing tower or structure, or the antenna(s) on such tower or structure would cause interference with the applicant's proposed antenna. 
e.  The applicant demonstrates that there are other limiting factors that render any available existing tower or structure unsuitable, including, but not limited to, the owner of such tower or structure requiring unreasonable terms for the applicant's use thereof. 
Antennas and towers for personal wireless services may be installed on lots with different existing principal structures and/or uses. Such antennas and towers, complying with the requirements of this section, shall not be deemed to be either principal or accessory structures or uses, but shall be permitted additional structures. Such antennas and towers, including all associated electrical and mechanical equipment, shall be included for purposes of determining maximum lot coverages for the lots upon which they are located. 
(E)  Antenna and tower standards: 
(1)  Generally: 
a.  All towers and antennas, including all associated electrical and mechanical equipment, shall be designed to the extent practicable to use materials, colors, textures, screening and landscaping which visually blend with the surrounding property. 
b.  All antennas and towers must comply with all applicable federal, state and local laws, ordinances, codes, rules, regulations and standards, including but not limited to the rules and regulations of the FAA and the FCC, and the city's building regulations, Chapter 4, of the Code of Ordinances. 
c.  Any shed or other building used to solely to support equipment related to any antenna shall not exceed ten (10) feet in height nor two hundred forty (240) square feet of gross floor area, shall comply with all setback requirements of the district in which it is located and shall be screened in compliance with the landscaping requirements of article XIV. 
d.  For antennas mounted on buildings or other structures, all support equipment shall be screened or enclosed in some manner as to mask such equipment. Antennas and support equipment shall not occupy more than ten (10) percent of the roof area of any building. 
(2)  Antennas: 
a.  Each antenna, including all support equipment, shall be of a neutral color identical to, or closely compatible with, the color of the supporting structure so as to minimize visual obtrusiveness. 
b.  Each antenna shall be either roof-mounted, tower-mounted or structure-mounted to a lawfully existing structure other than a building or tower. Each roof-mounted antenna shall be structurally attached to the roof of a building that complies with the requirements of the district in which it is located. Each tower-mounted antenna shall be structurally attached to a tower that complies with the requirements of this section. Each structure-mounted antenna shall be mounted to a structure, other than a building or tower, which is lawfully existing. 
c.  No roof-mounted antenna shall exceed a total height of twenty (20) feet above the height of such building, as measured to the highest point of the antenna, unless the applicant can demonstrate to the satisfaction of the zoning administrator that more height is physically necessary in order to permit the provision of personal wireless services and no alternative location or locations exist which would permit the provision of personal wireless services without such height; in which case, the antenna shall not exceed the minimum height necessary to provide personal wireless services. 
d.  No roof-mounted antenna shall overhang, or project, more than twenty-four (24) inches beyond the plane of any exterior wall of the building. 
e.  No structure-mounted antenna shall exceed a total height of twenty (20) feet above the height of such structure, as measured to the highest point of the antenna. 
(3)  Towers: 
a.  Not more than one (1) tower shall be installed on any zoning lot. 
b.  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, no tower located in the M Manufacturing District or the ORI Office Research and Light Industrial District shall exceed a total height of one hundred (100) feet, and no tower located in any other zoning district shall exceed a total height of seventy-five (75) feet, as measured from the finished grade of the parcel to the highest point on the tower, including the base pad and any antennas attached thereto. Towers exceeding the foregoing heights may be permitted as follows: 
1.  A tower that is designed to accommodate the antennas of two (2) unaffiliated users may be not more than one hundred twenty-five (125) feet in height if located in the M Manufacturing District or the ORI Office Research and Light Industrial District, or not more than one hundred (100) feet in height if located in any other zoning district. 
2.  A tower that is designed to accommodate the antennas of three (3) or more unaffiliated users may be not more than one hundred fifty (150) feet in height if located in the M Manufacturing District or the ORI Office Research and Light Industrial District, or not more than one hundred twenty-five (125) feet in height if located in any other zoning district. 
3.  Where the applicant can demonstrate to the zoning administrator that, to a reasonable degree of scientific certainty, a tower of greater height than that otherwise permitted under this subsection is physically necessary in order to permit the provision of personal wireless services, and no alternative location or locations exist which would permit the provision of personal wireless services, of such greater height, the zoning administrator may approve a tower of the minimum height necessary to provide personal wireless services. 
c.  As a condition of the approval of any new tower designed to accommodate multiple antennas, the applicant shall provide, in a form suitable to be recorded in the office of the county recorder of deeds, a letter of intent to allow unaffiliated users to place antennas on the tower, and shall thereafter: 
1.  Respond in a timely, comprehensive manner to a request for information from unaffiliated potential users. 
2.  Negotiate in good faith for shared use of the tower by unaffiliated users. 
3.  Allow such shared use where the unaffiliated user seeking such use enters into a written agreement to pay a reasonable, pro rata share of the costs of the tower and all equipment buildings, including all charges necessary to modify the tower to accommodate shared use, and to avoid interference with the signals transmitted or received by the tower's existing and/or intended users. 
d.  No tower shall be installed less than fifteen hundred (1,500) feet from any other freestanding tower. 
e.  No tower shall have any lights, signals, or signs, except as otherwise required by the applicable rules and regulations of the FAA or other regulatory agency having jurisdiction; in which case, such lights, signals, and/or signs shall be limited to the minimum that is so required. 
f.  Each tower located in the M Manufacturing District or the ORI Office Research and Light Industrial District shall be a monopole type (i.e. a cylindrical, tapering metal pole without guy wires) having a galvanized finish or painted a neutral color so as to minimize visual obtrusiveness, or shall be an approved alternative tower design. Each tower located in any zoning district other than the M Manufacturing District or the ORI Office Research and Light Industrial District shall be an approved alternative tower design. For the purposes of this section, the term approved alternative tower design means a tower design approved by the zoning administrator, which results in a tower that resembles a clock tower, bell tower, church steeple, light pole or other structure of a type common to the district in which the tower is located, so as to camouflage or conceal the presence of the antennas and reduce the adverse visual effects associated with typical tower designs. 
g.  Each tower shall be equipped with an appropriate anticlimbing device or devices; and shall feature security fencing not less than six (6) feet in height and/or other security measures, unless the applicant can demonstrate to the satisfaction of the zoning administrator that, due to specific circumstances relating to the applicant's proposed tower, such fencing and/or other security measures may be waived, in whole or in part, without a significant adverse impact on public safety. 
h.  Each tower shall comply with all required setbacks for the zoning district in which such tower is located and, further, shall be setback from any adjacent property in any residential district a distance not less than the height of such tower. 
i.  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, landscaping shall be used to effectively screen the view of each tower compound from adjacent property and public ways, including a landscape buffer area no less than six (6) feet wide around the base of the tower and related equipment, consisting of plant materials that will grow to form a continuous hedge at least six (6) feet in height within two (2) years after planting. The applicant shall provide a landscaping plan, in accordance with the requirements of article XIV, detailing the plant materials to be planted and any existing significant plant materials to be removed. The zoning administrator may waive such landscaping requirements, in whole or in part: 
1.  As a part of the zoning administrator's approval of an alternative tower design under subsection (E)(3)f above. 
2.  Where the applicant can demonstrate to the zoning administrator that, due to specific circumstances relating to the applicant's proposed tower, such landscaping requirements must be waived to avoid a significant adverse impact on public safety. 
(F)  Permit applications: Each application for a permit for an antenna and/or tower shall include the following information: 
(1)  Each applicant for a permit pursuant to this section shall provide to the zoning administrator an inventory of its existing towers within the city and within one-half mile of the corporate limits of the city, including specific information detailing the location, height and design of each such tower. 
(2)  A scaled site plan clearly showing the location, type, height and elevation drawings of the proposed antenna, tower and/or related accessory equipment sheds or other buildings; other buildings and/or structures on the lot; adjacent land uses and zoning; adjacent roadways; proposed access location; and applicable building setbacks. 
(3)  Legal description of the property. 
(4)  Exact distances, locations and identifications of surrounding residential properties and other antennas and towers. 
(5)  A landscape plan. 
(6)  Method of fencing and color of facilities. 
(7)  Plans must be certified by a professional engineer with the State of Illinois and include a written statement that the proposed facilities comply with the Electronic Industries Association's standards and all City of West Chicago building and construction codes. 
(8)  A statement by the applicant indicating whether any tower will accommodate additional users. 
(9)  Documentation must be provided establishing the licensing of the telecommunications provider by the FCC. 
(10)  Documentation from the FAA that the proposed antenna and/or tower is in compliance with all applicable FAA regulations. 
(G)  Abandonment: In the event the use of any antenna and/or tower has been discontinued for a period of on hundred eighty (180) consecutive days, such antenna and/or tower shall be deemed to be abandoned, and the owner of such antenna or tower shall remove same within thirty (30) days of receipt of notice from the zoning administrator notifying the owner of such abandonment. 
(Ord. No. 4258, § 1, 12-20-99)  
7.13. - Design standards and review. 
(A)  Purpose: The following are the purposes of the architectural design standards set forth in this section: 
(1)  To create an architectural identity for each development to avoid monotonous similarity among buildings or inappropriateness in exterior design and appearance of property. 
(2)  To promote the orderly and harmonious growth of the city, and to protect and enhance land values, investments, and the general welfare of the citizens of the city. 
(3)  To protect and to stabilize the general appearance of buildings, structures, landscaping and open spaces throughout the city. 
(4)  To ensure adequate light, air and privacy for property throughout the city. 
(5)  To encourage and promote acceptability, attractiveness, cohesiveness and compatibility of new development so as to maintain and improve the established standards of property values throughout the city; 
(6)  To aid prospective contractors, architects, designers and developers in preparing their project plans for review by the city; and 
(7)  To encourage high quality design, which will contribute to the overall appearance of the community upon construction and into the future. 
(B)  Applicability. The design standards shall apply to new construction and additions for single-family residential, any multi-family development and to all other types of developments within the B-1, B-2, B-3 and ORI zoning classifications, except for those developments located within the East Washington Historic District. Design guidelines approved by the city council from time to time shall also serve as a reference for development within specific historic districts and other areas. 
(C)  Building and structure design. 
(1)  Buildings and structures shall enhance the established neighborhood character and any adjacent residential and/or commercial property. 
(2)  Building materials shall be selected for suitability to the type of buildings and the design in which they are used. Buildings shall use the same materials, or those that are architecturally harmonious, for all building walls and other exterior building components. 
(3)  Building materials shall be of durable quality. Inappropriate materials or building methods, and those which will produce inconsistency with the structure and architecture of the building, shall be avoided. 
(4)  Brick or stone shall be used for all sides of new commercial structures. Brick shall, at a minimum, extend from ground level to tops of windows, with minor accents allowed in place of brick, subject to meeting building codes. Brick or stone shall not be painted. No mansard roofs shall be permitted. 
(5)  All multi-family residential dwelling units shall contain face brick or stone on not less than ninety (90) percent of exterior walls. All materials used shall be compatible as a group with the surrounding structures. The design of multi-family dwelling units shall include vertical relief and architectural features to enhance appearance. 
(6)  Building materials should be selected with special attention to energy conservation and in compliance with the Model Energy Code, as adopted by the City of West Chicago. Materials and colors that reduce the consumption of gas and electricity should be used wherever possible. 
(7)  All building components, including but not limited to windows, doors, eaves, and parapets shall have good proportions and relationship to one another. 
(8)  While it is recognized that color is a very subjective matter and that creativity should not be stifled, colors should nonetheless be used harmoniously and with some restraint. Color schemes should consider and respect the character and quality of the structure, as well as structures in the area. Excessively bright or brilliant colors should only be used for accent. Materials and colors should withstand the weather well over a twenty-five-year period. 
(9)  Architectural style should be appropriate to the Chicago area and evaluation of a project shall be based on the quality of design and its relationship to surroundings. The design of structures should display a sensitivity to the best aspects of character, quality and scale of those structures already existing in the area of a proposed project. Innovative design is encouraged, provided that it enhances the established character of the neighborhood. 
(10)  Architectural features and construction elements shall be completed and provide a finished appearance from all sides. There shall be no exposed framing. 
(11)  Monotony of design shall be avoided, however styles should be complementary and should relate to indigenous architecture. To avoid a monotonous appearance in residential districts, no two (2) detached single-family dwellings of substantially similar or identical front elevation or facade shall be constructed or located on adjacent lots. Dwellings on adjacent lots must have two (2) substantial changes, which may be a combination of major or minor changes as provided below: 
a.  Major changes. One (1) major change and color change shall constitute a substantial change: 
1.  Roof treatment - hip, gable, twenty-five (25) percent or greater change in slope 
2.  Location of garage entry - side and front 
3.  Type of brick treatment - extended porticos, etc. 
4.  Material treatment - full brick vs. half-and-half 
5.  Overall facade - Mediterranean vs. colonial, for example 
6.  Brick arches 
7.  Brick bay projections 
8.  Balconies 
b.  Minor changes. Three (3) minor changes constitute a substantial change: 
1.  Vertical or horizontal siding 
2.  Colors of materials 
3.  Door treatment - garage and entry 
4.  Window styles - casements, bows and double hung 
5.  Shutter treatment 
6.  Ornamental treatment - lighting fixture location, or posts and fascia 
7.  Reversing plan 
8.  Garage door design 
9.  Brick wing arms 
(12)  On commercial buildings, facades greater than one hundred (100) feet in length must incorporate recesses and projections along at least twenty (20) percent of the length of the facade. Recesses and projections shall impact the foundation or internal footprint of the building. Windows, awnings, and arcades must total at least sixty (60) percent of the facade length abutting a public street. 
(13)  On commercial buildings, color, texture and material module elements should be repeated horizontally and/or vertically. 
(14)  In residential districts, garages shall not be the prominent feature, and shall compliment the structure in material and design. 
(15)  Flat roofs shall be prohibited on single-family dwelling units. 
(D)  Relationship of buildings to site. 
(1)  The site shall be planned to accomplish a desirable transition with the streetscape and to provide for adequate planting, pedestrian movement and parking areas. 
(E)  Relationship of building and site to adjoining area. 
(1)  Attractive landscape transition to adjoining properties shall be provided. 
(2)  Buildings shall have similar scale to those in the surrounding area. 
(F)  Utility services. Newly installed utility services, and service revisions that are necessitated by exterior alterations, shall be located underground. 
(G)  Landscape and site treatment. 
(1)  Landscape treatment shall be provided in a scale appropriate to the structure and in a manner so as to enhance architectural features, strengthen views into and from the site and enhance access areas, and provide shade. All landscaping design shall comply with article XIV of these regulations. 
(2)  Where natural or existing topographic patterns contribute to the beauty and utility of a development, they shall be preserved and developed. Modification to topography shall be permitted only where it contributes to good appearance or as required to comply with stormwater management requirements. 
(3)  Grades of walks, parking spaces, terraces and other paved areas shall provide an inviting appearance for walking, and seating, if provided. 
(4)  Unity of design shall be achieved by repetition of certain plant varieties and other materials, and should compliment adjacent developments. 
(5)  Plant material shall be selected for interest in its, shape, density, texture and color, and for its ultimate growth. Plants that will be hardy, harmonious to the design, and of good appearance shall be used. 
(6)  In locations where plants will be susceptible to injury by pedestrian or motor traffic, they shall be protected by appropriate curbs, tree guards, or other devices, wherever possible. Where building sites limit planting, planting within containers and placing approved trees or shrubs in parkways or paved areas shall be encouraged. 
(7)  In areas where planting in general will not thrive, other materials such as fences, walls, and paving of wood, brick, stone, and cobbles shall be used. possible. 
(8)  Exterior lighting shall enhance the building design and the adjoining landscape. Lighting standards and building fixtures shall be of a design and size compatible with the building and adjacent areas. Lighting shall be restrained in design and excessive brightness avoided. Lighting shall be aimed appropriately to minimize glare and spill onto adjacent property, and in conformance with this code. 
(9)  Landscape islands shall be provided in accordance with article XIV of these regulations. 
(10)  Screening of service yards, utility meters and hardware, mechanical equipment, and/or other potentially unattractive places from public view, shall be accomplished by the use of walls, fencing, planting, or combinations of all of the measures that follow. Screening shall be equally effective in the winter and summer seasons. For rooftop equipment, parapet walls are required along street frontages and bordering residential areas. 
(11)  Dumpster enclosures shall be constructed of the same or similar material to the principle structure, unless granted an exception by the city council. 
(H)  Miscellaneous structures: Miscellaneous structures located on private property, public ways, and other public property, including light standards, utility poles, newspaper stands, bus shelters, planters, traffic signs and signals, benches, guardrails, rockeries, retaining walls, mailboxes and fire hydrants shall be designed to be part of the architectural concept of design and landscape. Materials shall be compatible with buildings, scale should be appropriate, and colors should be in harmony with nearby buildings and surroundings, and proportions shall be attractive. 
(I)  Signs. 
(1)  Signs shall be designed to comply with article XII of the Zoning Ordinance. Materials and color used in signs shall have good architectural character and shall be harmonious with both building design and the surrounding landscape. 
(2)  Signs shall have good scale in their design and in their visual relationship to buildings and surroundings. 
(3)  Colors shall be used harmoniously and with restraint. Excessive brightness and brilliant colors shall be avoided. 
(4)  Lighting shall be harmonious with the design. If external spot or flood light is used, it shall be arranged so that the light source is shielded from view of pedestrians and vehicles. 
(5)  Wall signs shall be part of the architectural concept. Size, color, lettering, location and arrangement shall be harmonious with the building design and shall be compatible with other signs on the building and signs on adjoining buildings. Signs shall have good proportions. 
(6)  Ground signs shall be designed to be compatible with the architecture of the building. The same criteria applicable to walls signs shall apply to ground signs. 
(7)  Identification signs of a prototype design shall conform to the criteria for wall and ground signs. 
(8)  Wall signs on all multi-tenant commercial buildings shall be comprised of channel lettering only, which are consistent in size and style, except in the Turner Junction Historic District. Box signs shall be prohibited. 
(9)  Neon tubing around the perimeter of a window or other opening, visible from the property boundary shall be prohibited. 
(10)  The number of graphic elements on a sign shall be held to the minimum needed to convey the sign's major message and shall be composed in proportion to the area of the sign face. 
(J)  Maintenance and upkeep. 
(1)  In general, maintenance and upkeep are required for all the parts and objects that compose the city's image. Lawns and plantings require considerably more periodic attention than do buildings; nonetheless, both require maintenance to retain a good appearance. Improper and inadequate maintenance decreases value that results in bad appearance. Continued good appearance depends upon the extent and quality of the maintenance. The choice of materials and their use, together with the types of finishes and other protective measures, must be conducive to easy maintenance and upkeep. 
(2)  Particular considerations. 
a.  Site. 
1.  Landscape materials, other than plantings, which have deteriorated or have been damaged or defaced, shall be properly repaired or replaced. 
2.  Plant materials that have deteriorated or died shall be replaced with healthy plantings, or the area redesigned with other treatment to provide an attractive appearance. 
3.  Plantings should be kept watered, fed, cultivated, and pruned as to give a healthy and well groomed appearance during all seasons. 
4.  Parking areas should be kept in good repair, free of hazards, properly marked, and clear of litter and debris. 
5.  Vacant property shall be kept free of refuse and debris, and shall have the vegetation cut periodically during the growing season in accordance with the International Property Maintenance Code, as amended. 
b.  Buildings and appurtenances. 
1.  Materials and finishes shall be selected for their durability and wear as well as for their beauty. Proper measures and devices shall be incorporated for protection against the elements, neglect, damage and abuse. 
2.  Buildings and appurtenances, including signs, shall be cleaned and painted or repaired as required to present a neat appearance. 
3.  Deteriorated, worn or damaged portions shall be rebuilt or replaced. 
4.  Building and sign illuminated elements shall be replaced as required to maintain the effect for which designed. 
5.  Window coverings such as blinds, curtains and tinting may be utilized, but shall not render more than fifty (50) percent of each window pane opaque or prohibit visibility through the window except during times when the screening of direct sunlight is necessary. Window coverings shall be kept in good repair, replaced if they become faded or deteriorated and shall be kept clean to present a neat appearance. 
c.  Public areas in or adjoining the development. 
1.  Parkway planting areas shall be maintained by the adjacent property owner or tenant in order to add to the aesthetic enhancement of the private property and the overall attractiveness of the streetscape. 
2.  Sidewalks, curbs and gutters, roadside berms and other public improvements in the public right-of-way shall be repaired and maintained as necessary. 
3.  Refuse containers of an aesthetically satisfactory design and color shall be placed in locations that will encourage their use and shall be cleaned regularly, to avoid littering of waste materials. 
4.  Street hardware shall be erected and secured properly, and shall be cleaned or painted regularly to present an orderly appearance. Signs shall be treated similarly. 
(K)  Factors for evaluation - The following factors and characteristics which affect the appearance of a development, based on the criteria outlined in subsections (C) through (J) above, will govern the staff's evaluation of a design submission: 
(1)  Conformance to ordinances; 
(2)  Logic of design; 
(3)  Exterior space utilization; 
(4)  Architectural character; 
(5)  Attractiveness; 
(6)  Material selection; 
(7)  Harmony and compatibility; 
(8)  Circulation - vehicular and pedestrian; and 
(9)  Maintenance aspects. 
(L)  Administration. 
(1)  An applicant for development approval shall submit a site plan, exterior elevations, and such other data deemed necessary by the community development department to evaluate a proposed architectural design and development layout. 
(2)  Final plans and elevations shall be drawn to scale and shall indicate the nature and extent of the work proposed. 
(3)  The review of architecture and site plans provided for in this section is intended to be only a part of the whole review procedure established in these regulations. Approval of architectural design does not in any way signify final approval of any portion of the project. 
(M)  Definitions. 
(1)  Appearance. The outward aspect visible to the public. 
(2)  Appropriate. Sympathetic, or fitting, to the context of the site and the whole community. 
(3)  Appurtenances. The visible, functional objects accessory to and part of buildings. 
(4)  Architectural character. The composite or aggregate of the characteristics of structure, form, materials and function of a building, group of buildings, or other architectural composition. 
(5)  Architectural concept. The basic aesthetic idea of a building, or group of buildings or structures, including the site and landscape development, which produces the architectural character. 
(6)  Architectural feature. A prominent or significant part or element of a building, structure or site. 
(7)  Architectural style. The characteristic form and detail, as of buildings of a particular historic period. 
(8)  Attractive. Having qualities that arouse interest and pleasure in the observer. 
(9)  City. The City of West Chicago. 
(10)  Code. The Code of Ordinances for the City of West Chicago. 
(11)  Cohesiveness. Unity of composition between design elements of a building, or a group of buildings and the landscape development. 
(12)  Compatibility. Harmony in the appearance of two (2) or more buildings, structures, and landscape developments in the same vicinity. 
(13)  Continuity. Unity of composition between design elements of a building, group of buildings, and the landscape development. 
(14)  Decorative screen. A wall or fence intended to partially or entirely cut off visibility to the area behind it. 
(15)  Design. The fit or form and function to a site or object of utility. 
(16)  Exterior building component. An essential and visible part of the exterior of a building. 
(17)  External design feature. The general arrangement of any portion of a building, sign, landscaping, or structure and including the kind, color and texture of the materials of such portion, and the types of roof, windows, doors, lights attached or ground signs, or other fixtures appurtenant to such portions as will be open to public view from any street, place or way. 
(18)  Graphic element. A letter, illustration, symbol, figure, insignia, or other device employed to express and illustrate a message or part thereof. 
(19)  Harmony. A quality which produces an aesthetically pleasing whole as in an arrangement of varied architectural and landscape elements. 
(20)  Landscape. Elements of nature, topography, buildings, and other manmade objects combined in relation to one another. 
(21)  Logic of design. Accepted principles and criteria of validity in the solution of the problem of design. 
(22)  Mechanical equipment. Equipment, devices, and accessories, the use of which relates to water supply, drainage, heating, ventilating, air conditioning and similar purposes. 
(23)  Miscellaneous and accessory structures. Structures, other than buildings, visible from public ways. Examples include, but are not limited to, memorials, antennas, water tanks and towers, sheds, shelters, fences and walls, kennels, transformers, and drive-up facilities. 
(24)  Paved areas. Roads, parking areas, terraces, plazas, patios and walkways. 
(25)  Plant materials. Trees, shrubs, vines, ground covers, grass, perennials, annuals, and bulbs. 
(26)  Proportion. Balanced relationship of parts of a building, landscape, structures, or buildings to each other and to the whole. 
(27)  Scale. Harmonious relationship of the size of parts to one another and the human figure. 
(28)  Screening. Structure or planting which conceals from view from public ways the areas behind such structure or planting. 
(29)  Site break. A structural or landscape device to interrupt long vistas and create visual interest in a site development. 
(30)  Street hardware. Objects other than buildings, structures, and buildings. Examples include, but are not limited to, lamp posts, utility poles, traffic lights, traffic signs, benches, refuse containers, planting containers, letter boxes and fire hydrants. 
(31)  Streetscape. The scene as may be observed along a public street or way composed of natural and man-made components, including buildings, paving, planting, street hardware, and miscellaneous structures. 
(32)  Structure. Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires permanent or temporary location on or in the ground. 
(33)  Utilitarian structure. A structure or enclosure relating to mechanical or electrical services to a building or development. 
(34)  Utility hardware. Devices such as poles, crossarms, transformers and vaults, gas pressure regulating assemblies, hydrants, and buffalo boxes that are used for water, gas, oil, sewer, and electrical services to a building or project. 
(35)  Utility service. Any device, including wire, pipe, and conduit, which carries gas, water, electricity, oil, and communications into a building or development. 
(N)  Appeals. An applicant may request a waiver from the strict adherence to these guidelines by filing an application with the community development department for city council consideration. Strict adherence to these guidelines may not be waived due to financial hardship, but may be waived in circumstances where the applicant demonstrates that the proposed project provides a high quality cohesive design and style, including architectural design, construction material, landscaping, signage and site layout. 
(Ord. No. 04-O-0045, § 2, 5-17-2004; Ord. No. 05-O-0003, § 1(Exh. B), 1-17-2005; Ord. No. 11-O-0012, §§ 2—4, 5-16-2011)  
7.14. - Above ground service facilities. 
(A)  Purpose. The purpose of these standards is to establish general guidelines for the placement of above ground service facilities. The goal of these standards is to encourage the location of above ground service facilities in non-residential areas and minimize the total number of above ground service facilities throughout the community; to encourage service providers to locate above ground service facilities, to the greatest extent possible, in areas where the adverse impact on the community is minimal; to encourage service providers to configure above ground service facilities in a manner that minimizes the adverse visual impact; and to enhance the ability of the service providers to provide such utility services to the community quickly, efficiently and effectively. 
(B)  Applicability. No above ground service facility shall be erected or installed except in compliance with the provisions of these regulations. Above ground service facilities located on property owned, leased or otherwise controlled by the city may be exempt from the requirements of this article provided a lease, franchise agreement entered into after adoption of this ordinance, or license authorizing such above ground service facilities has been approved by city council. Where conflicts exist between these regulations and the remainder of the zoning ordinance, the provisions of these regulations shall govern. 
(C)  Performance standards. 
(1)  For purposes of determining whether the installation of an above ground service facility complies with district bulk regulations, including but not limited to setback and lot requirements, the dimensions of the entire zoning lot shall control, even though the above ground service facility may be located on leased property within such zoning lot(s). 
(2)  Only one (1) above ground service facility shall be located on any one (1) zoning lot. 
(3)  An above ground service facility shall not be located within a two hundred fifty-foot radius of an existing or approved above ground service facility location, unless: 
(a)  No other site or current technology could be used to provide the intended services to the residents and businesses of the city; and 
(b)  The prohibited use of the proposed site would create a gap in providing the intended services to the residents of the city. 
(4)  No visible or audible signals, lights, or illumination shall be permitted on or from an above ground service facility. Above ground service facilities shall be of earth tone colors and be maintained in good condition including, but not limited to, being free of peeling paint and graffiti. 
(5)  No signs, advertising, or information shall be allowed on any above ground service facility, other than a plaque a maximum of four (4) inches by six (6) inches identifying the service provider and contact information. 
(6)  Above ground service facilities that are included as part of a building or structure shall be constructed of or screened with material(s) which substantially match or compliment the material(s) and color(s) of the exterior of the building or structure and shall be located or screened so as not to be visible from any adjacent property and/or right-of-way. 
(7)  Above ground service facilities that are not included as part of a building or structure shall be one hundred (100) percent screened on a year round basis from adjacent property and public right-of-way with landscape plant material(s). The height of the plant material(s) shall be at least equal the height of the above ground service facility at time of planting. Above ground service facilities located on wooded lots containing a one hundred (100) percent landscape screen of natural growth around the above ground service facility may be a sufficient screen. Any landscaping utilized to satisfy the screening requirements of this subsection shall be maintenance responsibility of the service provider. 
(8)  In the event the use of any above ground service facility has been discontinued for a period of one hundred and eighty (180) consecutive days, the above ground service facility shall be deemed to be abandoned. The city shall have the right to request documentation and/or affidavits from the service provider regarding the issue of the above ground service facility's use in determining the date of abandonment. Upon the city's determination and written notification to the service provider of such abandonment, the service provider shall have an additional thirty (30) days within which to: 1) reactivate the actual use of the above ground service facility or transfer the above ground service facility to another service provider who makes actual use of the above ground service facility, or 2) dismantle and remove the above ground service facility, and notify the city in writing of the completion of such removal. At the earlier date of either two hundred and seventy (270) days from the date of discontinuance without reactivation or upon completion of dismantling and removal, any zoning approval for the above ground service facility shall automatically expire without further action by the city. 
(9)  Mobile or immobile equipment not used in direct support of an above ground service facility shall not be stored or parked on the site of an above ground service facility unless and while repairs to such facility are being made. Backup generators shall only be operated during power outages and for testing and maintenance purposes. Noise attenuation measures shall be included to reduce noise levels to satisfy applicable state and city performance standards. Testing and maintenance of generators shall only take place on weekdays between the hours of 8:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m. 
(10)  Above ground service facilities installed in all residential and business zoning districts and the Office, Research and Light Industrial Zoning District shall be: 
(a)  Prohibited in the required front yard and required corner side yards. 
(b)  Prohibited in any critical sight lines at visibility triangles, as measured thirty (30) feet from the point of intersection of any two (2) rights-of-way, driveways, site access points, parking aisles, and public and private alleys, including any required landscape screening. 
(c)  Located at least five (5) feet from a rear lot line and three (3) feet from an interior side lot line. 
(d)  Located at least ten (10) feet from any existing principal or accessory structure. 
(11)  Above ground service facilities installed in the Manufacturing Zoning District shall be: 
(a)  Located at least five (5) feet from a front lot line, corner side lot line and rear lot line. 
(b)  Located at least three (3) feet from an interior side lot line. 
(D)  Factors considered in granting special use permits. In addition to the performance standards identified in subsection (C), the following factors shall be considered in determining whether to recommend or issue a special use permit: 
(1)  The size of proposed above ground service facility. 
(2)  The proximity of an above ground service facility proposed on a non-residential lot to any residential zoning district boundaries. 
(3)  The nature and intensity of the uses on the lot and the uses located on any adjacent or nearby properties. 
(4)  The topography of the lot and surrounding areas. 
(5)  The surrounding tree coverage and existing landscaping. 
(6)  The design of the above ground service facility, with particular reference to design characteristics that have the effect of reducing or eliminating visual, audible, or luminary obtrusiveness. 
(Ord. No. 07-O-0024, § 3, 3-19-2007)  
ARTICLE VIII. - NONCONFORMITIES 
 
8.1. - Purpose of article. 
The requirements imposed by this ordinance are designed to guide the use of land by encouraging the development of structures and uses that are compatible with the predominant character of each of the various districts. Lots, structures and uses of land or structures that do not conform to the requirements of the district in which they are located impede appropriate development. The regulations of this section are intended to alleviate such existing/potential problems by encouraging the gradual elimination of nonconformities.  
8.2. - Nonconforming lots. 
Any vacant lot that does not conform to one (1) or more of the lot size (area, dimensions) requirements of the district in which it is located, may be used in the manner indicated in this ordinance if such vacant lot: 
(A)  Is lot of record on the date of the adoption or amendment of this ordinance; and 
(B)  Has continuously remained in separate ownership from abutting tracts of land throughout the entire period during which the creation of such lot was prohibited by any applicable zoning or other ordinance; and 
(C)  Is at least fifty (50) feet wide.  
8.3. - Residential districts. 
In any residential district, one (1) single-family dwelling and related accessory structures, but no other use, may be erected on any vacant nonconforming lot of the type described above provided all other bulk and yard regulations of the particular district are observed.  
8.4. - Commercial and manufacturing districts. 
In the manufacturing district and in any business district, any structure permitted in the particular district may be erected on any vacant nonconforming lot of the type described above if all other bulk and yard requirements of that district are met.  
8.5. - Two or more lots in common ownership. 
If two (2) or more lots or combinations of lots and portions of lots with continuous frontage were and in common ownership on the effective date of this ordinance, and if one (1) or more of those lots does not meet the minimum lot width, depth and area requirements of the district in which it is located, the land involved shall be considered an undivided parcel. No portion of any such parcel shall be developed except in compliance with this ordinance, nor shall any such parcel be divided so as to create a lot that does not meet the requirements of this ordinance.  
8.6. - Nonconforming structures. 
Any lawful structure which exists on the effective date of this ordinance but which could not be erected under the terms of this ordinance because of restrictions on lot size, height, setbacks or other characteristics of the structure or its location on the lot may lawfully remain, subject to the following provisions: 
(A)  Enlargement, alterations. No such structure shall be enlarged or altered in any way which increases its nonconformity, except for existing residential driveways that are to be repaired or replaced at or less than the same dimensions and areas that they currently exist. 
(B)  Relocation. No such structure shall be relocated unless, after relocation, it will conform to all the regulations of the district in which it is located. 
(C)  Reconstruction. No such structure which is destroyed or damaged by any means shall be reconstructed if the administrator determines that the cost of such reconstruction exceeds fifty (50) percent of the structure's market value at the time of loss, unless after reconstruction the structure will conform to all applicable regulations of the district in which it is located, except for existing residential driveways that are to be repaired or replaced at or less than the same dimensions and areas that they currently exist. In the event the administrator determines the estimated cost of reconstruction is less than fifty (50) percent of the structure's market value at the time of loss, repairs or reconstruction shall be permitted, provided such work starts within six (6) months from the date the damage occurred and is diligently prosecuted to completion. 
The administrator may require that the reconstruction cost estimate be made by a bona-fide construction contractor and that the structure's market value at the time of loss be determined by a licensed real estate appraiser. The owner of the damaged structure shall be responsible for obtaining these estimates for the administrator. 
(Ord. No. 09-O-0042, §§ 1, 2, 7-20-2009)  
8.7. - Nonconforming uses occupying a structure. 
If any lawful use occupying a structure exists on the effective date of this ordinance but would not be allowed under the terms of this ordinance, such use may lawfully continue, subject to the following provisions: 
(A)  Maintenance. Any structure housing a nonconforming use may be maintained through ordinary repairs. 
(B)  Enlargement, alteration, reconstruction, relocation. No structure housing a nonconforming use shall be enlarged, structurally altered, reconstructed or relocated unless the use of the structure is changed to a permitted use. 
(C)  Extension of use. No nonconforming use may be extended to any part(s) of the structure not intended or designed for such use, nor shall the nonconforming use be extended to occupy any land outside such structure. 
(D)  Yard and bulk. A building which is nonconforming with respect to yards, floor area ratio or any other element of bulk regulated by this code shall not be altered or expanded in any manner which would increase the degree or extent of its nonconformity with respect to the bulk regulations for the district in which it is located. 
(E)  Change of use. A nonconforming use occupying a structure shall not be changed except to a use permitted under the applicable district regulations. 
(F)  Discontinuance of use. When a nonconforming use of a structure, or of a structure and premises in combination, is discontinued for twelve (12) consecutive months or for eighteen (18) months during any three-year period, the nonconforming use shall not thereafter be resumed.  
8.8. - Nonconforming uses of land. 
Any lawful use of land existing on the effective date of this ordinance that would not be permitted under the terms of this ordinance may lawfully continue, subject to the following provisions: 
(A)  Intensification or extension of use. A nonconforming use of land shall not be intensified or extended to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied by such use on the effective date of this ordinance. 
(B)  Relocation. No nonconforming use of land shall be moved, in whole or in part, unless such use upon relocation will conform to all pertinent regulations of the district in which it is proposed to be located. 
(C)  Change of use. A nonconforming use of land shall not be changed except to a use that is permitted under the applicable district regulations. 
(D)  Discontinuance. When a nonconforming use of land is discontinued for a period of twelve (12) consecutive months, it shall not thereafter be resumed, and any subsequent use of such land shall conform to the applicable district regulations.  
8.9. - Elimination of nonconforming building, structures and uses. 
(A)  The following nonconforming buildings, structures and uses shall be subject to amortization provisions herein set forth below under (B). 
(1)  In residence districts. Any nonconforming principal and accessory building or structure, all or substantially all of which is designed and used or intended for a permitted or conditional use that is allowed only in a business or manufacturing district shall be subject to the amortization provisions of this ordinance. 
(2)  In business districts. Any principal or accessory building or structure, all or substantially all of which is designed and used or intended for a permitted or conditional use that is allowed in any manufacturing district, and located in any business district shall be subject to the amortization provisions of this ordinance. 
(3)  In manufacturing districts. No lawfully established principal and accessory nonconforming building or structure and a lawful nonconforming use thereof shall be subject to the amortization provisions of this ordinance. Moreover, a single-family detached dwelling may be erected on a lot in an existing recorded subdivision in which fifty (50) percent or more of the lots contained single-family detached dwellings on the effective date of this ordinance. 
(B)  Amortization provisions. All nonconforming buildings, structures and uses as set forth in (1), (2) and (3) above that were nonconforming prior to and remain nonconforming after the adoption of this ordinance or which became nonconforming by subsequent amendments thereto shall be removed or converted and, therefore, devoted to uses permitted in the districts in which they are located within six (6) months after the applicable amortization period as follows: 
(1)  If made nonconforming under this West Chicago zoning ordinance. 
a.  Assessed valuation more than five thousand dollars. In accordance with the types of construction classification set forth in the Building Code of the City of West Chicago in effect in 1975. 
1.  Fireproof construction and non-combustible construction. Forty (40) years from date of original building permit or twenty-five (25) years from effective date of that ordinance or any amendments thereto, whichever last occurs. 
2.  Exterior masonry wall construction. Thirty (30) years from date of original building permit or twenty (20) years from effective date of this ordinance or any amendments thereto, whichever last occurs. 
3.  Frame construction. Twenty (20) years from date of original building permit or ten (10) years from effective date of this ordinance or any amendments thereto, whichever last occurs. 
4.  Unimproved land (including use of the land) ten (10) years from the effective date of this ordinance. 
b.  Assessed valuation not less than two thousand dollars but not more than five thousand dollars. Eight (8) years from date of original building permit or four (4) years from effective date of that ordinance or any amendments thereto, whichever last occurs. 
c.  Assessed valuation less than two thousand dollars. Four (4) years from date of original building permit or two (2) years from effective date of that ordinance or any amendments thereto, whichever last occurs. 
NOTE: Assessed valuation referred to in a, b and c above are the equalized assessed valuations of improvements of a lot, established for real estate tax purposes for the year of 1975 by DuPage County. 
(2)  If made nonconforming under the West Chicago Zoning Ordinance of 1979 or any amendments thereto: 
a.  Assessed valuation more than ten thousand dollars. In accordance with the types of construction classification set forth in the Building Code of the City of West Chicago of 1975: 
1.  Fireproof construction and non-combustible construction. Forty (40) years from date or original building permit or twenty-five (25) years from effective date of this ordinance or any amendments thereto, whichever last occurs. 
2.  Exterior masonry wall construction. Thirty (30) years from date of original building permit or twenty (20) years from effective date of that ordinance or any amendments thereto, whichever last occurs. 
3.  Frame construction. Twenty (20) years from date of original building permit or ten (10) years from effective date of that ordinance or any amendments thereto, whichever last occurs. 
b.  Assessed valuation not less than five thousand dollars but not more than ten thousand dollars. Eight (8) years from date of original building permit or four (4) years from effective date of this ordinance or any amendments thereto, whichever last occurs. 
c.  Assessed valuation less than five thousand dollars. Four (4) years from date of original building permit or two (2) years from effective date of this ordinance or any amendments thereto, whichever last occurs. 
NOTE: Assessed valuation referred to in a, b and c above are the unequalized assessed valuations of improvements of a lot, established for real estate tax purposes for the year of 1975 by DuPage County. 
(Ord. No. 2733, § 9, 4-4-94)  
ARTICLE IX. - RESIDENTIAL 
 
9.1. - ER-1 Estate residential. 
It is the purpose of this district to establish regulations for larger lot single-family residential areas. It is anticipated that neighborhoods in this district shall consist of very low density single family homes. 
(A)  Use restrictions. 
(1)  Dwelling standards: 
(a)  One story—One thousand fifty (1,050) square feet. 
(b)  Two story—Eight hundred fifty (850) square feet, first floor. 
(c)  Height—Forty (40) feet. 
(2)  Accessory buildings: 
(a)  Up to four (4) car garage (this is an exception to section 6.19 private garages). 
(b)  Swimming pools. 
(c)  Bath houses. 
(d)  Tennis courts no closer than twenty-five (25) feet to property line. 
(e)  Greenhouses, non-commercial. 
(f)  Guest houses up to eight hundred and fifty (850) square feet if on two (2) acres or more. 
(g)  Horses may be kept on five (5) acres or more with a limitation of three (3) horses, and stable may be no closer than two hundred (200) feet to property line. Horses are allowed only in rear yard. 
(B)  Lot requirements. 
(1)  Minimum lot area: Forty thousand (40,000). 
(2)  Minimum lot width: One hundred (100) feet at front, lot line and two hundred (200) feet at building line. 
(3)  Minimum setbacks: 
(a)  Front yard. Fifty (50) feet. 
(b)  Corner side yard: Fifty (50) feet. 
(c)  Side yard: Thirty (30) feet. 
(d)  Rear yard: Fifty (50) feet. 
(e)  Maximum lot coverage: Thirty (30) percent. 
(C)  Permitted uses. 
(1)  Single-family detached dwellings. 
(2)  Home occupations. 
(3)  Small community residences, provided: 
(a)  They are located not less than one thousand three hundred (1,300) feet from another small community residence. 
(b)  Prior to occupancy, a certificate of zoning compliance is applied for and received. 
(4)  Forest preserves. 
(5)  Parks and recreational areas when publicly owned. 
(D)  Special uses. 
(1)  Golf course including driving range, bar, restaurant, meeting and banquet rooms. 
(2)  Country club. 
(3)  Site reclamation and clean up plan areas. 
(4)  Above ground service facilities. 
(E)  Site reclamation and clean up plan. 
(1)  Legislative findings. The corporate authorities of the City of West Chicago find that residential real property is a valuable asset to the city and that the public health, welfare and safety is served by providing for the safe removal of industrial contamination from the surface of real property located within the corporate limits of the City of West Chicago so as to protect the citizens of the city, subsequent residential users of residential real property, surrounding properties, the public water supply, the public storm and sanitary sewer systems and public highways, and to promote, protect and preserve the value of residential properties, and such other matters as are properly within the concern of the city. Further, adequate measures must be taken for the safe provision of necessary municipal services to any such property. 
(2)  Purpose and intent. It is the purpose and intent of this subsection (E) to establish regulations and requirements for the clean up of industrial contamination, as defined herein, from real property zoned E-R Estate Residential, and surrounding property, in order to restore such property to optimum future productive use and in the process thereof to fully protect the public health, welfare and safety. 
(3)  Definitions. 
(a)  Clean up plan: Is a plan approved by the corporate authorities of the city, together with any changes or modifications thereto which are made pursuant to the provisions of subsection (E)(7) hereunder, for the removal of industrial contamination/contaminants from property zoned E-R Estate Residential and impacted properties. 
(b)  Impacted property/properties: A parcel of real property, not within a site, upon which is located industrial contamination which originated from processes or activities conducted upon a site. Impacted property may be located within or outside the corporate limits of the city. 
(c)  Industrial contamination/contaminants: Any industrial waste, hazardous substances, construction waste or other material remaining on a given area as the result of industrial and/or manufacturing activities conducted thereon; provided, however, that, the movement of any such materials to an impacted property by any means, including; but not limited to, migration or deliberate relocation, shall not affect the materials' classification as industrial contamination/contaminants. 
(d)  Surface site reclamation and clean up plan area (or site): An area under unified ownership or control for which the city has granted a special use permit for a site reclamation and clean up plan area and approved a clean up plan. 
(4)  Site reclamation and clean up plan area; special use permit required: 
(a)  No person shall engage in the movement or removal of any industrial contamination from or onto property in the E-R District without having first obtained a special use permit for a site reclamation and clean up plan area as hereinafter provided. The activities for which a special use permit for a site reclamation and clean up plan area shall be specifically required include, but are not limited to, one or more of the following activities, to be undertaken by or on behalf of the applicant pursuant to a clean up plan: 
1.  Removal of a surficial industrial contamination/contaminants from the site, including, but not limited to, scrap piles, containerized materials, surface concrete, piled soil, vegetation or tailings. 
2.  Characterization of subsurface materials. 
3.  Boring, installation, and proper abandonment of monitoring wells. 
4.  Excavation of subsurface industrial contamination/contaminants. 
5.  Neutralization and/or stabilization of industrial contamination/contaminants. 
6.  Removal of subsurface industrial contamination/contaminants from the site. 
7.  Construction of buildings and other facilities to facilitate removal of industrial contamination/contaminants from the site. 
8.  Treatment of groundwater and discharge of same on the site or off of the site. 
9.  Closure, dismantling and removal of clean up equipment and facilities from the site, including rail loading facilities and spur tracks. 
10.  Site restoration, including grading, covering and revegetation of the site. 
11.  Demolition and removal of concrete. 
12.  Relocation onto and removal from the site of industrial contamination from impacted properties as otherwise authorized pursuant to subsection (4)(b) hereof. 
Each of the activities listed hereinabove shall only be undertaken in the manner and to the extent explicitly authorized in the special use permit for site reclamation and clean up plan area issued with respect to the site. No such special use permit shall authorize the filling, backfilling, or other permanent placement of any industrial contamination/contaminants on any site, or the construction or use of a physical separation facility. 
(b)  No person shall move or relocate, or cause to be moved or relocated, any industrial contamination from impacted property or properties, except to an approved site, as authorized pursuant to a special use permit obtained as hereinafter provided. Any special use permit for a site, or portion thereof, permitting the movement or relocation of industrial contamination from impacted property or properties onto said site shall be subject to the following conditions and restrictions: 
1.  All industrial contamination moved or relocated from the impacted properties to the site shall be located thereon and be kept in a segregated manner. 
2.  Any and all identified quantities of industrial contamination moved or relocated from impacted property to the site shall be removed from the site and disposed of by shipment to a permanent disposal facility licensed or approved to accept and dispose of such materials within one hundred eighty (180) days of the movement or relocation of such identified quantities of industrial contamination onto the site; provided, however, that delay resulting from any cause beyond the control of the owner, including, but not limited to, the unavailability of a permanent disposal facility licensed to accept and dispose of such materials shall excuse performance within said 180-day period and extend the time for such removal and disposal to the earliest practicable time thereafter. 
3.  The owner or owners of the site shall keep true and correct records of all movement or relocation of specifically identified quantities of industrial contamination onto the site, which records shall include, at a minimum: dates of relocation, volumes of contaminants and storage locations of contaminants relocated onto the site; volumes of contaminants and the nature of any and all authorized stabilization or neutralization of contaminants relocated onto the site; and dates of shipment and volumes of contaminants shipped to the licensed permanent disposal facility, said records to be kept in sufficient detail to demonstrate the removal of any and all identified quantities of industrial contamination from the site within one hundred eighty (180) days of the date on which the contaminants were originally moved or relocated onto the site. 
4.  The records required to be kept pursuant to subsection 3. above shall be kept at the owner's offices within the city and shall be available for inspection by appropriate officers of the city or their duly designated representatives upon reasonable notice. In addition, the city may require that copies of said records, certified as to their accuracy by the keeper of said records, be periodically forwarded to the city. Records identifying individual impacted properties or their owners may be redacted before being produced for inspection or otherwise released to the city. 
5.  The movement or relocation of industrial contamination from impacted properties onto the site from which such contaminants originated may be limited to a specific time period and may be further limited to a specific maximum quantity of such contaminants. 
6.  The relocation of industrial contaminants from impacted properties onto the site from which such contaminants originated and the disposal of such contaminants from the site shall be undertaken pursuant to a clean up plan approved and incorporated into an ordinance granting a special use permit as herein required together with such other reasonable conditions as the corporate authorities of the city may impose therein. The clean up plan shall satisfy the requirements of subsection (E)(5) hereof as the same may be amended pursuant to the terms of subsection (E)(7) hereof. 
(5)  Application for site reclamation and clean up plan area special use permit submittals. Application for a site reclamation and clean up plan area special use permit shall be made to the zoning officer, shall specify the activity or activities set forth at subsection (E)(4) hereinabove for which approval is sought, and shall contain the following information in addition to the information generally required with respect to all special uses as provided under this ordinance: 
(a)  Name, address and telephone number of the owner of the site. 
(b)  Name, address and telephone number of person having authority to act as agent for the owner during the clean up program, if any. 
(c)  Legal description of the site. 
(d)  Copies of any and all regulatory permits, including conditions attached thereto. 
(e)  Each type of industrial contamination located in or on the site. 
(f)  Each type of and approximate quantity of industrial contamination to be removed from the site, and to be deposited, moved or relocated onto the site for transshipment. 
(g)  The technique(s) to be utilized to remove each specific type of industrial contamination from the site and to be utilized to move or relocate the specific industrial contamination onto the site from impacted properties. 
(h)  A list of equipment proposed to be used during the clean up program. 
(i)  A public services safety and training plan detailing the procedures to be followed to assure the safety of all persons working on the site, as well as the training and safety program to be used to protect the employees of the city and other outside agencies whose employees may have to be on the site for the purpose of making inspections, responding to medical emergencies, fires or other similar events. 
(j)  Practices and methods proposed to be utilized to minimize noise, dust, air contamination, and to prevent pollution of surface and/or underground water. 
(k)  Practices and methods proposed to be used to protect public utilities. 
(l)  A detailed site plan, together with such number of copies as required by the zoning officer, certified by a registered land surveyor or professional engineer, drawn on sheets of paper not to exceed twenty-four (24) inches by thirty-six (36) inches, showing the following information: 
(1)  A narrative description of the required clean up plan including a description of the activities to be undertaken pursuant to the clean up plan. 
(2)  Boundary lines. 
(3)  Easements - location, width, purpose. 
(4)  Streets on or adjacent to the site, name and right-of-way width, centerline elevation, walks, culverts, etc. 
(5)  Proposed location, size, shape, height, construction and use of structures, location and description of streets, sidewalks, light fixtures, fences, signs, railroad tracks, storage areas and all other uses or structures to be located on the site. 
(6)  Surrounding land uses. 
(7)  Legal and common description. 
(8)  Date and north point for identification of individual site plans. 
(9)  Reasonably specific ground elevation contour lines, location of utilities, description and location of significant natural features such as old trees, creeks, etc. 
(10)  Location of any and all watercourses, lakes, ponds, springs, etc. 
(11)  Location of any and all excavation sites and the depth of excavation proposed necessary to accomplish the surface clean up. 
(12)  Truck routes proposed to be utilized. 
(13)  Proposed hours of operation. 
(14)  The site plan shall contain appendices consisting of engineering plans and specifications covering all aspects of the clean up plan. 
(15)  The specific location on the site, including the specific dimensions of such location, onto which contaminants from impacted properties are to be moved or relocated prior to disposal at a licensed permanent disposal facility. 
(m)  A stormwater management plan. 
(n)  A reimbursement of costs agreement. 
(o)  Such other items as shall be reasonably required by the zoning officer. 
The reimbursement of costs agreement required at subsection (n) hereinabove shall be in a form acceptable to the corporation counsel and shall require the applicant to make reasonable provision for the reimbursement to the city of the costs and/or expenses which the city may, in its sole and exclusive discretion, incur in connection with any professional and/or technical services which the city determines to be necessary or desirable in order to process the application and monitor or inspect work performed under an approved clean up plan or under the authority of any permit referenced in the clean up plan, and in order to process applications relating to further clean up work at the site. Such services shall include, but not be limited to, attorneys, engineers, planners, architects, surveyors, court reporters, environmental, traffic, drainage or other consultants, including full and/or part time site inspection and/or testing services. The costs intended to be subject to reimbursement hereunder shall be those costs and expenses incurred by the city in processing and evaluating the application for special use permit and the clean up plan incorporated therein, the negotiation and preparation of all relevant agreements, notices, ordinances, resolutions and similar documents as well as the issuance of permits and inspection of construction or other activities undertaken pursuant to the approved clean up plan or otherwise incurred by the city in determining the applicant's satisfactory completion of an approved clean up plan. 
When any professional and/or technical services contemplated herein are rendered by the city's staff, such costs shall be reimbursed at two (2) times the hourly rate at which the individual members of the city's staff are compensated. All other costs shall be reimbursed at the actual cost to the city. The city shall send the applicant monthly invoices for such fees and costs. The applicant shall reimburse the city within thirty (30) days of receipt of such invoice. Should the applicant fail to reimburse the city as provided by in the cost reimbursement agreement, then no further action shall be undertaken by the applicant pursuant to the special use permit or the clean up plan and the applicant shall be deemed to be in violation thereof. 
Upon receipt of a completed application, the zoning officer shall review it and shall within thirty (30) days submit the application, together with his report and recommendations, to the plan commission. 
(6)  Plan commission review. Upon receipt of the complete application, the plan commission shall hold a public hearing thereon, pursuant to notice, as generally provided under this ordinance for all special uses in the city, and forward it, with its written recommendations, to the city council within thirty (30) days of receipt. Said time period may be extended by the consent of the applicant. 
(7)  City council approval. Upon receipt of the application and the plan commission's recommendation, the city council shall consider such application and either approve, approve with modifications and/or conditions, or disapprove of same within thirty (30) days of receipt. In the event that the city council does not act on any application within said thirty-day period, the application shall be deemed denied; provided, however, that said thirty-day period may be extended with the consent of the applicant. Approval of a special use permit is a condition precedent to the issuance of any city permit. 
A site reclamation and clean up plan area may depart from strict conformance with the required use, height, bulk, and other regulations for the zoning district and other provisions of this ordinance and the other codes and other ordinances of the city to the extent expressly specified in the ordinance granting the special use permit for the site reclamation and clean up plan area, including, but not limited to, the construction, maintenance and use of two (2) or more principal buildings on a single zoning lot. 
As a condition to the approval of any special use permit for a site reclamation and clean up plan area, the city council may stipulate such conditions and restrictions as it may deem necessary for the protection of the public health, welfare and safety, improvement of the site reclamation and clean up plan area and protection of adjacent areas. Such conditions and restrictions may be in addition to those set forth at subsection (E)(4) hereinabove. The city council may require such evidence and guarantees as it may deem necessary as proof that the conditions stipulated in connection with any approval will be complied with. No changes shall be made with respect to an approved special use permit, including modifications to the stipulated terms and conditions and/or the applicant's clean up plan, except as follows: 
(a)  Field changes: As used herein, the term "field changes" shall be deemed to mean, refer and be limited to minor changes in an applicant's approved clean up plan in the nature of repositioning valves, reconfiguration of building supports, the replacement of approved building materials or components with other Code compliant equivalents and other similar minor changes as are typically handled as field changes in the construction industry. It is anticipated that field changes shall be limited to minor alterations or substitutions made necessary due to unanticipated conditions encountered in the field or the unavailability of specified building materials or components. 
Application for approval of a field change shall be made to the city engineer and the city administrator (in the manner hereinafter set forth) who shall, in the exercise of their exclusive discretion, determine whether the proposed alteration qualifies as a field change. The decision of the city engineer and the city administrator as to whether a requested alteration qualifies as a field change hereunder shall be final. Approval of field changes shall be requested, approved and documented in the following manner: 
(1)  The applicant or the applicant's duly authorized representative shall make application for each proposed field change to the city engineer. The application shall be supported by sufficient information to enable the city engineer to properly review the application. The city engineer may request that additional information and documentation be provided. 
(2)  The city engineer shall note the receipt of the application for field change and shall incorporate in his field notes any explanation as to the necessity of the field change. 
(3)  Should the city engineer and the city administrator determine that the proposed alteration is in the nature of a field change and, further, that the proposed field change is compatible with good engineering practice, they shall approve such application for field change, with or without modifications, by initialing their approval thereon together with the date of such approval, returning an initialed copy thereof to the applicant or applicant's designated representative. No application for approval of a field change shall be considered to have been approved unless and until a copy of the application, initialed by the city engineer and the city administrator, is returned to the applicant or the applicant's designated representative. 
(4)  In the event that the city engineer and/or the city administrator, in their sole and exclusive discretion, determine that the relief requested does not qualify for treatment as a field change, or should the applicant, in consultation with the city engineer and city administrator, determine that any desired change or changes to any drawing, plan or specification comprising or constituting a part of an approved clean up plan does not qualify for treatment as a field change, then the applicant or the applicant's designated representative shall request that the proposed change or changes be classified as either minor or major changes to the approved clean up plan and make application for such relief, as appropriate, in accordance with the following procedures. 
(b)  Minor changes: Minor changes to an approved clean up plan shall be deemed to be changes more substantial in nature than field changes. Minor changes may require the modification of approved drawings, plans and specifications but shall not be of such a nature as to constitute a substantive change to an approved clean up plan. A minor change shall not be deemed to have been granted or approved and no action shall be taken in furtherance thereof unless and until the city council shall have passed and the mayor shall have approved an ordinance approving the same. 
(c)  Major changes: Major changes to an approved clean up plan shall be deemed to be changes more substantial in nature than the minor changes referenced in subparagraph (b) above. Major changes may not only require modification of approved drawings, plans and specifications, but are also of such a nature as to constitute a substantive change, alteration or modification in the approved clean up plan. 
(d)  Procedure for minor changes: The decision as to whether a proposed formal change to a clean up plan is a minor or major change shall, in the first instance, rest in the sole and exclusive discretion of the city administrator. Should the city administrator determine that a proposed change is minor in nature, he may cause the change to be placed before the city council together with the recommendation of the city engineer, confirming that the proposed change is minor in nature and conforms to good engineering practice, and an ordinance amending the approved clean up plan to incorporate therein the recommended minor change. Should the city council concur with the city administrator that the proposed change is minor in nature, they may amend the previously approved clean up plan by passing the ordinance approving such change. Should the city council determine that the proposed change is a major, as opposed to a minor, change, the city council may require that such change be processed as a major change to the previously approved clean up plan and that the consideration of a request to approve such a major change comply with the requirements of subparagraph (e) below. 
(e)  Procedure for major changes: Should the city administrator or the city council determine that any proposed change in an approved clean up plan is a major change, the applicant or applicant's designated representative shall make formal application to amend the special use permit through which the surface site reclamation and clean up plan area was originally approved and, as appropriate, shall further make formal application for the amendment of any annexation or other relevant agreement so as to make such agreement(s) consistent with the relief requested. In the case of major changes, notice shall be published, posted and otherwise given and public hearings conducted on the proposed amendment of the special use permit and annexation agreement as otherwise required by law. A major change shall not be deemed to have been granted or approved and no action shall be taken in furtherance thereof unless and until the city council shall have passed and the mayor shall have approved an ordinance providing for the amendment of the special use and the city council shall have passed and the mayor shall have approved a resolution authorizing the execution of any annexation, or other, agreement as appropriate. 
(8)  Compliance with governmental regulations. Every applicant for a special use permit for a site reclamation and clean up plan area shall comply with all applicable statutes, ordinances, codes, rules and regulations of any governmental body or agency. The applicant's right to operate under the special use permit shall be contingent upon the applicant securing and complying with all other necessary approvals, permits, and/or licenses of any governmental body or agency. 
(Ord. No. 2771, §§ 1, 2, 5-19-94; Ord. No. 2802, §§ 1, 2, 8-1-94; Ord. No. 2875, §§ 1—4, 4-3-95; Ord. No. 2878, § 1, 7-31-95; Ord. No. 03-O-0115, § 3, 12-15-2003; Ord. No. 05-O-0078, §§ 4, 5, 10-17-2005; Ord. No. 07-O-0024, §§ 4, 5, 3-19-2007; Ord. No. 08-O-0010, § 9, 2-18-2008)  
9.1-1. - ER-2 Estate residential district. 
It is the purpose of this district to preserve and maintain existing single-family areas of the city and permit the continued development of residential uses on large lots primarily in areas where public utilities may not be readily available at the time of annexation. 
(A)  Use restrictions. 
(1)  All non-single-family detached uses shall comply with required yards in the following manner: 
(a)  Front and corner side yards shall be maintained for the purpose of providing site access, fire access, landscaping, and fences. 
(b)  Interior side yards and rear yards shall be maintained for the purpose of providing site access, fire access, landscaping and fences. 
(2)  Building bulk requirements. 
(a)  Maximum height of buildings: 
1.  On zoning lots of forty thousand (40,000) square feet of land area or greater, no height limitations for single-family detached dwellings. 
2.  On zoning lots with less than forty thousand (40,000) square feet of land area, single-family detached dwellings shall not exceed thirty-six (36) feet in height. 
(3)  Floor area ratio (F.A.R.): Does not apply to single-family residences; all other permitted or special uses shall be a maximum of 0.30. 
(4)  Any non-single-family detached use may utilize up to twenty (20) percent of the interior portion of any required yard for accessory off-street parking or on-site circulation. 
(5)  Only one (1) principal building may be erected on any one (1) zoning lot. 
(B)  Lot and building requirements. 
(1)  Minimum lot area: Forty thousand (40,000) square feet. 
(2)  Minimum lot width: One hundred twenty-five (125) feet. 
(3)  Minimum setbacks: 
(a)  Front yard: Thirty (30) feet. 
(b)  Interior side yard: Ten (10) feet. 
(c)  Corner side yard: Thirty (30) feet. 
(d)  Rear yard: Twenty-five (25) feet. 
(e)  If an attached garage is provided, both interior side yards shall be not less than ten (10) percent of the lot width or ten (10) feet whichever is less, provided no interior side yard shall be less than four (4) feet. If no attached garage is provided, one interior side yard shall be not less than ten (10) feet at any point between the principal building and the lot line, and not less than ten (10) percent of the lot width or ten (10) feet whichever is less at any point between detached accessory buildings and the lot line, while the other interior side yard shall be not less than ten (10) percent of the lot width or ten (10) feet whichever is less, provided such side yard shall not be less than four (4) feet. 
(f)  On corner lots the interior side yard may be ten (10) percent of the lot width or ten (10) feet whichever is less, provided such side yard shall not be less than four (4) feet. 
(g)  A corner lot existing on the effective date of this ordinance with a lot width less than seventy-five (75) feet shall have a twenty-foot setback on the corner side yard. 
(C)  Permitted uses. 
(1)  Single-family detached dwellings. 
(2)  Day care homes where the provider lives in the house, which receive no more than eight (8) children under the age of twelve (12) (including the provider's own children) and which do not have any employees which do not reside in the house. 
(3)  Accessory buildings, structures and uses, which comply with the minimum building setbacks shall be permitted as follows: 
(a)  Except by variance or special use, detached garages, carports, stables or other accessory buildings or structures shall not exceed the maximum amount of floor area as hereinafter set forth: 
1.  On lots containing forty thousand (40,000) square feet or less of lot area, accessory buildings and structures shall contain not more than six hundred fifty (650) square feet of floor area. 
2.  On lots containing more than forty thousand (40,000) square feet of lot area the permissible area for accessory buildings and structures shall be based on a floor area ratio (F.A.R.) of 0.01625 but shall, in no case, exceed two thousand six hundred (2,600) square feet of floor area. 
3.  If the principal building is constructed without an attached garage, an additional two hundred (200) square feet of gross floor area may be added to the accessory building or structures permitted herein. 
4.  In addition to (3) above, if horses are maintained, two hundred seventy-five (275) square feet of stable space shall be permitted for each permitted horse. Regardless of the number of horses maintained on any zoning lot, at least five hundred fifty (550) square feet of stable space shall be permitted. 
(b)  Roadside stands where all the farm products are grown or raised on said zoning lot. 
(c)  Private stables for the keeping of horses are permitted subject to the following conditions: 
1.  That the total number of horses permitted on any given lot shall be determined by use of the following formula: 
One (1) horse for the first forty thousand (40,000) square feet of land area, and one (1) additional horse for each additional twenty thousand (20,000) square feet of land area. 
2.  Stables shall be located not less than one hundred fifty (150) feet from the front lot line and not less than thirty (30) feet from any side or rear lot line. 
(d)  Any 4-H Project may be permitted on a zoning lot containing not less than forty thousand (40,000) square feet of land area. All buildings for the 4-H Project shall be set back not less than one hundred fifty (150) feet from the front lot line and not less than thirty (30) feet from any side or rear lot line. 
(e)  Noncommercial radio and television towers and antennas, including the structure thereto, shall be permitted subject to the following conditions: 
1.  Shall comply with applicable Federal Communications Commission (F.C.C.) height restrictions, if any. 
2.  No portion of any tower, antenna or support wires may be located within any required yard or closer than ten (10) feet to any lot line, whichever is greater. 
3.  All yards shall be increased by one (1) foot for each additional two (2) feet by which the tower or antenna height exceeds thirty (30) feet in height. 
4.  In no event shall the tower or antenna exceed one hundred (100) feet in height except by variance. 
(f)  Home occupations. 
(g)  The storage of household equipment in an enclosed structure. 
(h)  Non-commercial greenhouses. 
(i)  Compost piles or structures. 
(4)  Intentionally deleted, reserved. 
(5)  Small community residences. 
(6)  Public land, where land is permanently retained as open space in its natural state. 
(D)  Special uses. 
(1)  Bed and breakfast establishments. 
(2)  Detached accessory buildings or structures having a gross floor area exceeding the maximum accessory building floor area permitted in the ER-2 District. 
(3)  Golf course. 
(4)  Greenhouse and nurseries for wholesale and/or retail sales of plant materials and crops, at least fifty (50) percent of which are grown on the zoning lot. 
(5)  More than four (4) pets over four (4) months of age. 
(6)  Noncommercial radio and television towers and antennas, which exceed the maximum height permitted in the ER-2 District. 
(7)  Planned unit developments. 
(8)  Private clubs, lodges and fraternal organizations. 
(9)  Public and private libraries, museums and art galleries. 
(10)  Public and private parks, playgrounds, picnic groves, play fields and other open spaces. 
(11)  Stables, non-private, and riding academies. 
(12)  Residential care uses: 
(a)  Day care centers. 
(b)  Day care centers, adult. 
(c)  Day care homes which receive from nine (9) to twelve (12) children under the age of twelve (12) (including the provider's own children) or which have one (1) or more employees which do not reside in the house. 
(d)  Group day care homes. 
(13)  Roadside stands where less than one hundred (100) percent of the farm products are grown or raised on said lot. 
(14)  Separate living quarters for domestic servants employed on the premises. 
(15)  Above ground service facilities. 
(E)  Additional conditions. In addition to other sections of this code, the following regulations shall apply within the ER-2 Residential Zoning District. 
(1)  Any motor vehicle stored on the lot, which is inoperable, shall be stored within a completely enclosed structure or may be stored in the open provided it is within the buildable area of the lot behind the rear wall of the principal structure, and then only for a period not to exceed six (6) months. Exception: An inoperable vehicle used for decorative purposes as a lawn feature, such as an antique tractor, may be stored in the open if properly maintained. 
(2)  Only personal motor vehicles owned by a resident of the lot may be displayed for sale and then only on the driveway. 
(3)  Recreational vehicles owned by the occupant may be parked or stored on single family zoning lots in accordance with the follow requirements: 
(a)  All recreational vehicles shall be parked or stored within completely enclosed buildings or in the open within the buildable area of the lot. 
(b)  On residential zoned properties all recreational vehicles and garden and utility trailers shall be located, stored or parked behind the front wall of the principle building, which is nearest to the front lot line. In no instance shall a recreational vehicle and/or garden or a utility trailer be parked or stored within the front and side yard setback requirements of the district. Utility trailers shall have either a TA or a TB license plate. 
(c)  No more than one (1) recreational vehicle shall be parked or stored on a lot except for lots over forty-thousand (40,000) square feet in size, where an area not to exceed five hundred (500) square feet of the gross lot area, may be used for the parking or storage of recreational vehicles in the open. No recreational vehicle shall exceed a height of fifteen (15) feet. 
(Ord. No. 05-O-0078, § 6, 10-17-2005; Ord. No. 07-O-0024, §§ 6, 7, 3-19-2007)  
9.2. - R-1 Single-family residence district. 
It is the purpose of this district to establish regulations for a larger lot single-family residential neighborhood. It is anticipated that neighborhoods in this district shall consist of low density areas consisting of single-family detached dwellings.  
9.2-1. - Use restrictions. 
(A)  Dwelling standards: 
(1)  Every one (1) story dwelling hereafter erected shall have a total ground floor area of not less than one thousand six hundred (1,600) square feet measured from the outside of the exterior walls including utility rooms but excluding cellars, basements, open porches, breezeways, garages and other spaces that are not used frequently or during extended periods for living, eating or sleeping purposes. 
(2)  Every dwelling of more than one (1) story hereafter erected shall have a floor area, measured from the outside of the exterior walls of not less than one thousand one hundred fifty (1,150) square feet on the first floor including utility rooms but excluding cellars, basements, open porches, breezeways, garages and other spaces that are not used frequently or during extended periods for living, eating or sleeping purposes. 
(B)  Building allowance: In the R-1 Single-Family Residence District only one (1) principal building shall be erected on any one (1) lot. 
(C)  Accessory buildings: 
(1)  Height. No accessory building shall exceed fifteen feet six inches (15'6") in height. 
(2)  Location. No part of an accessory building shall be located closer than fifteen (15) feet to the side lot line. No part of an accessory building shall be located closer than five (5) feet to the rear lot line. No detached accessory building shall be closer than ten (10) feet to the principal building. 
(3)  Time of construction. No accessory building or structure shall be constructed on any lot prior to the start of construction of the principal building to which it is accessory. 
(4)  Use of accessory building. Use of any accessory structure as a dwelling is strictly prohibited. 
(5)  Yard coverage. Accessory uses, including patios/decks, shall not cover more than thirty (30) percent of the required rear yard. 
(6)  Satellite receiving dishes. Are allowable as an accessory use provided they comply with all accessory building requirements. 
(Ord. No. 03-O-0115, § 4, 12-15-2003; Ord. No. 04-O-0074, § 6, 7-19-2004; Ord. No. 08-O-0081, § 1, 3-16-2009)  
9.2-2. - Lot and building requirements. 
(A)  Minimum lot area: Twenty thousand (20,000) square feet. 
(B)  Minimum lot width: One hundred (100) feet at the established building line. 
(C)  Minimum setbacks: 
(1)  Front yard: Thirty-five (35) feet. 
(2)  Corner side yard: Thirty-five (35) feet. 
(3)  Side yards: Fifteen (15) feet. 
(4)  Rear yard: Forty (40) feet. 
(5)  Maximum structure height: Thirty (30) feet. 
(6)  Maximum lot coverage: Thirty (30) percent.  
9.2-3. - Permitted uses. 
(A)  Single-family detached dwellings. 
(B)  Parks and recreational areas when publicly owned. 
(C)  Home occupations. 
(D)  Small community residences, provided: 
(1)  They are located not less than one thousand three hundred (1,300) feet from another small community residence 
(2)  Prior to occupancy, a certificate of zoning compliance is applied for and received.  
9.2-4. - Special uses. 
(A)  Public or private schools, elementary, high, junior college or university, including playgrounds and athletic fields auxiliary thereto. 
(B)  Churches, chapels, temples, synagogues. 
(C)  Convents, monastery and religious retreats. 
(D)  Country club including accessory uses such as driving ranges, bar, restaurants, meeting and banquet rooms. 
(E)  Golf courses including accessory uses such as driving ranges, bar, restaurants, meeting and banquet rooms. This does not include miniature golf courses, pitch and putt and non-golf course golf driving ranges. 
(F)  Public library/museums. 
(G)  Cemeteries. 
(H)  Hospitals and nursing homes. 
(I)  Intentionally deleted, reserved. 
(J)  Above ground service facilities. 
(Ord. No. 2733, § 10, 4-4-94; Ord. No. 01-O-0118, § 7, 1-7-2002; Ord. No. 07-O-0024, § 8, 3-19-2007)  
9.2-5. - Elm Road Overlay District. 
The Elm Road Overlay District is intended to help preserve the residential character and enhance the property values within this stand-alone single family residential neighborhood along Elm Road, which at the time of the adoption of these regulations, is completely surrounded on all sides by non-residential uses and zonings. The defining elements of this district generally include: 
(1)  Large lot sizes (at least one-half (½) acre or greater in area); 
(2)  A lack of public improvements such as curb and gutters, sidewalks, street lights, and direct access to municipal water and sanitary sewer services; and 
(3)  A more rural setting with several properties having gravel driveways, barns, stables and other large accessory structures. 
It is also intended to encourage new construction, additions, or alterations to the existing single family dwellings that will promote the well-being of the neighborhood and that will be comparable with the bulk, scale, setbacks, and uses of the city's other R-1 zoned residential developments. 
These overlay district provisions apply only to the underlying properties along Elm Road identified by the Elm Road Overlay District's boundaries. Where these requirements conflict with the underlying R-1 zoning district regulations or any other provisions of this ordinance, the requirements of the more restrictive provisions shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 14-O-0008, § 1, 3-17-2014)  
9.2-5.1. - Accessory uses. 
(A)  Private stables or barns used for the shelter and care of equine. Said structures shall be located no closer than fifty (50) feet to any property line and shall be located only in the actual rear yard. One (1) horse shall be permitted for every twenty thousand (20,000) square feet of zoning lot area. 
(Ord. No. 14-O-0008, § 1, 3-17-2014)  
9.2-5.2. - Lot and building requirements. 
(A)  Minimum lot width: Eighty-four (84) feet, measured at the front yard building setback line. 
(B)  Minimum front yard setback: Twenty-five (25) feet. 
(Ord. No. 14-O-0008, § 1, 3-17-2014)  
9.3. - R-2 Single-family residence district. 
It is the purpose of this district to establish regulations for single-family residential neighborhoods. It is anticipated that neighborhoods in this district shall consist of low density areas consisting of single-family detached dwellings.  
9.3-1. - Use restrictions. 
(A)  Dwelling standards: 
(1)  Every one (1) story dwelling hereafter erected shall have a total ground floor area of not less than one thousand four hundred fifty (1,450) square feet measured from the outside of the exterior walls including utility rooms but excluding cellars, basements, open porches, breezeways, garages and other spaces that are not used frequently or during extended periods for living, eating or sleeping purposes. 
(2)  Every dwelling of more than one-story hereafter erected shall have a floor area measured from the outside of the exterior walls of not less than one thousand fifty (1,050) square feet on the first floor including utility rooms but excluding cellars, basements, open porches, breezeways, garages and other spaces that are not used frequently or during extended periods for living, eating or sleeping purposes. 
(B)  Building allowance: In the R-2 Single-Family District only one (1) principal building shall be erected on any one (1) lot. 
(C)  Accessory buildings: 
(1)  Height. No accessory building shall exceed fifteen feet six inches (15'6") in height. 
(2)  Location. No part of an accessory building shall be located within the required side yard. No part of an accessory building shall be located closer than five (5) feet to the rear lot line. No detached accessory building shall be closer than ten (10) feet to the principal building. 
(3)  Time of construction. No accessory building or structure shall be constructed on any lot prior to the start of construction of the principal building to which it is accessory. 
(4)  Use of accessory building. Use of any accessory structure as a dwelling is strictly prohibited. 
(5)  Yard coverage. Accessory uses, including patios/decks, shall not cover more than thirty (30) percent of the required rear yard. 
(6)  Satellite receiving dishes. Are allowable as an accessory use provided they comply with all accessory building requirements. 
(7)  Private stables for the keeping of horses are permitted subject to the following conditions: 
That the total number of horses permitted on any given lot shall be determined by use of the following formula: 
a.  One (1) horse for the first forty thousand (40,000) square feet of land area, and one (1) additional horse for each additional twenty thousand (20,000) square feet of land area. 
b.  Stables shall be located not less than one hundred fifty (150) feet from the front lot line and not less than thirty (30) feet from any side or rear lot lines. 
(Ord. No. 03-O-0115, § 4, 12-15-2003; Ord. No. 04-O-0074, § 6, 7-19-2004; Ord. No. 05-O-0078, § 7, 10-17-2005; Ord. No. 08-O-0081, § 1, 3-16-2009)  
9.3-2. - Lot and building requirements. 
(A)  Minimum lot area: Twelve thousand (12,000) square feet. 
(B)  Minimum lot width: Seventy-five (75) feet at the building line. 
(C)  Minimum setbacks: 
(1)  Front yard: Thirty (30) feet. 
(2)  Corner side yard: Thirty (30) feet. 
(3)  Side yards: Ten (10) percent of the lot width at the building line. 
(4)  Rear yard: Thirty (30) feet. 
(5)  Maximum structure height: Thirty-six (36) feet. 
(6)  Maximum lot coverage: Thirty (30) percent. 
(Ord. No. 05-O-0078, § 8, 10-17-2005)  
9.3-3. - Permitted uses. 
(A)  Single-family detached dwellings. 
(B)  Parks and recreational areas when publicly owned. 
(C)  Home occupations. 
(D)  Small community residences. 
(1)  They are located not less than one thousand three hundred (1,300) feet from another small community residence. 
(2)  Prior to occupancy, a certificate of zoning compliance is applied for and received.  
9.3-4. - Special uses. 
(A)  Public or private schools, elementary, high, junior college or university including playgrounds and athletic fields auxiliary thereto. 
(B)  Churches, chapels, temples, synagogues. 
(C)  Convents, monastery and religious retreats. 
(D)  Golf courses including accessory uses such as driving ranges, bars, restaurants, meeting and banquet rooms. This does not include miniature golf courses, pitch and putt. 
(E)  Public library/museums. 
(F)  Cemeteries. 
(G)  Hospitals and nursing homes. 
(H)  Intentionally deleted, reserved. 
(I)  Above ground service facilities. 
(J)  Golf driving range. 
(Ord. No. 2733, § 11, 4-4-94; Ord. No. 01-O-0118, § 8, 1-7-2002; Ord. No. 07-O-0024, § 9, 3-19-2007)  
9.4. - R-3 Single-family residence district. 
It is the purpose of this district to establish regulations for single-family dwellings. It is anticipated that neighborhoods in this district shall consist of single-family detached dwellings in the established parts of the city.  
9.4-1. - Use restrictions. 
(A)  Dwelling standards: 
(1)  Every one-story dwelling hereafter erected shall have a total ground floor area of not less than one thousand three hundred (1,300) square feet measured from the outside of the exterior walls including utility rooms but excluding cellars, basements, open porches, breezeways, garages and other spaces that are not used frequently or during extended periods for living, eating or sleeping purposes. 
(2)  Every dwelling of more than one-story hereafter erected shall have a floor area measured from the outside of the exterior walls of not less than nine hundred fifty (950) square feet on the first floor including utility rooms but excluding cellars, basements, open porches, breezeways, garages and other spaces that are not used frequently or during extended periods for living, eating or sleeping purposes. 
(B)  Building allowance: In the R-3 Single-Family Residence District only one (1) principal building shall be erected on any one (1) lot. 
(C)  Accessory buildings: 
(1)  Height. No accessory building shall exceed fifteen feet six inches (15'6") in height. 
(2)  Location. No part of an accessory building shall be located within the required side yard. No part of an accessory building shall be located closer than five (5) feet to the rear lot line. No detached accessory building shall be closer than ten (10) feet to the principal building. 
(3)  Time of construction. No accessory building or structure shall be constructed on any lot prior to the start of construction of the principal building to which it is accessory. 
(4)  Use of accessory building. Use of any accessory structure as a dwelling is strictly prohibited. 
(5)  Yard coverage. Accessory uses, including patios/decks, shall not cover more than thirty (30) percent of the required rear yard. 
(6)  Satellite receiving dishes. Are allowable as an accessory use provided they comply with all accessory building requirements. 
(Ord. No. 03-O-0115, § 4, 12-15-2003; Ord. No. 04-O-0074, § 6, 7-19-2004; Ord. No. 08-O-0081, § 1, 3-16-2009)  
9.4-2. - Lot and building requirements. 
(A)  Minimum lot area: Nine thousand (9,000) square feet. 
(B)  Minimum lot width: Seventy-five (75) feet at the building line. 
(C)  Minimum setbacks: 
(1)  Front yard. Thirty (30) feet. 
(2)  Corner side yard. Thirty (30) feet. 
(3)  Side yards. Ten (10) percent of lot width at building line. 
(4)  Rear yard. Thirty (30) feet. 
(5)  Maximum structure height. Thirty (30) feet. 
(6)  Maximum lot coverage. Forty (40) percent. 
(Ord. No. 03-O-0039, § 2, 5-19-2003)  
9.4-3. - Permitted uses. 
(A)  Single-family detached dwellings. 
(B)  Parks and recreational areas when publicly owned. 
(C)  Home occupations. 
(D)  Small community residences, provided: 
(1)  They are located not less than one thousand three hundred (1,300) feet from another small community residence. 
(2)  Prior to occupancy, a certificate of zoning compliance is applied for and received.  
9.4-4. - Special uses. 
(A)  Public or private schools, elementary, high, junior college or university including playgrounds and athletic fields auxiliary thereto. 
(B)  Churches, chapels, temples, synagogues. 
(C)  Convents, monastery and religious retreats. 
(D)  Golf courses including accessory uses such as driving ranges, bars, restaurants, meeting and banquet rooms. This does not include miniature golf courses, pitch and putt and non-golf course golf driving range. 
(E)  Public library/museum. 
(F)  Cemeteries. 
(G)  Hospitals and nursing homes. 
(H)  Planned unit developments. 
(I)  Above ground service facilities. 
(Ord. No. 2733, § 12, 4-4-94; Ord. No. 07-O-0024, § 9, 3-19-2007)  
9.5. - R-4 Single-family residence district. 
It is the purpose of this district to establish regulations for single-family dwellings. It is anticipated that neighborhoods [in] this district shall consist of single-family detached dwellings. This district is to be used in areas not suitable for a larger lot subdivision.  
9.5-1. - Use restrictions. 
(A)  Dwelling standards: 
(1)  Every one (1) story dwelling hereafter erected shall have a total ground floor area of not less than one thousand one hundred fifty (1,150) square feet measured from the outside of the exterior walls including utility rooms but excluding cellars, basements, open porches, breezeways, garages and other spaces that are not used frequently or during extended periods for living, eating or sleeping purposes. 
(2)  Every dwelling of more than one (1) story hereafter erected shall have a floor area measured from the south side of the exterior walls of not less than eight hundred fifty (850) square feet on the first floor including utility rooms but excluding cellars, basements, open porches, breezeways, garages and other spaces that are not used frequently or during extended periods for living, eating or sleeping purposes. 
(B)  Building allowance: In the R-4 Single-Family Residence District only one (1) principal building shall be erected on any one (1) lot. 
(C)  Accessory buildings: 
(1)  Height. No accessory building shall exceed fifteen feet six inches (15'6?) in height. 
(2)  Location. No part of any accessory building shall be located within the required side yard. No part of an accessory building shall be located closer than five (5) feet to the rear lot line. No detached accessory building shall be closer than ten (10) feet to the principal building. 
(3)  Time of construction. No accessory building or structure shall be constructed on any lot prior to the start of construction of the principal building to which it is accessory. 
(4)  Use of accessory building. Use of any accessory structure as a dwelling is strictly prohibited. 
(5)  Yard coverage. Accessory uses, including patios/decks, shall not cover more than thirty (30) percent of the required rear yard. 
(6)  Satellite receiving dishes. Are allowable as an accessory use provided they comply with all accessory building requirements. 
(Ord. No. 03-O-0115, § 4, 12-15-2003; Ord. No. 04-O-0074, § 6, 7-19-2004; Ord. No. 08-O-0081, § 1, 3-16-2009)  
9.5-2. - Lot and building requirements. 
(A)  Minimum lot area: ;hg;Seven thousand eight hundred (7,800) square feet for interior lots. 
Eight thousand five hundred eighty (8,580) square feet for corner lots. 
(B)  Minimum lot width: Sixty-five (65) feet at the building line. 
(C)  Minimum setbacks: 
(1)  Front yard. Twenty-five (25) feet. 
(2)  Corner side yard. Twenty-five (25) feet. 
(3)  Side yards. Ten (10) percent of lot width at building line. 
(4)  Rear yard. Thirty (30) feet. 
(5)  Maximum structure height. Thirty (30) feet. 
(6)  Maximum lot coverage. Forty (40) percent.  
9.5-3. - Permitted uses. 
(A)  Single-family detached dwellings. 
(B)  Parks and recreational areas when publicly owned. 
(C)  Home occupations. 
(D)  Small community residences, provided: 
(1)  They are located not less than one thousand three hundred (1,300) feet from another small community residence. 
(2)  Prior to occupancy, a certificate of zoning compliance is applied for and received.  
9.5-4. - Special uses. 
(A)  Public or private schools, elementary, high, junior college or university including playgrounds and athletic fields auxiliary thereto. 
(B)  Churches, chapels, temples, synagogues. 
(C)  Convents, monastery and religious retreats. 
(D)  Golf courses including accessory uses such as driving does not include miniature golf courses, pitch and putt and non-golf course driving range. 
(E)  Public library/museum. 
(F)  Cemeteries. 
(G)  Hospitals and nursing homes. 
(H)  Intentionally deleted, reserved. 
(I)  Above ground service facilities. 
(Ord. No. 2733, § 13, 4-4-94; Ord. No. 01-O-0118, § 9, 1-7-2002; Ord. No. 07-O-0024, § 9, 3-19-2007)  
9.6. - R-5 Single-family residence district. 
It is the purpose of this district to establish regulations for single-family dwellings in established neighborhoods. It is anticipated that neighborhoods in this district shall consist of single-family detached dwellings in the established parts of the city. It is not anticipated that this will apply to newly developed areas.  
9.6-1. - Use restrictions. 
(A)  Dwelling standards: 
(1)  Every one (1) story dwelling hereafter erected shall have a total ground floor area of not less than one thousand (1,000) square feet measured from the outside of the exterior walls including utility rooms but excluding cellars, basements, open porches, breezeways, garages and other spaces that are not used frequently or during extended periods for living, eating or sleeping purposes. 
(2)  Every dwelling of more than one (1) story hereafter erected shall have a floor area measured from the outside of the exterior walls of not less than seven hundred fifty (750) square feet on the first floor including utility rooms but excluding cellars, basements, open porches, breezeways, garages and other spaces that are not used frequently or during extended periods for living, eating or sleeping purposes. 
(B)  Building allowance: In the R-5 single family residence district, only one (1) principal building shall be erected on any one (1) lot, except for principal buildings related to public or private schools, elementary, high, junior college or university, places of assembly and houses of worship. 
(C)  Accessory buildings: 
(1)  Height. No accessory building shall exceed fifteen feet six inches (15'6?) in height. 
(2)  Location. No part of an accessory building shall be located closer than three (3) feet to the side lot line. No part of an accessory building shall be located closer than five (5) feet to the rear lot line. No detached accessory building shall be closer than ten (10) feet to the principal building. 
(3)  Time of construction. No accessory building or structure shall be constructed on any lot prior to the start of construction of the principal building to which it is accessory. 
(4)  Use of accessory building. Use of any accessory structure as a dwelling is strictly prohibited. 
(5)  Yard coverage. Accessory uses, including patios/decks, shall not cover more than forty (40) percent of the actual rear yard. 
(6)  Satellite receiving dishes. Are allowable as an accessory use provided they comply with all accessory building requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2733, § 14, 4-4-94; Ord. No. 01-O-0118, § 11, 1-7-2002; Ord. No. 03-O-0115, § 4, 12-15-2003; Ord. No. 04-O-0074, § 7, 7-19-2004; Ord. No. 08-O-0081, § 1, 3-16-2009; Ord. No. 11-O-0053, § 1, 9-19-2011  
9.6-2. - Lot and building requirements. 
(A)  Minimum lot area: Six thousand five hundred (6,500) square feet. 
(B)  Minimum lot width: Fifty (50) feet at the building line. 
(C)  Minimum setbacks: 
(1)  Front yard. Twenty-five (25) feet. 
(2)  Corner side yard. Fifteen (15) feet. 
(3)  Side yards. Ten (10) percent of lot width at building line. 
(4)  Rear yard. Thirty (30) feet. 
(5)  Maximum structure height. Thirty (30) feet. 
(6)  Maximum lot coverage. Forty (40) percent. 
(D)  Infill lots. If buildings along the frontage of any street between two (2) intersecting streets in any R-5 Single-Family Residence District have observed an average setback which is greater or lessor in dimension than the minimum front yard or setback established for the district in which the street frontage is located than the set back shall be the average setback of the two (2) immediately adjoining lots. This section shall apply to required front yards for interior lots and required front yards and required corner side yards for corner lots. 
(Ord. No. 2733, § 15, 4-4-94; Ord. No. 03-O-0040, § 8, 6-16-2003)  
9.6-3. - Permitted uses. 
(A)  Single-family detached dwellings. 
(B)  Parks and recreational areas when publicly owned. 
(C)  Home occupations. 
(D)  Small community residences, provided: 
(1)  They are located not less than one thousand three hundred (1,300) feet from another small community residence. 
(2)  Prior to occupancy, a certificate of zoning compliance is applied for and received. 
(E)  Government facilities. 
(Ord. No. 08-O-0010, § 10, 2-18-2008)  
9.6-4. - Special uses. 
(A)  Public or private schools, elementary, high, junior college or university including playgrounds and athletic fields auxiliary thereto. 
(B)  Houses of worship. 
(C)  Convents, monastery and religious retreats. 
(D)  Golf courses including accessory uses such as driving ranges, bars, restaurants, meeting and banquet rooms. This does not include miniature golf courses, pitch and putt and non-golf course golf driving range. 
(E)  Public library/museum. 
(F)  Cemeteries. 
(G)  Hospitals and nursing homes. 
(H)  Parking lots for public or private schools, elementary, high, junior college or university, places of assembly and houses of worship. 
(I)  Intentionally deleted, reserved. 
(J)  Municipal uses and offices for professionals such as physicians, dentists, attorneys-at-law, architects, engineers, musicians, artists, teachers, accountants, photographers, real estate agents, insurance agents, public stenographers, brokers, business consultants and other professional offices as determined by the zoning board or appeals/plan commission if they meet the following criteria: 
(1)  Must provide paved parking area which is approved by the city council; and, 
(2)  There shall be no parking in required front yard; and, 
(3)  Signage must be approved by the city council. 
(K)  Above ground service facilities. 
(Ord. No. 2698, § 1, 2-7-94; Ord. No. 2733, § 16, 4-4-94; Ord. No. 01-O-0118, § 10, 1-7-2002; Ord. No. 02-O-0084, § 4, 6-17-2002; Ord. No. 03-O-0018, § 1, 3-17-2003; Ord. No. 03-O-0040, § 9, 6-16-2003; Ord. No. 07-O-0024, § 10, 3-19-2007)  
9.7. - R-6 Multiple-family dwellings district. 
It is the purpose of this district to encourage the creation and maintenance of a stable and enduring multiple-residence environment. To do this, limitations are imposed on the use, character and density or development of land so as to take advantage of, or to avoid conflict with, natural topography, existing development, arrangement and location of existing or planned community facilities and the social needs of the city. This district may also be utilized for the appropriate use of redevelopment areas.  
9.7-1. - Use restrictions. 
(A)  Dwelling standards: 
(1)  Any single-family structure shall have a total ground floor area of not less than seven hundred fifty (750) square feet measured from the outside of the exterior walls including utility rooms but excluding cellars, basements, open porches, breezeways, garages and other spaces that are not used frequently or during extended periods for living, eating or sleeping purposes. 
(2)  Two-family dwelling structures shall have a total floor area of not less than seven hundred (700) square feet for each dwelling unit measured from the outside walls including utility rooms but excluding all other areas not used for living, eating or sleeping purposes. 
(3)  Multiple-family dwelling structures shall have a total floor area of not less than six hundred fifty (650) square feet for each dwelling unit measured from the outside walls including utility rooms but excluding all other areas not used for living, eating or sleeping purposes. 
(4)  Independent senior housing dwelling units shall have a minimum total floor area per dwelling unit of not less than: 
a.  Studio units: Four hundred (400) square feet/dwelling unit 
b.  One (1) bedroom units: Five hundred seventy-five (575) square feet/dwelling unit 
c.  Two (2) bedroom units: Seven hundred eighty (780) square feet/dwelling unit 
Assisted/supportive housing dwelling units shall have a minimum total floor area per dwelling unit of not less than: 
a.  Studio units: Three hundred fifty (350) square feet/dwelling unit 
b.  One (1) bedroom units: Four hundred seventy-five (475) square feet/dwelling unit 
c.  Two (2) bedroom units: Six hundred fifty (650) square feet/dwelling unit 
For the purposes this subsection, assisted/supportive living facilities shall have common areas totaling not less than forty (40) percent of its building area. 
(B)  Accessory uses: 
(1)  Height. No accessory use shall be higher than fifteen feet six inches (15'6?). 
(2)  Setbacks. No accessory use shall be located within the front yard area. No part of an accessory building shall be located in any part of the side yard. 
(3)  Yard coverage. Accessory uses shall not cover more than thirty (30) percent of the rear yard. 
(4)  Use as dwelling. Use of any accessory structure as a dwelling is strictly prohibited. 
(5)  Satellite receiving dishes. Are allowable as an accessory use provided they comply with all accessory building requirements. 
(C)  Only one (1) principal building may be erected on any one (1) lot. 
(Ord. No. 2733, § 17, 4-4-94; Ord. No. 4408, § 2, 4-16-2001)  
9.7-2. - Lot and building requirements. 
(A)  Lot size. Every detached dwelling hereafter erected shall be located on a lot having the following minimum area requirements: 
(1)  Single-family dwellings—Nine thousand (9,000) square feet. 
(2)  Two-family dwellings—Six thousand (6,000) square feet. 
(3)  Multi-family—Five thousand (5,000) square feet (per dwelling unit). 
(4)  Senior housing—Two thousand (2,000) square feet (per dwelling unit). 
(B)  Yard areas. No building shall be erected or enlarged unless the following yards are provided and maintained: 
(1)  Front yard. On every zoning lot a front yard shall be provided of not less than twenty-five (25) feet. For buildings exceeding twenty-five (25) feet in height, the minimum front yard shall be increased by one (1) foot for each two (2) feet or fraction thereof by which the building height exceeds twenty-five (25) feet. 
(2)  Side yard. For every single family, two-family and multiple-family dwelling units, the side yard on each side of the main building shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet in width plus an additional two (2) feet in width for each additional story above two (2) stories in height. On corner lots there shall be maintained a side yard of not less than fifteen (15) feet on the side adjacent to the street. 
In case of a reversed corner lot, there shall be maintained a setback from the side street of not less than fifty (50) percent of the front yard required on the lots in rear of such corner lots, but such setback need not exceed fifteen (15) feet. No accessory building on such reversed corner lot shall project beyond the front yard required on the adjacent lot to the rear nor be located nearer than five (5) feet to the side lot line of such adjacent lots. 
On a lot improved with a nonresidential building there shall be a side yard of not less than twelve (12) feet on each side of the main building and combined total of side yards of not less than thirty (30) feet. 
(3)  Rear yard. On every zoning lot a rear yard shall be provided of not less than thirty (30) feet in depth. 
(C)  Reserved. 
(D)  Lot coverage. Not more than sixty (60) percent of the area of a lot may be covered by building and structure including accessory buildings. 
(E)  Height limitations maximum height of seventy-five (75) feet. 
(Ord. No. 4408, § 3, 4-16-2001)  
9.7-3. - Permitted uses. 
(A)  Single-family residence dwellings. 
(B)  Multiple-family dwellings. 
(C)  Condominiums. 
(D)  Apartments. 
(E)  Parks and recreational areas when publicly owned and operated. 
(F)  Small community residences, provided: 
(1)  They are located not less than one thousand three hundred (1,300) feet from another small community residence. 
(2)  Prior to occupancy, a certificate of zoning compliance is applied for and received. 
(G)  Large community residences subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  No such residence shall be located less than six hundred (600) feet from a small or large community residence; provided however, that this spacing requirement may be waived by the city council if they find that the cumulative effect of such use would not alter the residential character of the neighborhood setting, and by its operation would not create an adverse effect on surrounding properties. 
(2)  Prior to admitting residents, the operator of such residence shall demonstrate that the dwelling will comply with all applicable licensing and code standards. 
(3)  Applicant shall submit a statement of the exact nature of the residence, the qualifications of the agency that will operate the residence, the number and type of personnel who will be employed, and the number and nature of the residents who will live in the residence. 
(4)  The residence shall, to the extent possible, conform to the type and outward appearances of the residences in the area in which it is located. 
(5)  Prior to occupancy, a certificate of zoning compliance is applied for and received.  
9.7-4. - Special uses. 
(A)  Schools—public, denominational or private including playgrounds and athletic fields auxiliary thereto. 
(B)  Churches and other places of worship. 
(C)  Cemeteries. 
(D)  Institutions for the aged which are licensed. 
(E)  Home occupations. 
(F)  Golf courses of regulation size which may include driving ranges; provided that no clubhouse, parking lot or accessory building is located nearer than five hundred (500) feet to any dwelling unit or other zoning district. 
(G)  Planned unit developments. 
(H)  Medical and dental offices and group medical centers. 
(I)  Offices for professionals such as physicians, dentists, attorneys-at-law, architects, engineers, musicians, artists, teachers, accountants, photographers, real estate agents, insurance agents, public stenographers, brokers, business consultants and other professional offices as determined by the plan commission. 
(J)  Rest homes, nursing homes, hospitals, sanitariums, group medical centers, which are licensed and/or registered. 
(K)  Agriculture, horticulture, forestry. 
(L)  Dormitories. 
(M)  Barber shops. 
(N)  Beauty shops. 
(O)  Parking lots. 
(P)  Public facilities including libraries and museums. 
(Q)  Drug stores. 
(R)  Restaurants. 
(S)  Religious retreats. 
(T)  Above ground service facilities. 
(Ord. No. 07-O-0024, § 11, 3-19-2007)  
ARTICLE X. - BUSINESS 
 
10.1. - Business.  
10.1-1. - Business land usage. 
The intent is to establish four (4) distinctly separate business districts within the city. These categorical classifications shall be: 
B-1 - Central Business District 
B-2 - General Business District 
B-3 - Regional Shopping District 
A - Airport District 
(Ord. No. 4123, § 2, 9-22-98; Ord. No. 01-O-0117, § 1(Exh. B), 12-17-2001)  
10.2. - B-1 Central business district. 
A pedestrian-oriented district geographically designated within the central core of the city in which retail and service uses are provided. 
(Ord. No. 01-O-0117, § 1(Exh. B), 12-17-2001)  
10.2-1. - Use restrictions. 
(A)  All establishments located in this district shall primarily be retail or service and deal directly with patrons. 
(B)  Any processing or treatment of goods on any premises must be clearly incidental and related to the business conducted on such premises. 
(C)  Outdoor storage is prohibited. 
(D)  An outside seating area is permitted ancillary to a permitted or special use provided the area does not encroach onto any required parking spaces or interfere with vehicle or pedestrian traffic. If located on a walkway, a minimum of four-foot wide clearance shall be preserved. 
(E)  Funeral establishments: 
(1)  No loading doors shall be visible from any public right-of-way. 
(2)  All business vehicles associated with the facility shall not be visible from any public right-of-way. 
(F)  Banks and financial institutions. 
(1)  Shall consist of a minimum leasable floor area of six thousand five hundred (6,500) square feet if located in a stand alone building. 
(2)  Shall consist of a minimum leasable floor area of three thousand five hundred (3,500) square feet if located in a multi-tenant office building. 
(3)  Shall not be permitted in a multi-tenant retail building. 
(Ord. No. 2733, § 18, 4-4-94; Ord. No. 4123, § 3, 9-22-98; Ord. No. 01-O-0117, § 1(Exh. B), 12-17-2001; Ord. No. 03-O-0040, § 10, 6-16-2003; Ord. No. 04-O-0055, § 4, 6-21-2004; Ord. No. 09-O-0047, § 1, 8-17-2009)  
10.2-2. - Lot and building requirements. 
Every building erected in the B-1 Central Business District shall conform to the requirements indicated below: 
(A)  Minimum lot area: None. 
(B)  Minimum lot width: Twenty (20) feet at the established building line. 
(C)  Minimum lot depth: None. 
(D)  Minimum setback: None. 
(E)  Maximum floor area ratio: None. 
(F)  Maximum percentage of lot building coverage: None. 
(G)  Maximum height: Four (4) stories or forty-eight (48) feet. 
(Ord. No. 01-O-0117, § 1(Exh. B), 12-17-2001)  
10.2-3. - Permitted uses. 
Provided all of the use restrictions of this district are observed, the following uses are permitted: 
(A)  Bakeries. 
[(B)  Reserved.] 
(C)  Barber shops. 
(D)  Beauty parlors and nail salons. 
(E)  Broadcasting and recording studios. 
(F)  Convenience stores. 
(G)  Dwelling units above the first floor. 
(H)  Florists. 
[(I)  Reserved.] 
(J)  Government facilities. 
(K)  Laundromats and dry cleaners. 
(L)  Libraries. 
(M)  Mass transit facilities. 
(N)  Medical and dental clinics and offices. 
(O)  Museums. 
(P)  Music studios and dance studios. 
(Q)  Offices. 
(R)  Printing, publishing and photocopying. 
(S)  Real estate services. 
(T)  Resale stores. 
(U)  Restaurants, including those with live entertainment. 
(V)  Retail establishments. 
(W)  Supermarkets/grocery stores. 
(X)  Theaters, indoor. 
(Y)  Trade and martial art schools, under seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet. 
(Z)  Video rental. 
(AA)  Massage establishments that are associated with a medical facility, physician's office, health care facility or full service health and beauty salon. 
(BB)  Above ground service facilities. 
(CC)  Pet shops. 
(Ord. No. 01-O-0117, § 1(Exh. B), 12-17-2001; Ord. No. 03-O-0040, § 14, 6-16-2003; Ord. No. 04-O-0055, § 2, 6-21-2004; Ord. No. 05-O-0067, § 10, 9-19-2005; Ord. No. 07-O-0024, § 12, 3-19-2007; Ord. No. 09-O-0047, § 2, 8-17-2009; Ord. No. 12-O-0008, § 8, 4-16-2012; Ord. No. 19-O-0008, § 2, 3-18-2019)  
10.2-4. - Special uses. 
Provided all the use restrictions of this district are observed, the following uses may be allowed by special use permit: 
[(A)  Reserved.] 
(B)  Auditoriums and meeting rooms, under seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet. 
(C)  Motor vehicle service stations. 
(D)  Clubs and lodges, under seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet. 
(E)  Daycare facilities. 
(F)  Drive-in and drive-thru facilities. 
(G)  Dwelling units, if located below the second story. 
(H)  Hotels, motels and bed and breakfast facilities. 
(I)  Nursing homes. 
(J)  Places of worship, under seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet. 
(K)  Recreational facilities (public and private). 
(L)  Public or private schools, elementary or high, under seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet. 
(M)  Intentionally deleted, reserved. 
(N)  Funeral establishments. 
(O)  Banks and financial institutions. 
(M)[P]  Planned unit developments. 
(Ord. No. 01-O-0117, § 1(Exh. B), 12-17-2001; Ord. No. 03-O-0040, § 13, 6-16-2003; Ord. No. 03-O-0062, § 1, 7-2-2003; Ord. No. 04-O-0055, § 3, 6-21-2004; Ord. No. 07-O-0024, § 13, 3-19-2007; Ord. No. 09-O-0047, § 3, 8-17-2009; Ord. No. 12-O-0008, § 9, 4-16-2012; Ord. No. 18-O-0031, § 4, 6-18-2018)  
10.3. - B-2 General business district. 
This district is intended to accommodate and regulate Commercial/Business development outside of the Central Business District (B-1). These typically require direct access to major streets and large lots for off-street parking and loading. This district is arterial-road oriented and primarily located along State highways. 
(Ord. No. 01-O-0117, § 1(Exh. B), 12-17-2001)  
10.3-1. - Use restrictions. 
(A)  All establishments located in this district shall primarily deal directly with patrons. 
(B)  Outdoor storage is prohibited. 
(C)  An outside seating area is permitted ancillary to a permitted or special use provided the area does not encroach onto any required parking spaces or interfere with vehicle or pedestrian traffic. If located on a walkway, a minimum of four-foot wide clearance shall be preserved. 
(D)  Funeral establishments: 
(1)  No loading doors shall be visible from any public right-of-way. 
(2)  All business vehicles associated with the facility shall not be visible from any public right-of-way. 
(E)  Banks and financial institutions. 
(1)  Shall consist of a minimum leasable floor area of six thousand five hundred (6,500) square feet if located in a stand alone building. 
(2)  Shall consist of a minimum leasable floor area of three thousand five hundred (3,500) square feet if located in a multi-tenant office building. 
(3)  Shall not be permitted in a multi-tenant retail building. 
(F)  Nursing homes and senior housing. 
(1)  Shall be located on a zoning lot a minimum of ten (10) acres in area. 
(2)  Shall not be located on a zoning lot have street frontage on Neltnor Boulevard (IL Route 59), North Avenue (IL Route 64) or Roosevelt Road (IL Route 38). 
(G)  Used automobile sales. 
(1)  Minimum lot area: two (2) acres. 
(2)  Minimum lot width: three hundred (300) feet, measured at the front lot line. 
(3)  Minimum building area: ten thousand (10,000) square feet. 
(Ord. No. 4123, § 4, 9-22-98; Ord. No. 01-O-0117, § 1(Exh. B), 12-17-2001; Ord. No. 03-O-0040, § 11, 6-16-2003; Ord. No. 04-O-0055, § 4, 6-21-2004; Ord. No. 09-O-0047, § 4, 8-17-2009; Ord. No. 12-O-0037, § 2, 9-17-2012; Ord. No. 18-O-0022, § 2, 5-21-2018)  
10.3-2. - Lot and building requirements. 
Every principal building erected in this district shall conform to the requirements indicated below: 
(A)  Minimum lot size: Fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet. 
(B)  Minimum lot width: One hundred (100) feet at the established building line. 
(C)  Minimum setbacks: 
(1)  Front yard: Fifty (50) feet for buildings and other structures. A twenty-foot landscape yard shall be provided along the front lot line, with landscaping in accordance with the provisions of sections 14.4 through 14.8 hereof. 
(2)  Corner side yard: Fifty (50) feet for buildings and other structures. A twenty-foot landscape yard shall be provided along the corner side lot line, with landscaping in accordance with the provisions of sections 14.4 through 14.8 hereof. 
(3)  Side yards: Twenty-five (25) feet for buildings and structures. A ten-foot landscape yard shall be provided along the side lot line. 
(4)  Rear yard: Twenty-five (25) feet for buildings and structures. A ten-foot landscape yard shall be provided along the rear lot line. 
(D)  Floor area ratio: Not to exceed 3. 
(E)  Maximum structure height: Seventy-five (75) feet. 
(Ord. No. 01-O-0117, § 1(Exh. B), 12-17-2001)  
10.3-3. - Permitted uses. 
Provided all the use restrictions of this district are observed, the following uses are permitted: 
(A)  Animal hospitals/veterinarian clinics (no outside kennel). 
(B)  Auditoriums and meeting rooms. 
(C)  Banquet halls. 
(D)  Barber shops. 
(E)  Beauty parlors and nail salons. 
(F)  Bowling alleys. 
(G)  Convenience stores. 
(H)  Clubs and lodges. 
(I)  Drive-in and drive-thru facilities. 
(J)  Employment staffing agency, with no temporary employees reporting routinely to the agency to obtain a job order or collect compensation. 
(K)  Florists. 
[(L)  Reserved.] 
(M)  Government facilities, United States. 
(N)  Hotels and motels. 
(O)  Laundromats and dry cleaners. 
(P)  Libraries. 
(Q)  Mass transit facilities. 
(R)  Medical and dental clinics and offices. 
(S)  Museums. 
(T)  Music studios and dance studios. 
(U)  Offices. 
(V)  Places of worship. 
(W)  Printing, publishing and photocopying. 
(X)  Radio and television recording and broadcasting studios. 
(Y)  Real estate services. 
(Z)  Resale stores. 
(AA)  Restaurants, including those with live entertainment. 
(BB)  Retail establishments. 
(CC)  Public or private schools, elementary and high. 
(DD)  Supermarkets/grocery stores. 
(EE)  Theaters, indoors. 
(FF)  Trade schools. 
(GG)  Video rental. 
(HH)  Wholesale ancillary to retail. 
(II)  Health, fitness, and exercise centers. 
(JJ)  Massage establishments that are associated with a medical facility, physician's office, health care facility or full service health and beauty salon. 
(KK)  Community colleges. 
(LL)  Bakeries. 
(MM)  Above ground service facilities. 
(NN)  Personal training and group exercise facility. 
(OO)  Pet shops. 
(Ord. No. 01-O-0117, § 1(Exh. B), 12-17-2001; Ord. No. 02-O-0140, § 1, 12-16-2002; Ord. No. 03-O-0040, §§ 14, 15, 20, 6-16-2003; Ord. No. 04-O-0131, § 1, 11-15-2004; Ord. No. 05-O-0067, §§ 1, 11, 9-19-2005; Ord. No. 07-O-0024, § 14, 3-19-2007; Ord. No. 09-O-0047, § 5, 8-17-2009; Ord. No. 13-O-0027, § 2, 13-O-0027; Ord. No. 13-O-0028, § 1, 8-19-2013; Ord. No. 16-O-0018, § 2, 4-18-2016; Ord. No. 19-O-0008, § 3, 3-18-2019)  
10.3-4. - Special uses. 
(A)  Nursing homes. 
(B)  Motor vehicle body shops. 
(C)  Motor vehicle care centers. 
(D)  Motor vehicle laundry. 
(E)  Motor vehicle rental. 
(F)  Motor vehicle repair shops. 
(G)  Motor vehicle service stations. 
(H)  Daycare facilities. 
(I)  Senior housing. 
(J)  Heating, air conditioning, electrical, plumbing, general contracting offices with retail and wholesale. 
(K)  Reserved. 
(L)  Motor vehicle sales, new. 
(M)  Planned unit developments. 
(N)  Recreational facilities (public and private). 
(O)  Theaters, drive-in. 
(P)  Motor vehicle sales, used. 
(Q)  Intentionally deleted, reserved. 
(R)  Funeral establishments. 
(S)  Banks and financial institutions. 
(Ord. No. 01-O-0117, § 1(Exh. B), 12-17-2001; Ord. No. 02-O-0117, § 2, 10-7-2002; Ord. No. 03-O-0040, § 13, 6-16-2003; Ord. No. 03-O-0062, § 1, 7-2-2003; Ord. No. 04-O-0055, § 3, 6-21-2004; Ord. No. 07-O-0024, § 15, 3-19-2007; Ord. No. 09-O-0047, § 6, 8-17-2009; Ord. No. 12-O-0037, § 3, 9-17-2012; Ord. No. 18-O-0022, § 3, 5-21-2018; Ord. No. 18-O-0031, § 5, 6-18-2018)  
10.4. - B-3 Regional shopping district. 
This district is intended to accommodate and regulate business developments, which are directly and indirectly accessed from major arterial roadways. This district is large retail shopping center oriented and is primarily located at the city's busiest intersection. 
(Ord. No. 01-O-0117, § 1(Exh. B), 12-17-2001)  
10.4-1. - Use restrictions. 
(A)  Outdoor storage is prohibited. 
(B)  An outside seating area is permitted ancillary to a permitted or special use provided the area does not encroach onto any required parking spaces or interfere with vehicle or pedestrian traffic. If located on a walkway, a minimum of four-foot wide clearance shall be preserved. 
(C)  Banks and financial institutions. 
(1)  Shall consist of a minimum leasable floor area of six thousand five hundred (6,500) square feet if located in a stand alone building. 
(2)  Shall consist of a minimum leasable floor area of three thousand five hundred (3,500) square feet if located in a multi-tenant office building. 
(3)  Shall not be permitted in a multi-tenant retail building. 
(D)  Used automobile sales. 
(1)  Minimum lot area: two (2) acres. 
(2)  Minimum lot width: three hundred (300) feet, measured at the front lot line. 
(3)  Minimum building area: ten thousand (10,000) square feet. 
10.4-2. - Lot and building requirements. 
(A)  Minimum lot size: Five (5) acres. 
(B)  Minimum lot width: One hundred fifty (150) feet at established building line. 
(C)  Minimum setbacks: 
(1)  Front yard: Fifty (50) feet for buildings and structures. A twenty (20) foot landscape yard shall be provided along the front lot line, with landscaping in accordance with the provisions of sections 14.4 through 14.8 hereof. 
(2)  Corner side yard: Fifty (50) feet for buildings and structures. A twenty (20) foot landscape yard shall be provided along the corner side lot line, with landscaping in accordance with the provisions of Sections 14.4 through 14.8 hereof. 
(3)  Side yards: Thirty-five (35) feet for buildings. A ten (10) foot landscape yard shall be provided. 
(4)  Rear yard: Thirty-five (35) feet for buildings and structures. A fifteen (15) foot landscape yard shall be provided along the rear lot line. 
(D)  Floor area ratio: Not to exceed three (3). 
(E)  Maximum structure height: Seventy-five (75) feet. 
(Ord. No. 01-O-0117, § 1(Exh. B), 12-17-2001)  
10.4-3. - Reserved.  
10.4-4. - Permitted uses. 
(A)  Animal hospitals/veterinarian clinics (no outside kennel). 
(B)  Banquet halls. 
(C)  Barber shops. 
(D)  Beauty parlors and nail salons. 
(E)  Broadcasting studios. 
(F)  Daycare facilities. 
(G)  Drive-in and drive-thru facilities. 
[(H)  Reserved.] 
(I)  Florists. 
[(J)  Reserved.] 
(K)  Government facilities. 
(L)  Hotels and motels. 
(M)  Laundromats and dry cleaners. 
(N)  Medical and dental clinics and offices. 
(O)  Movie and performance theaters. 
(P)  Offices. 
(Q)  Piano and musical (retail only). 
(R)  Printing, publishing and photocopying. 
(S)  Real estate services. 
(T)  Resale stores. 
(U)  Restaurants, including those with live entertainment. 
(V)  Retail establishments. 
(W)  Schools, elementary and secondary. 
(X)  Supermarkets/grocery stores. 
(Y)  Trade schools. 
(Z)  Variety stores. 
(AA)  Video rental. 
(BB)  Health, fitness and exercise centers. 
(CC)  Massage establishments that are associated with a medical facility, physician's office, health care facility or full service health and beauty salon. 
(DD)  Servicing and repair of goods that are offered for sale by any of the permitted uses in this district. 
(EE)  Warehousing, not more than twenty (20) percent of the gross floor area of the unit and ancillary to a permitted use. 
(FF)  Above ground service facilities. 
(GG)  Personal training and group exercise facility. 
(HH)  Pet shops. 
(Ord. No. 01-O-0117, § 1(Exh. B), 12-17-2001; Ord. No. 02-O-0084, § 5, 6-17-2002; Ord. No. 03-O-0040, §§ 14, 15, 20, 6-16-2003; Ord. No. 03-O-0074, § 3, 10-6-2003; Ord. No. 04-O-0045, § 3, 5-17-2004; Ord. No. 04-O-0055, § 2, 6-21-2004; Ord. No. 05-O-0067, § 12, 9-19-2005; Ord. No. 07-O-0024, § 16, 3-19-2007; Ord. No. 09-O-0047, § 8, 8-17-2009; Ord. No. 13-O-0027, § 3, 8-19-2013; Ord. No. 16-O-0018, § 3, 4-18-2016; Ord. No. 19-O-0008, § 4, 3-18-2019)  
10.4-5. - Special uses. 
[(A)  Reserved.] 
(B)  Motor vehicle body shops. 
(C)  Motor vehicle care centers. 
(D)  Motor vehicle laundry. 
(E)  Motor vehicle rental. 
(F)  Motor vehicle repair shops. 
(G)  Motor vehicle service stations. 
(H)  Golf course, including, but not limited to accessory uses such as driving ranges, bars, restaurants, meeting and banquet rooms, facilities for employees and maintenance structures. 
(I)  Reserved. 
(J)  Motor vehicle sales, new. 
(K)  Pawnshops (pawnshops shall maintain a five hundred-foot separation distance from any residential use, school, church and daycare facility). 
(L)  Planned unit developments. 
(M)  Tattoo parlors (tattoo parlors must maintain a five hundred-foot separation distance from any residential use, school, church and daycare facility). 
(N)  Theaters, drive-in. 
(O)  Motor vehicle sales, used. 
(P)  Intentionally deleted, reserved. 
(Q)  Reserved. 
[(R)]  Warehousing, not more than twenty (20) percent of the gross floor area of the unit and ancillary to a special use. 
(S)  Banks and financial institutions. 
(Ord. No. 01-O-0117, § 1(Exh. B), 12-17-2001; Ord. No. 02-O-0117, § 3, 10-7-2002; Ord. No. 03-O-0040, §§ 13, 16, 6-16-2003; Ord. No. 03-O-0062, § 1, 7-2-2003; Ord. No. 04-O-0045, § 4, 5-17-2004; Ord. No. 07-O-0024, § 17, 3-19-2007; Ord. No. 08-O-0075, § 1, 10-20-2008; Ord. No. 09-O-0047, § 9, 8-17-2009; Ord. No. 18-O-0022, § 5, 5-21-2018; Ord. No. 18-O-0031, § 6, 6-18-2018)  
10.5 - The Airport Zoning District.[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 18-O-0049, § 1(Exh. B), adopted July 16, 2018, amended § 10.5 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 10.5 pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 16-O-0003, § 1(Exh. B), 1-18-2016. 
 
10.5-1. - General regulations. 
(A)  Title. This document shall be known, and may be referred to, as the airport zoning district Ordinance. 
(B)  Authority and purpose. 
(1)  There has been a legislative finding that it is in the best interest of the residents of the City of West Chicago that there be only one (1) airport within its corporate limits and that an airport known as the DuPage Airport has been established within the municipal boundaries of the City of West Chicago. It is the purpose of this District to establish a rational pattern of land uses and encourage the most appropriate use of individual parcels and land from time to time constituting the DuPage Airport, under the jurisdiction of the DuPage Airport Authority, will provide the following: 
(a)  Protect the existing character, airport facilities and land uses; 
(b)  Encourage compatibility among different land uses and develop architectural, landscape architectural and design standards to govern development; 
(c)  Encourage and enhance the preservation of natural resources, aesthetic amenities and natural features; 
(d)  Secure adequate natural light, clean air, privacy and a safe airport environment; 
(e)  Promote and protect the public health, safety, morals and general welfare of the County of DuPage, the County of Kane, the City of West Chicago, surrounding communities and the DuPage Airport Authority; 
(f)  Facilitate the most efficient use of existing and planned public facilities and utilities; 
(g)  Protect existing public facilities and utilities from being overloaded due to excess development; 
(h)  Reduce congestion and promote safety on streets and highways by limiting traffic generation through the control of land use intensity; and 
(i)  Protect natural resources including vegetation. 
(j)  Support sustainable building and site design development. 
(C)  Public infrastructure. 
(1)  Utilities. All utility lines shall be installed underground. 
(2)  Civil engineering. It is anticipated that civil engineering plans including items such as regional detention facilities, mass grading plans, and preliminary utility layout will be created for the airport zoning district, and that development of each lot will occur in compliance with these master engineering plans. 
(3)  Stormwater management. Development of each lot shall accommodate stormwater management requirements of the City of West Chicago on its own lot or as part of a regional stormwater management facility. If a development utilizes a regional facility, calculations shall be provided demonstrating the total capacity of the facility, the amount of capacity presently committed to existing development, the amount available for use, the amount needed for the proposed development and the remaining capacity available for future development. 
(4)  Right-of-way improvement. Developers of individual parcels shall protect all improvements within the right-of-ways during property improvements. Any damage to any improvement shall be replaced with in-kind repair in accordance with the City of West Chicago Code. 
(D)  Administration and standards. 
(1)  Protect and respect the justifiable reliance of existing residents, business people and taxpayers on the continuation of the DuPage Airport Authority; 
(2)  Establish standards for the review of applications filed pursuant to this Airport Zoning District Ordinance; and 
(3)  Protect and enhance the taxable value of land and buildings. 
(E)  Development review procedure. Development approval shall follow Exhibit "C" of the Intergovernmental Agreement between the City of West Chicago and the DuPage Airport Authority, entered into March 22, 2001, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 18-O-0049, § 1(Exh. B), 7-16-2018)  
10.5-2. - Definitions. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section 10.5 shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
Address street: The roadway on which the development parcel primary vehicular entrance is located. 
Authority: The DuPage Airport Authority. 
Botanical name: The Latin scientific name of a plant, a binomial consisting of "genus" and "species"; each plant has a unique botanical name. 
Building height: The vertical distance measured from the average grade at the front wall of the building to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof or to the deck line of a mansard roof, or to the mean height level between two (2) eaves and ridge for gable, hip or gambrel roofs. Chimneys, towers, cooling towers and any other projections shall not exceed ten (10) feet above the building height. 
Center island: A center island is created where two (2) rows of head-in parking are separated by a landscape island. 
City: The City of West Chicago. 
Common name: The English name of a plant; there is often more than one (1) common name to a plant, or one (1) common name shared by several plants. 
Deciduous: Plants shedding or losing foliage at the end of the growing season. 
End island: An end island is a landscaped island that terminates a row of parking. 
Eye-level: A view point origin located five (5) feet six (6) inches above the ground plane. 
Fleet vehicles: Automobiles and trucks (of Class D or less under the Illinois Motor Vehicle Code existing on June 1, 2005) owned or operated by an occupant of the building on the site where the storage will occur. 
Floor area ratio: The gross floor area of the building or buildings on the zoning lot divided by the area of such zoning lot. 
Hardscape: Exterior surface ground plane site improvement components of rigid construction (i.e., roadways, curbs, walkways, parking areas, retaining walls). 
Groundcover: A group of low-growing plants, usually no higher than twelve (12) or eighteen (18) inches. 
Ground plane: The surface of the ground. 
Intermediate island: An intermediate island is a landscaped island placed intermittently along a row of parking. 
In-kind: Equal to in aesthetic, functionality, material used, and life cycle of the existing condition. 
Landscape setback: An area designated for plant material between the right-of-way and parking lot, pavement, building or other accessory structure. Culverts, sewers, water mains and underground utility lines and facilities may be located within the landscape setback. Access driveways may cross the landscape setback. 
Landscaped area: An area which is completely covered with grass, groundcover, shrubs, perennials, trees, or any other living plant material. 
Landscape bed: An area composed of plant materials which is differentiated from adjacent landscaped area(s) or hardscape area(s) through a change in ground plane materials. 
Landscape bed edging: A material or installation method used to delineate the perimeter of a landscape bed. 
Light fixture: The combined components of foundation, pole, base cover and luminaire. 
Limited manufacturing and assembly: Any production, fabrication, processing, cleaning, servicing, testing, repair, or storage of material, goods or products which shall conform to the performance standards set forth in subsection 10.5-3(C)(1). 
Lot or zoning lot: A single tract of land having direct access to dedicated right-of-way which, at the time of filing for a building permit, is designated by its owner or developer as a tract to be used, developed or built upon as a unit, under single ownership or control. 
Lot line, exterior side: A lot line which abuts a street and which is not a front line or a rear lot line. 
Lot line, front: A lot line which abuts a street. On a lot abutting two (2) or more streets, the front lot line shall be the shortest lot line abutting a street. 
Lot line, interior side: A lot line which abuts another lot and which is not a front lot line or a rear lot line. 
Lot line, rear: A lot line or lot lines most distant from and most nearly parallel to the front lot line. 
Mulch: Material placed on the surface encompassing plant material for the purposes of weed control and retaining soil moisture. 
Ornamental tree: A deciduous tree, mature height less than thirty (30) feet, possessing qualities such as flowers and attractive foliage or shape. 
Park: The DuPage Business Center under the authority of the DuPage Airport Authority. 
Parkway: That portion of the public way between the street and the nearest parallel property line, including sidewalk area. 
Parkway planting area: An area between the sidewalk or lot line and the back of curb used for landscaping. 
Parkway tree: A permitted shade tree planted in the public parkway. 
Shade tree: A large-scale deciduous tree with a mature height greater than thirty (30) feet generally having a single stem and planted primarily for shade. 
Shrub: Small-scale plants, generally without a single stem, used as hedges, foundation planting, borders, and accents, possessing qualities such as flowers and attractive foliage or shape. 
Side yard: An area between the side building facade and the side property line. 
Yard, exterior side: A required yard adjoining a street which extends the full depth of a lot, along an exterior or side lot line, excluding the area within a front yard. 
Yard, front: A required yard which extends the full width of a lot along a front lot line which faces an address street. 
Yard, interior side: A required yard adjoining another lot which extends the full depth of a lot along an interior side lot line, excluding the areas within a front yard and/or rear yard. 
Yard, rear: A required yard which extends the full width of a lot along a rear lot line. The exterior side yard requirements shall prevail over the rear yard requirements. 
(Ord. No. 18-O-0049, § 1(Exh. B), 7-16-2018)  
10.5-3. - Sub planned unit development (PUD). 
Within the airport zoning district there may be more than one (1) sub PUD. All land located within the airport zoning district shall be classified in one (1) of the following parcels which, in each case, shall conform to the regulations hereinafter set forth. 
(A)  Airport parcels zone. Within the airport zoning district there shall be one (1) airport parcel or zoning lot which shall be developed as a PUD. Its principal use shall be a public airport together with all associated accessory uses and amenities, which are used for or useful as an aid to the landing, taking off, navigation, repair, maintenance or storage of aircraft, including, but not limited to, air traffic control towers, hangars, terminals, fuel farms, ground maintenance buildings, administrative offices, flight instruction buildings or offices, automobile rentals, food service, aircraft repair or maintenance buildings or offices, roads, parking, runways, taxiways, ramp areas, clear zones, noise impact areas and air space requirements areas. 
(B)  Golf course parcels zone. Within the airport zoning district there shall be not more than two (2) golf course parcels which shall be single zoning lots developed as PUDs. Their principal use shall be a golf course and the following accessory uses and amenities which are used or useful in the operation of the golf courses, including, but not limited to, maintenance and storage facilities, practice facilities, driving range, clubhouse, food and beverage facilities, swimming pools, tennis courts, other recreational facilities, hotels, cottages and other lodging facilities (not intended for permanent occupancy), facilities for meetings, benefits, banquets and the like held at the golf courses. 
(C)  Commercial parcels zone. 
(1)  Purpose. The commercial parcels zone is intended to serve as a multi-use zone which may contain multiple PUDs on multiple zoning lots that incorporates business, research, recreational, technology, and light industrial uses. All or any portions of the commercial parcels zone may be classified and developed without PUDs. It is the intent of Section 10.5-3(C) to separate, where possible, uses which conflict with one another. As part of the site plan review process, the applicant will be encouraged to develop uses that are consistent in terms of character and function. 
Any use that produces adverse effects upon the property in terms of public health, safety or welfare, or which may be harmful to the DuPage Airport, or which does not comply with the intent of the development plan shall be precluded. No use shall be permitted which does not comply with state and/or federal regulations. 
(2)  Permitted uses. All permitted uses may include offices as accessory uses. 
(a)  Office, research and technology. 
Corporate offices; 
General offices; 
Government offices, fire and police stations; 
Medical and dental offices and clinics; 
Professional offices; 
Agricultural research; 
Computer and data processing facilities; 
Educational and/or training facilities; 
Engineering and testing facilities; 
Laboratories for professional, medical and scientific instruments, equipment and supplies; 
Research and development operations; 
Telemarketing operations; 
Day care center as ancillary to another office, research and technology use. 
(b)  Light industrial. 
Limited manufacturing and assembly; 
Printing and publishing operation; 
Public utilities; 
Warehouse and distribution; 
Day care center as ancillary to another light industrial use. 
(c)  Commercial. 
Bank, savings and loan, credit union; 
Beauty parlor and barber shop; 
Catering facility; 
Conference center; 
Day care center; 
Dry cleaning and laundry; 
General recreation parks; 
Health clubs; 
Home improvement center; 
Hotel and convention center; 
Motor vehicle rental (excluding trucks over Class B license); 
Museums; 
Passenger railroad station; 
Photography studio; 
Playgrounds and athletic areas; 
Printing, publishing, and blueprinting with retail sales; 
Public or private recreational facilities; 
Resorts; 
Restaurant, sit down; 
Retail and wholesale trade; 
Sod and crop farms; 
Swimming pools/ice skating rinks; 
Theater; 
Veterinarian clinic with no outside kennel. 
(d)  Accessory uses. 
Accessory uses and accessory structures, as defined in section 10.5-6. 
(3)  Special uses. (In accordance with section 5.4-6 of the City Zoning Code). 
Alternative electric suppliers unless ancillary to a permitted or special use; 
Banquet hall; 
Fuel sales and storage; 
Heliports; 
Motor vehicle repair; 
Motor vehicle sales; 
Motor vehicle service stations; 
Outside storage; 
Places of assembly; 
(4)  Bulk, setbacks and yard requirements. 
(a)  Maximum building height of fifty-five (55) feet. 
* Subject to Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) Regulations. 
(b)  Minimum zoning lot area. 
Non-commercial 	2 acres 
Commercial 	1 acre 
 
(c)  Minimum zoning lot width of one hundred fifty (150) feet. 
(d)  Minimum front and exterior side yard for building of forty (40) and twenty (20) feet for paving. 
(e)  Minimum interior side yard for building of twenty (20) feet and fifteen (15) feet for paving. 
(f)  Minimum rear yard for building of twenty (20) feet and fifteen (15) feet for paving. 
(g)  Maximum floor area ratio * . 
Hotel and Motel 	1.00 
All other uses 	0.60 
 
*  Includes parking garages. 
(5)  Multiple buildings on a lot. As part of planning for the commercial parcels zone, it may be appropriate to consider proposals for multiple buildings on one (1) zoning lot in order to achieve a unified use, appearance and architectural style. "Unified use" shall mean that all uses on any one (1) zoning lot shall be limited to those uses grouped in the separate use categories contained in subsections 10.5-3(C)(2)(a)—(d), together with and accessory uses and accessory structures. Multiple buildings may be permitted on a lot provided that each building conforms to all regulations set forth in this section. Subject to the applicable building codes, forty (40) feet shall be maintained between buildings, except for accessory uses, which shall comply with section 10.5-6. 
(Ord. No. 18-O-0049, § 1(Exh. B), 7-16-2018)  
10.5-4. - Architectural and development guidelines. 
(A)  Parking, driveways and sidewalks. 
(1)  No on-street parking shall be allowed. Parking access shall be of sufficient size to serve the business use conducted on a lot. No parking area or driveway shall be located within ten (10) feet of any building except for drop off areas (to be consistent with subsection 10.5-5(J)(1)). 
(2)  All surfaces used as parking, driveways or walkways shall be minimally paved in accordance with City of West Chicago specifications. 
(3)  Pedestrian and bicycle paths may be installed where practical. Sidewalks shall be required pursuant to the City of West Chicago's ordinances. 
(4)  All parking shall be completed in compliance with section 10.5-7 of this Airport Zoning District Ordinance. 
(5)  Devices restricting access (i.e., gates, gate arms, fences, barricades or bollards) shall not be permitted at any driveway, curb cut, or ingress and/or egress; unless previously approved by the authority and the city. 
(B)  Loading and service areas. 
(1)  No loading or servicing shall be conducted between a building and any street, unless approved by the authority and city. 
(2)  No loading spaces are to be located closer to any public right-of-way than the façade of the building facing such right-of-way, unless approved by the authority and city. 
(3)  Loading and servicing shall be designed so that the entire operation is conducted within the confines of the zoning lot. No loading vehicles may extend beyond the lot line. 
(4)  Loading and servicing areas shall be either (i) screened from streets and building entrances by means of a landscape screening buffer, earthen berm, or combination of landscaping and berming, or (ii) shall be designed as an integral part of the building architecture. 
(5)  All areas used for loading and servicing shall be paved in accordance with Code. 
(6)  All loading shall be in compliance with section 10.5-8 of this Airport Zoning District Ordinance. 
(C)  Outside storage and equipment. 
(1)  Accessory structures shall not be deemed to constitute outside storage. Parking of fleet vehicles shall not constitute outside storage. All outside storage shall be on a paved surface and shall only be permitted in the rear or interior side yards. Outside storage of fixed machinery shall be permitted on any zoning lot for which the principal use is light industrial, provided that the fixed machinery shall be either (i) screened from streets and building entrances by means of a landscape screening buffer, earthen berm, or combination of landscaping and berming, or (ii) shall be designed as an integral part of the building architecture. All other types of outside storage such as articles, goods, materials, equipment, stock in trade and similar items, shall be permitted by special use only and shall be screened with fencing or landscaping. 
(2)  Vehicles shall be stored in within the rear yard unless otherwise approved by the authority and city. If vehicles are to be stored for more than seventy-two (72) hours, they shall be stored in an area screened from adjacent sites, streets and sidewalks and comply with all setback requirements. 
(3)  There shall be no outside production or assembly of products, material, equipment or other business operations. 
(D)  Fencing and walls. 
(1)  No fence or wall of any kind shall be constructed without a fence permit issued from the city. 
(2)  Materials and colors of fences and walls shall be compatible with building architecture. 
(3)  Barbed wire fences are prohibited, except as required by public utilities. 
(4)  Chain link fences shall be permitted in side and rear yards. 
(5)  Fences shall be a maximum of six (6) feet in height. 
(6)  Fences shall be permitted in the rear and side yards only, except that decorative fences shall be permitted, upon approval of the authority, in front yards in the commercial parcels zone when site security is a requirement of the building occupant(s). Said fences shall not be located within the required front yard landscape setback. 
(E)  Waste and refuse. All waste material and refuse shall be securely stored and maintained internally in (i) enclosed receptacles within the building until removed by a licensed scavenger service or (ii) exterior trash enclosures so long as they are fully screened by building materials or other opaque substances consistent with the principal building architecture. Design and materials of the waste enclosure shall be compatible with the building architecture/character and materials. 
(F)  Site lighting. 
(1)  Lights shall not be placed to cause glare or spillage on other adjacent sites or property. Intensity of lighting shall be no greater than required for vehicle and pedestrian safety. 
(2)  Lighting and photometric plans shall be designed in a manner so as not to interfere with the aviation operations of the DuPage Airport. All lighting shall be directed toward the ground and have no spillage above the light itself. 
(3)  All lighting plans shall comply with City Code. Light levels for all pedestrian and bike pathways, including emergency exit walkways, shall be illuminated at one-half (½) foot candle when measured on the paved surface. 
(4)  All parking area and driveway lighting shall comply with City Code. Poles and fixtures shall be consistent among lighting type for each development site. All concrete foundations for poles shall be set at six (6) inches above adjacent grade. Concrete foundations shall be used for all poles located within a hardscape. Pole foundations, other than concrete may be considered for poles located within landscaped or lawn areas; these foundations are to be at grade. 
(5)  Building mounted lighting is restricted to (i) loading and storage locations or similar areas except as permitted in section 10.5-9, (ii) building accent lighting, (iii) doorways of building ingress and egress including emergency exits, and (iv) parking areas, sidewalks or roadways within seventy-five (75) feet of the building façade. Building mounted light fixtures shall be shielded and shall not project above the fascia or roofline. The shields and/or light fixtures, shall be selected to match the color of the surface to which they are attached, or other pole mounted light fixtures, building mounted fixtures visible from parking lots, streets or off-site areas shall be integral to the building architecture or visually similar to parking lot fixtures, as determined by the authority. 
(6)  All low level lighting fixtures shall comply with City Code. 
(G)  Utility installation. 
(1)  All permanent utilities shall be located underground and in easements of sufficient width for utility operation, maintenance and repair. Where feasible, utilities shall be located immediately adjacent to the lot line. 
(2)  All utility, data and communications appurtenances, including telephone pedestals, utility meters, transformers, etc., shall be screened. 
(H)  Construction phase. 
(1)  Development of any lot shall follow the soil erosion procedure of the city. 
(2)  Construction sites shall be maintained in a neat and orderly manner. All construction debris and other trash shall be kept in enclosed containers and frequently removed. 
(3)  Existing roads shall be kept free and clear of all dirt, soil construction material and/or debris on a daily basis. 
(4)  Construction fences shall be installed by the applicant to protect existing landscape materials, as well as lawns and underground landscape drainage systems. 
(5)  Portable toilet facilities shall be provided at all construction sites. 
(I)  Architectural design standards. 
(1)  Corrugated metal or pre-engineering metals installed with exposed fasteners are prohibited on any building exterior wall, except that, in the commercial parcels zone, architectural grade metal and metal products may be used on the exterior of buildings and structures, and for rooftop screening, if incorporated into an overall architectural scheme for such the building(s) or structure(s) on a zoning lot. 
(2)  All buildings on a lot shall be of similar, compatible design and materials. 
(3)  Rooftop equipment, vents and ducts shall be screened from adjacent street frontages of the subject zoning lot and adjacent parcels, at eye-level. 
(4)  All buildings shall be insulated to protect from noise by overhead and nearby air traffic. 
(J)  Sight triangles. 
(1)  In order to protect views at vehicular, bicycle and pedestrian intersections, a vision sight triangle, per City Code, will be required. 
(Ord. No. 18-O-0049, § 1(Exh. B), 7-16-2018)  
10.5-5. - Landscape standards. 
(A)  Purpose. This section defines landscape performance standards and sets guidelines and specifications for the design of the airport zoning district. These standards are established to ensure a high quality of performance, construction, and aesthetic value that will benefit landowners, businesses, the general public, and the community as a whole while recognizing the authority's responsibility for aviation safety. This section is intended to facilitate the following purposes: 
(1)  To establish an aesthetically cohesive and functional design throughout the airport zoning district. 
(2)  To promote the airport's wildlife management plan to minimize wildlife migration and enhance air traffic safety. 
(3)  To enhance views and minimize the adverse visual and environmental impact of all large paved areas. 
(4)  To protect and preserve the appearance and character of the community. 
(5)  To consider the scale and nature of the landscaping material. 
(6)  To incorporate lush vegetation and emulate a natural, park-type setting. 
(7)  To encourage environmental sensitivity with regards to wetlands, trees and other existing desirable natural amenities. 
(8)  To protect and promote the health, safety, and welfare of the residents of DuPage County, Kane County, the City of West Chicago, the surrounding communities and the authority. 
(9)  Promote sustainable and responsible landscape design and maintenance. 
(B)  Plant palette. 
(1)  Plant materials, identified in item (3) below, have been selected to maintain a consistent landscape image. Materials have been chosen for their durability, disease resistance, low maintenance and character compatibility with the regional ecosystem. Most all plant materials listed are 'indigenous or native' to this region; however, some materials have been included because of successful performance, ability to perform specific functions, visual interest and expectations of similar business center development landscapes. Subsequently, plant materials not listed may be approved provided they meet the aforementioned criteria and are approved by the authority. 
(2)  All plants supplied shall conform to the "American Standard for Nursery Stock," latest edition, and shall be installed according to the current standards of the American Association of Nurserymen. 
(3)  Plants shall be selected to minimize conflicts between the flight path of planes, bird, and small mammal habitats. 
(a)  The landscape within the airport zoning district shall be designed to minimize potential wildlife hazards of raptors, small mammals that may attract birds of prey and small birds that congregate into large flocks. Plant materials and planting design that provides food and or habitat shelter to these types of birds and mammals shall be avoided. 
(b)  Tree species shall be selected and located so that at maturity, tree crowns shall not overlap to minimize habitats that are potentially attractive to European starlings and other wildlife species of concern to airport operations. Trees shall be spaced to maintain a minimum of fifteen (15) feet between anticipated mature crown sizes for each tree species selected. 
(c)  Selected tree species should tend toward a vertical or ascending branching habit to minimize perching and nesting opportunities for birds. Densely branched and foliated tree species shall not be allowed. 
(d)  No more than forty (40) percent of selected trees shall be evergreen; however, where loading docks and/or storage is allowed in the front yard, then a maximum of sixty-five (65) percent is allowed. 
(e)  Trees, shrubs, forbs and grasses that provide fruit, seed or forage palatable to grazing animals shall be avoided. 
The following is a suggested list of plants to achieve this purpose: 
(a)  Shade trees. 
• Aesculus 'glabra'…Ohio Buckeye 
• Acer x freemanii…Freeman Maple 
• Acer x freemanii 'Crimson Sunset'…Freeman Maple 
• Acer miyabei…State Street Maple 
• Acer platanoides…Norway Maple 
• Acer rubrum…Red Maple 
• Acer rubrum 'Red Pointe'…Red Pointe Maple 
• Acer saccharum…Sugar Maple ** 
• Betula nigra…River Birch 
• Carya ovata…Shagbark Hickory 
• Celtis occidentalis spp…Common Hackberry 
• Carya Cordiformis…Bitternut Hickory 
• Catalpa speciosa…Catalpa * 
• Gleditsia triacanthos 
var. inermis 'Shademaster'…Shademaster Honey locust 
• Gleditsia triacanthos var. inermis 'Skyline'…Skyline Honey locust 
• Gymnocladus diocus…Kentuckey Coffee Tree *** 
• Juglans nigra…Black Walnut * 
• Juniperus Virginiana…Red Cedar 
• Liriodendron Tuliphera…Tulip Tree 
• Nyssa sylvatica…Black Tupelo 
• Picea glauca 'Densata'…Black Hills Spruce 
• Picea abies…Norway Spruce 
• Picea pungeons…Colorado Green Spruce 
• Pinus sylvestris…Scotch Pine 
• Pinus strobus…White Pine 
• Quercus bicolor…Swamp White Oak 
• Quercus Muehlenbergii…Chinkapin Oak 
• Quercus macrocarpa…Bur Oak 
• Quercus palustris…Pin Oak 
• Quercus robur…English Oak 
• Quercus rubra…Red Oak 
• Ulmus x 'varieties'…Elm **** 
• Ulmus americana 'American Liberty'…American Liberty Elm 
• Ulmus davdiana variety japonica 'Prospector'…Prospector Elm 
• Ulmus hollandica 'Pioneer'…Pioneer Elm 
* These species shall be planted in non-lawn areas and at a minimum of forty (40) feet from potential right-of-way in accordance with Section 4 (B) of the City Resolution 04-R-0060. 
** Select varieties that will perform well in clay soils and are drought tolerant. 
*** When proposed for planting within a roadway parkway or right-of-way, use the variety a fruitless variety (i.e., 'Espresso'). 
**** Cultivars more resistant to disease than early developed varieties should be used (i.e., New Horizon, Morton Plainsman, Morton Glossy, Homestead and Frontier). 
(b)  Ornamental trees. 
• Acer campestre…Hedge Maple 
• Amelanchier arborea…Juneberry 
• Amelanchier canadensis…Serviceberry ** 
• Carpinus caroliniana…American Hornbeam 
• Cornus alternifolia…Pagoda Dogwood 
• Cornus mas…Cornelian Cherry Dogwood 
• Cornus florida…Flowering Dogwood 
• Crataegus phaenopyrum 'inermis'…Washington Hawthorn * ( ** ) 
• Magnolia stellata…Star Magnolia 
• Viburnum prunifolium…Blackhaw Viburnum 
* Do not locate adjacent to pedestrian walkways or bicycle paths. 
** To be used with caution given the potential to attract wildlife. 
(c)  Large deciduous shrubs. 
• Aesculus parviflora…Bottlebrush Buckeye 
• Cornus racemosa…Grey Dogwood 
• Cornus stolonifera…Redtwig Dogwood 
• Hamamelis virginiana…Common Witchhazel 
• Hamamelis vernalis…Vernal Witchhazel 
• Ilex verticillata…Winterberry * 
• Prunus x cistena…Purpleleaf Sand Cherry 
• Prunus virginiana…Chokecherry *** 
• Rhus typhina 'copallina'…Flameleaf Sumac 
• Spiraea x vanhouttei…Vanhoutte Spirea 
• Syringa vulgaris…Common Lilac ** 
• Viburnum x burkwoodii…Burkwood Viburnum 
• Viburnum carlesii…Koreanspice Viburnum 
• Viburnum d. 'Synnestvedt'…Arrowwood Viburnum 
• Viburnum lentago…Nannyberry 
• Viburnum x juddii…Judd Viburnum 
* Winterberry shall be planted at the ratio of one (1) male for every five (5) female plant materials. 
** Locate adjacent to verticle structures and not freestanding as a specimen. 
*** To be used with caution given the potential to attract wildlife. 
(d)  Small deciduous shrubs. 
• Aronia melancarpa…Black Chokeberry ** 
• Aronia arbutifolia 'Brilliantissima'…Red Chokeberry ** 
• Buxus x. microphylla 'Glencoe'…Chicagoland Green Boxwood * 
• Chaenomeles x superba speciosa 'Texas Scarlet'…Texas Scarlet Flowering Quince ** 
• Clethra alnifolia 'Hummingbird'…Summersweet 
• Cornus sericea 'Isanti'…Isanti Redosier Dogwood 
• Corylus Americana…American Hazelnut 
• Euonymus fortunei 'Sarcoxie'…Sarcoxie Euonymus 
• Forsythia viridissima 'Bronxensis'…Bronx Greenstem Forsythia 
• Juniperus chinensis 'sargentii'…Sargent Juniper 
• Juniperus chinensis 'Kallay's Campact'…Kallay's Compact Pfitzer Juniper 
• Lindera benzoin…Spicebush 
• Potentilla fruticosa 'Gold Drop'…Gold Drop Cinquefoil 
• Potentilla fruticosa 'McKay's White'…McKay's White Cinquefoil 
• Rhododendron 'PJM Compact'…Compact PJM Azalea 
• Ribes alpinum 'Green Mound'…Green Mound Alpine Currant 
• Rosa x bonica 'Bonica'…Bonica Rose 
• Rosa x 'Knock Out'…Knock Out Rose 
• Rosa x 'Nearly Wild'…Nearly Wild Rose 
• Rosa rugosa 'Pavement'…Pink Pavement Rose 
• Rosa rugosa 'varieties'…Rugosa Rose 
• Rosa x 'Scarlet Meidiland'…Scarlet Meidiland Rose 
• Spirea alba…Meadowsweet 
• Syringa patula 'Miss Kim'…Miss Kim Lilac 
• Spiraea x bumalda 'Anthony Waterer'…Anthony Waterer Spirea 
• Spiraea x bumalda 'Froebelii'…Frobel's Spirea 
• Spiraea x bumalda 'Goldflame'…Goldflame Spirea 
• Spiraea japonica 'Goldmound'…Goldmound Spirea 
• Spiraea japonica 'Little Princess'…Little Princess Spirea 
• Syringa meyeri 'Palibin'…Dwarf Korean Lilac 
• Viburnum trilobum 'Bailey Compact'…American Cranberry Spicebush Viburnum ** 
• Viburnum dentatum 'KLM Seventeen' Little Joe…Little Joe Viburnum 
* Utilize these varieties sparingly at focal points of visual interest and building ingress. 
** To be used with caution given the potential to attract wildlife. 
(e)  Ornamental grasses (for use in detention and retention areas). 
• Andropogon gerardii…Big Blue Stem 
• Schizachyrium scoparium…Little Blue Stem 
• Bouteloua curtipendula…Side-Oats Grama 
• Calamagrostis acutiflora 'Karl Foerster'…Feather Reed Grass 
• Carex spp…Sedge Grass * 
• Molinia caerulea arundinacea 'Skyracer'…Tall Moor Grass 
• Miscanthus sinensis 'Purpurascens'…Prairie Flame Grass 
• Panicum virgatum. 'Shenandoah'…Shenandoah Switch Grass 
• Panicum virgatum 'Northwind'…Northwind Switch Grass 
• Panicum virgatum 'Heavy Metal'…Heavy Metal Switch Grass 
• Sporobolus heterolepis…Prairie Dropseed 
* Utilize sedge grass native sedge grass varieties. 
(f)  Groundcovers (for use in foundation areas, front yards and parking islands). 
• Coreopsis palmata…Prairie Coreopsis 
• Euonymus fortunei…Purpleleaf Wintercreeper 
• Fern spp…Fern 
• Pachysandra terminalis…Pachysandra * 
• Rhus aromatica 'Gro-Low'…Gro-Low Fragrant Sumac 
• Vinca minor…Periwinkle 
* Utilize these varieties sparingly at focal points of visual interest and building ingress. 
(g)  Perennials (for use in foundation areas, front yards and parking islands). 
• Achillea spp…Yarrow 
• Allium 'Summer Beauty'…Summer Beauty Onion 
• Aster laevis…Smooth Aster 
• Baptisia leucantha…White Wild Indigo 
• Boltonia asteroides…False Aster 
• Chasmanthium latifolium…Northern Sea Oats 
• Coreopsis spp…Coreopsis 
• Echinacea purpurea…Purple Coneflower 
• Eutrochium purpureum…Joe-Pye Weed 
• Hemerocallis spp…Daylily 
• Hosta spp…Hosta 
• Liatris spp…Liatris 
• Monarda didyma 'Raspberry Wine'…Beardtongue 
• Penstemon spp…Raspberry Wine Bee Balm 
• Ratibida pinnata…Yellow Coneflower 
• Rudbeckia fulgida 'Goldsturm'…Black-Eyed Susan 
• Solidago rugosa 'Fireworks'…Goldenrod 
• Verbena 'hastata'…Blue Vervain 
(C)  General planting and design requirements. 
(1)  All shade trees shall be a minimum of three (3) inches in caliper, measured six (6) inches above the root flare, at time of installation. 
(2)  All shade trees located in turf areas that require mowing or adjacent to intersections, roadways and driveways where there is a need for sight distance requirements shall have a minimum height of six (6) feet of clear trunk, free of branches and with a well-shaped canopy. 
(3)  Large shrubs (shrub species with an anticipate growth height of thirty-six (36) inches or greater) shall be supplied in containers or balled and burlapped at a minimum height of twenty-four (24) inches and eighteen (18) inch spread. 
(4)  Small shrubs (shrub species with an anticipate growth height of less than thirty-six (36) inches) shall be supplied in containers or balled and burlapped at a minimum height eighteen (18) inches and twelve (12) inch spread. 
(5)  Perennials and ornamental grasses may be planted in lieu of small shrubs. Three (3) perennial plants or ornamental grasses shall equal one (1) small or large shrub. 
(6)  All groundcovers shall be planted so that an effective covering is obtained within five (5) growing seasons, or at a maximum spacing of one (1) foot on center in all directions. 
(7)  All lawn areas adjacent right-of-way shall be either seeded or sodded (see subsection (T), installation, for implementation of seed time period requirements). 
(8)  Screening of transformers, above ground utilities, and loading docks shall consist of planting material or natural materials or a combination thereof. 
(9)  Any area of the lot not used for structures or circulation elements shall be landscaped or otherwise improved in accordance with the landscape and architectural standards of the airport zoning district. 
(10)  The following no planting zones shall apply around a utility structure, such as but not limited to, a fire hydrant, buffalo box, water shut off valve, valve vault, manhole, catch basin, or inlet: 
(a)  Fifteen (15) feet for shade, ornamental or evergreen trees. 
(b)  Ten (10) feet for large or small shrubs. 
(c)  Five (5) feet for perennials and ornamental grasses. 
(D)  Berms. 
(1)  Berms (contoured topography), in combination with plant materials, may be utilized to screen parking lots from street views. 
(2)  All slopes in landscaped areas shall be no greater than 3:1. 
(E)  Landscaping for parkways. One (1) shade tree shall be provided for every fifty (50) feet of frontage, excluding curb cuts and utility structures and shall be centered within the parkway area between the curb and sidewalk or as necessary to avoid underground utility locations. Species selection shall conform to the minimum spacing requirements specified in subsection 10.5-5(B)(2)(b). 
(F)  Landscaping for parking areas. 
(1)  Parking lots shall be a minimum of fifteen (15) feet from a front yard building facade. All other parking lots shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet from building façade. 
(2)  A minimum of one hundred sixty-two (162) square feet of landscaped islands shall be provided for every twenty (20) parking stalls provided by end, intermediate and/or center landscape islands. 
(3)  Landscaped islands shall be a minimum of nine (9) feet in width and eighteen (18) feet in length from back of curb to back of curb and required at the ends of parking rows. 
(4)  All plants installed in parking lot islands shall be planted at a minimum of three (3) feet from the back of curb. 
(5)  Nine (9) feet wide intermediate islands shall require one (1) shade tree and either lawn or plant materials at a maximum of two (2) feet in height. 
(6)  Eighteen (18) feet wide intermediate islands shall require one (1) shade tree and either lawn or plant materials at a maximum of two (2) feet in height. 
(7)  Nine (9) feet wide end islands shall require two (2) shade trees and either lawn or plant materials at a maximum of two (2) feet in height. 
(8)  Nine (9) feet wide center islands shall require either lawn or plant materials at a maximum of two (2) feet in height. 
(G)  Landscaping for front and exterior side yards. 
(1)  A minimum of each of the following landscape material shall be provided: 
(a)  One (1) shade tree per one hundred (100) linear feet or portion thereof excluding curb cuts of the yard to be landscaped; and 
(b)  One (1) ornamental and/or evergreen tree per one hundred (100) linear feet or portion thereof excluding curb cuts of the yard to be landscaped; and 
(c)  Ten (10) shrubs per twenty-five (25) linear feet or portion thereof excluding curb cuts of the yard to be landscaped. 
(2)  The landscape design shall include the use of groupings of landscape materials and shall conform to the minimum spacing requirements described in subsection 10.5-5(B)(2)(b). 
(H)  Landscaping for side yards and rear yards. 
(1)  A minimum of each of the following landscape materials shall be provided: 
(a)  One (1) shade, ornamental or evergreen tree per every one hundred (100) linear feet or portion thereof of the yard to be landscaped. 
(2)  Tree locations shall not conflict with underground utility locations. 
(I)  Landscaping for detention and retention areas. 
(1)  A minimum of each of the following landscape materials shall be provided: 
(a)  One (1) shade or ornamental tree per every one hundred (100) linear feet of detention and retention perimeter or portion thereof, measured at the high water level; and 
(b)  Trees planted in the perimeters of retention and detention areas shall be of a natural and non-linear design and shall be clustered into groups rather than planted evenly around the pond. 
(2)  Only plants adaptable to temporary flooding (water standing for less than seventy-two (72) hours) shall be planted below the high water line. 
(3)  Ornamental grasses, if proposed, shall be planted in groupings of no less than three (3) to seven (7) to minimize the potential for bird or animal nesting areas. 
(J)  Foundation landscaped areas. 
(1)  Landscaped areas at the perimeters of buildings, walls and enclosures, shall a minimum of ten (10) feet in width except for areas identified in item (2) below and as referenced in subsection 10.5-4(A)(1), planned building or vehicular use area expansion, exit doors, sidewalks, plazas, loading docks and spaces and driveways to building doors and openings. Landscaping adjacent to foundation areas shall consist of a combination of plant materials and lawn. A minimum of thirty (30) percent of the required ten (10) foot width shall consist of plant material other than lawn. Food supply and distribution facilities which require a rodent strip shall provide an eighteen (18) inch wide strip with clean washed gravel and a metal edge adjacent to the entire building perimeter. 
(2)  Exception to the ten (10) feet in width landscape area at the perimeter of buildings may be considered if the parking area or roadway is not parallel to the building façade. 
(3)  Particular attention shall be paid toward softening large expanses of building walls and accenting building entrances and architectural features. 
(K)  Landscaping within right-of-way medians. 
(1)  All plantings shall not be less than two (2) feet from the back of curbs. 
(2)  All plantings that reach a mature height of more than eighteen (18) inches shall not be less than seven (7) feet from the back of curbs or at such other locations where sight distance requirements exist. 
(3)  All ornamental, evergreen or shade trees shall be naturally spaced within the median allowing the maximum growth spread without compromising the growth of the adjacent material. 
(4)  Only shrubs or groundcovers that reach a mature height of no more than eighteen (18) inches shall be planted within the median, unless such plantings are located not less than seven (7) feet from the back of curbs, in which case such plantings may exceed eighteen (18) inches in height so long as they do not obstruct sight distance requirements. 
(5)  Landscaping shall conform with the City Code. 
(L)  Landscaping for ground signs. 
(1)  For every one (1) square foot of sign surface area, there shall be provided one and one-half (1½) square feet of landscape area. Sodded or seeded areas shall not qualify as such a landscaped area. 
(2)  The required landscaped areas shall be improved with such plantings as shrubs, ornamental trees, perennials, annual beds, etc., of a size and in a quantity proportionate to the size and height of the sign. 
(3)  No plantings shall cover or obstruct any views or illumination of the sign surface area. 
(M)  Site grading. 
(1)  All site grading shall be done to enhance and preserve natural topographic features. 
(2)  All changes in slopes shall be gradual and shall provide a smooth and even transition between existing and proposed grades. 
(3)  All grading shall provide positive drainage away from all buildings and into swales, ditches, storm sewers, detention areas and retention areas. 
(4)  Grading for parking lots shall provide positive drainage away from parked cars and sidewalks into inlets and catch basins. 
(5)  Landscaping improvements shall be installed in a manner consistent with an approved mass grading plan. 
(6)  Grading shall comply with City Code. 
(N)  Preliminary landscape plan. 
(1)  Hardcopy full scale copies of the landscape plan shall be submitted to the City for preliminary review. 
(2)  The landscape plans shall be of a scale of 1" = 50'- 0" or larger and on standard size cut sheets (24 × 36 inches). 
(3)  Landscape plans shall include a table of landscape calculations indicating the requirements as stated within these general regulations and those proposed for the following: 
• Parkway; 
• Parking areas; 
• Front + exterior side yards; 
• Rear + side yards; 
• Detention + retention areas (if applicable); 
• Foundation; 
• Right-of-way medians (if applicable); 
• Ground signs (if applicable). 
(4)  The preliminary landscape plan shall be prepared by a licensed landscape architect, registered within the State of Illinois, and include the following: 
• Name of project and client; 
• Title block including the name, phone number, and street address of the landscape architect; 
• Name, address, and phone number of civil engineer; 
• Date of plan; 
• Location map indicating particular area being addressed; 
• Drawing scale; 
• Drawing orientation (indicated by conventional north arrow); 
• Property lines, easements, and rights-of-way frontages, streets; 
• Labels of wetland areas, detention, and retention ponds; 
• Labels of buildings and other structures, including parking lots, sidewalks, and other paved areas; 
• Location of all proposed areas to be seeded and/or sodded; 
• Location of all plant material; 
• Lot topography; 
• Size, height and type of all plant material; 
• Location and labels of all signage; 
• Plant key identifying particular key symbols. All plant materials shall be coded using USDA plant codes. 
• Existing plant materials to remain (if any); 
• All preliminary plans shall be denoted as "For Review Only-Do Not Use for Construction". 
(O)  Final landscape plan. 
(1)  Hardcopy full scale copies of the landscape plan shall be submitted to the city for final approval. 
(2)  The final landscape plan shall be of a scale of 1" = 50'- 0" or larger and on standard size cut sheets (24 × 36 inches). 
(3)  Landscape plans shall include a table of landscape calculations indicating the requirements as stated within these general regulations and those proposed for the following: 
• Parkway; 
• Parking areas; 
• Front + exterior side yards; 
• Rear + side yards; 
• Detention + retention areas (if applicable); 
• Foundation; 
• Right-of-way medians (if applicable); 
• Ground signs (if applicable). 
(4)  The final landscape plan shall be prepared by a licensed landscape architect, registered within the State of Illinois, and include the following: 
• Name of project and client; 
• Title block including the name, phone number, and street address of the landscape architect; 
• Name, address, and phone number of civil engineer; 
• Date of plan; 
• Location map indicating particular area being addressed; 
• Drawing scale; 
• Drawing orientation (indicated by conventional north arrow); 
• Property lines, easements, and rights-of-way frontages, streets; 
• Labels of wetland areas, detention, and retention ponds; 
• Labels of buildings and other structures, including parking lots, sidewalks, and other paved areas; 
• Location and keyed labels of all proposed plants; 
• Location of all proposed areas to be seeded and/or sodded; 
• Location and labels of all signage; 
• Plant list or schedule to include key symbols, quantity, correct botanical and common names, size and condition of all proposed plants. All plant materials shall be coded using USDA plant codes. 
• General and specific notes and details to indicate or explain the design and construction procedures to be used; 
• Elevations, cross-sections, and any other graphic details that will help explain the design more thoroughly; 
• Location of all utilities and utility structures; 
• Location of all light or flag poles; 
• Existing plant materials to remain (if any). 
(P)  Mulch. 
(1)  All planting beds shall be mulched with a minimum depth of three (3) inches of double processed (and/or triple processed) shredded hardwood or bark mulch. 
(2)  Perennial, groundcover and annual flowerbeds shall be mulched with two (2) inches of mushroom compost. 
(3)  All trees, three (3) inches caliper and greater, shall require a five (5) foot mulch ring with a minimum of three (3) inches of mulch depth. 
(Q)  Mowed lawn areas (sodded). 
(1)  Shall be topsoil sod (versus peat), four bluegrass variety minimum and be grown by a sod farm within the same USDA Plant Hardiness Zone 5a or colder Zone 4b. 
(R)  No-mow lawn areas (short grass prairie and or no-mowed lawn). 
(1)  Short grass prairie and no-mowed are permitted as an alternative to mowed lawn area providing it is an acceptable application as determined during the development review process. 
(2)  Short grass prairie and or no-mowed areas shall be used in combination with mowed lawn areas and the interface between the materials articulated as meandering and amorphic/non-geometric. No greater than seventy-five (75) percent of all landscaped area (excluding planting beds) shall be non-mowed lawn areas. 
(3)  Short grass prairie areas shall be a seed mix providing a diverse assemblage of shorter (four (4) feet or less) prairie grass and wildflower species, blooming from early spring to fall, creating a diverse habitat for birds, butterflies, moths and other pollinators. Seed mix shall be suitable for medium-to-dry sites. The seed mix shall include five (5) of six (6) native permanent grass and sedge species and twenty-nine (29) of thirty-four (34) native forb species, Low-Prairie Seed Mix as produced by Cardo Native Plant Nursery or equal. Additionally, this mix shall be supplemented by seed mix including quick-blooming annuals, biennials, and perennials to provide initial color during native prairie establishment. This seed mix shall include eight (8) to eleven (11) native forb species. Annual and Perennial Forbs Seed Mix as produced by Cardo Native Plant Nursery or equal. 
(4)  No-mow lawn areas seed mix shall have six (6) fescue and one (1) annual rye grasses equal to No Mow Lawn Mix with Annual Rye, produced by Prairie Nursery, Inc. or equal. 
(S)  Landscape bed edging. 
(1)  The perimeter of landscape planting beds, adjacent to mowed lawn and/or no-mow lawn areas, shall be 'shovel cut'. No other edging material (i.e., metal, plastic, stone or wood) shall be permitted with the exception of metal edging for perimeter rodent strips at food supply and distribution facilities (see subsection (J)(1), foundation). 
(T)  Installation. 
(1)  All landscaping materials shall be installed in accordance with the current planting procedures established by the American Association of Nurserymen. 
(2)  Landscape plant materials shall be properly guyed and staked (until established and maintained as true and plumb) in accordance with current industry standards. 
(3)  Install mowed lawn sod in rolls, versus cut pieces, in all areas in excess of twenty-five (25) contiguous square feet. 
(4)  Low-Prairie Seed Mix applied at 38.67 PLS pounds per acre. 
(5)  Annual and Perennial Forbs Seed Mix applied at 4.56 PLS pounds per acre. 
(6)  No Mow Seed Mix applied at 5.0 PLS pounds per acre. 
(7)  All seed mix shall be installed prior to May 1 (providing no late frost dates occur after that date) and after September 1 (providing no late frost dates occur after that date). 
(U)  Irrigation system. 
(1)  All landscaped areas are required to have temporary irrigation until such time all plant material and lawn areas are established. Temporary systems can consist of: 
• A subsurface irrigation system remaining for the life of the project. 
• An on grade or below grade system installed and maintained until the establishment of plant materials and lawn areas. On grade systems shall be removed after plant material establishment. 
• Temporary watering from water tank supply truck. 
(2)  Permanent irrigation systems are not required; however, during drought periods plant materials must be watered as required to maintain them in a healthy, thriving condition. 
(3)  Irrigation systems must be designed so as not to spray water on any paved surface. 
(4)  Water sources, other than potable water are encouraged. 
(5)  Spray or drip systems are permitted provided both are inspected on a regular basis and maintained in full operation. 
(V)  Landscape maintenance. 
(1)  All required landscaping shall be the responsibility of the property owner and shall be maintained by the lot owner. 
(2)  Any damaged or dead trees, shrubs or groundcover shall be promptly replaced. 
(3)  Maintenance of landscaped areas includes, but is not limited to, weeding, mowing, trimming, pruning, edging, cultivation, seeding, fertilization, watering, pest control and anything else necessary to ensure healthy, vigorous plant growth. 
(4)  Landscape plant material overhanging sidewalks, pedestrian paths and seating areas shall be pruned to a minimum of eight (8) feet in height. 
(5)  Landscape plant material overhanging streets and vehicular traffic areas shall be pruned to a minimum of fifteen (15) feet in height. 
(6)  If the developments and buildings are not maintained in accordance with the approved landscape plan, the occupant of the property shall be notified by the city. 
(7)  If the required maintenance is not improved within thirty (30) days from date of notice, the city may perform the required maintenance and charge the occupant of the property all related costs or issue citations in violation of this section. 
(8)  All parkway trees replacement and pruning, within a dedicated right-of-way, shall be the responsibility of the city upon acceptance. 
(9)  All plant materials shall be maintained in a plumb and upright condition; trees shall be staked as required until established (maintain a true and upright position without staking assistance). 
(10)  All mowed lawn areas shall be mowed as required so that grass height does not exceed three (3) inches. 
(11)  Weed control in lawn areas shall be eco-friendly and comply with applicable codes for application. Control program shall be as required so that no less than ninety-five (95) percent of the total lawn area is grass varieties. 
(12)  Short grass prairie shall be 'burned', annually, between February 15 and April 15, weather permitting in accordance with industry standards, unless prohibited by local ordinance. Mowing once annually in October to height of six (6) inches shall be an alternate if burning is prohibited by the authority or the city. Mowed material shall be properly disposed of off-site. 
(13)  All short grass prairie, adjacent to curb, and paved areas shall be mowed from the curb and paved areas a distance of three (3) feet to a height of six (6) inches. Mowing of the short grass prairie shall occur simultaneously with the mowing of the mowed lawn area. 
(14)  Short grass prairie shall be maintained during the establishment period and afterward by industry standards. Seeding shall occur, weather permitting, prior to May 15 and after September 15 but prior the October 15. 
(W)  Irrigation system maintenance. 
(1)  All required maintenance shall be the responsibility of the property owner and shall be maintained by the lot owner. 
(2)  Temporary and/or permanent irrigation systems will be professionally maintained to a fully operational system. Repairs to any leaking/damaged lines or heads shall occur within the next system cycle or twenty-four (24) hours, whichever occurs first. The zone in which the leakage and/or damage occurs shall be immediately shut down upon discovery. 
(Ord. No. 18-O-0049, § 1(Exh. B), 7-16-2018)  
10.5-6. - Accessory structures and uses. 
(A)  Authorization. Subject to the limitations of this section 10.5-6, accessory structures and accessory uses are permitted in connection with any principal use lawfully existing within such district. 
(B)  Definition. An accessory structure or an accessory use is a structure or use that: 
(1)  Is subordinate in extent and purpose to, and serves, a principal structure or use; and 
(2)  Is customarily found as an incidental use to such principal structure or use; 
(3)  Contributes to the comfort, convenience or necessity of those occupying, working at or being served by such principal structure or use; 
(4)  Is, except as otherwise expressly authorized by the provision of this Airport Zoning District Ordinance, located on the same zoning lot as such principal structure or use; 
(5)  Is under the same ownership and control as the principal structure or use. 
(C)  Special regulations applicable to particular accessory structures and uses. 
(1)  Storage. Except as otherwise expressly permitted by this Code, outdoor storage shall not be allowed as an accessory use. 
(2)  Storage structures. Accessory storage structures, other than garages and permitted outside storage, shall not exceed ten (10) percent of either the floor area or the volume, whichever is less of the principal structure, if accessory to any other type of principal structure. 
(3)  Storage of inoperable vehicles. No vehicle, other than a vehicle waiting timely repair at an motor vehicle repair shop, motor vehicle service station or new or used motor vehicle dealer, incapable of being driven or used for the purpose or use for which it was designed shall be stored in any parking lot or parking area. Vehicles awaiting timely repair shall not be stored for longer than two (2) business days. 
(4)  Antenna with surface areas of ten (10) square feet or less. Antenna and antenna support structures having no single dimension exceeding twelve (12) feet shall be permitted as an accessory use. 
(5)  Antenna, other than amateur radio facilities with a single dimension exceeding twelve (12) feet shall comply with the regulations set forth in article VII. 
(6)  Accessory day care centers. Day care centers shall be considered permitted accessory uses in accordance with subsection 10.5-3(C)(2) subject to the following limitations: 
(a)  The accessory day care center shall be for the exclusive use of employees of the principal use. Day care operations serving those not employed on the premises shall be deemed a separate principal use, and so regulated in accordance with this Airport Zoning District Ordinance; 
(b)  All requisite state and local licenses and permits regarding day care facilities shall be required for such operations; 
(c)  All regular day care activities, including any outdoor play areas, shall be located within the building setbacks for the district in which the principal use is located; and 
(d)  The persons or organization operating the accessory day care center need not be employed by the operators of the principal use. 
(D)  Special bulk, yard and space regulations. 
(1)  General rule. Except as otherwise provided, all accessory structures and uses shall comply with, and be included in calculating compliance with, all bulk, yard and space requirements applicable in this airport zoning district. 
(2)  Distance from principal structures. No detached accessory structure, except an air conditioning unit, antenna or antenna support structure, or exterior trash enclosures, shall be located within ten (10) feet of any principal structure unless such accessory structure is protected by a fire separation wall in compliance with the city's applicable building code. 
(3)  Any accessory structure must compliment the architecture of the principal structure. 
(Ord. No. 18-O-0049, § 1(Exh. B), 7-16-2018)  
10.5-7. - Off-street parking. 
(A)  Authorization. Subject to the limitations of section 10.5-6, off-street parking is permitted as an accessory use in all districts. Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the right of any person to provide off-street parking in excess of the requirements herein established but all such parking shall comply with the standards of this section. 
(B)  General requirements. 
(1)  Applicability to existing, new and expanded uses. 
(a)  General applicability. Except as provided otherwise in this section 10.5-7, the provisions of this section shall apply to all new uses. 
(b)  Change in existing use. Whenever a use lawfully existing on the effective date of the Airport Zoning District Ordinance is changed thereafter to a new use, parking facilities shall be provided as required herein for such new use; provided, however, that when any such new use is required to have no more than the same number of parking spaces required of such existing lawful use, then such new use may be established with a deficiency in required parking spaces equal in number to not more than the number of spaces such existing lawful use was deficient on the effective date of the Airport Zoning District Ordinance. 
(c)  Increase in use intensity. Whenever the intensity of use of any structure or use is increased through the lawful addition of units, floor area, seating capacity or other units of measurement specified herein for required parking spaces, parking spaces as required herein shall be provided for such increase in intensity of use. 
(d)  Exception for non-conforming locations and design. Nothing in this section 10.5-7 shall be construed to prohibit the continued utilization of any parking space as an accessory use to any structure or use for parking a vehicle that may lawfully be parked in such space solely because such space does not satisfy the location or design requirements of this Airport Zoning District Ordinance, or any amendment to it, if such space was legally in use as an accessory use to such structure or use on the effective date of the Airport Zoning District Ordinance or such amendment. 
(2)  Location of required parking spaces. 
(a)  General rule. Parking spaces required by this section 10.5-7 shall be located on the same lot as the use to which they are accessory. 
(C)  Design and maintenance. Every parking lot and garage shall be designed, constructed and maintained in accordance with the standards and requirements herein set forth: 
(1)  Location on lot. Off-street parking facilities shall be located on the same zoning lot as the principal use and may be provided on surface lots, underground, building or in parking structures, but shall comply with the yard requirements applicable in the district in which they are located. 
(2)  Screening and landscaping. All parking lots and garages shall comply with the screening and landscaping requirements set forth in section 10.5-5. 
(3)  Design. 
(a)  Access to street. All parking lots, areas and garages shall be so located and designed as to provide access to adjacent streets with least interference with through traffic movements. 
(b)  Turnaround area. Every parking lot or garage shall be provided with a turnaround area or other means to permit cars to exit the parking lot or garage without backing onto any street or sidewalk. No street shall be used as a turnaround. 
(c)  Lighting. Fixed lighting shall be provided for all parking lots and garages accommodating more than ten (10) vehicles. All lighting shall comply with subsection 10.5-4(f) and shall be reduced to security levels at all times of non-use. 
(d)  Landscaping islands. All islands shall be bordered by a B-6-12 type concrete barrier curb and shall be located and constructed in accordance with City Code. 
(e)  Curbs. Every parking lot and garage shall be bordered by a six (6) inch high concrete curb and shall be provided with curbs, barrier fences, or other suitable devices designed and located to protect required screening devices, landscaping and structures from damage by vehicles using such lot or garage. 
(f)  Circulation aisles. Each parking space shall be accessed by a circulation aisle of a width, in feet, as specified below: 
Parking Angle 	One-Way Aisle Width 	Two-Way Aisle Width 
Parallel 	14 	24 
45° 	14 	24 
60° 	16 	24 
75° 	20 	24 
90° 	24 	24 
 
(g)  Back-up area. Each parking space shall be provided with a sufficient back-up area to permit egress in one (1) maneuver, consisting of one (1) backward and one (1) forward movement. 
(h)  Space dimensions. Each off-street parking space, excluding its associated circulation aisle, shall have the following minimum dimensions, in feet: 
Parking Angle 	Stall Width 	Stall Length 	Stall Height 
Parallel 	9.0 	23 	8 
30° 	8.5 	18 	8 
45° 	8.5 	18 	8 
60° 	8.5 	18 	8 
90° 	9.0 	18 	8 
 
The above-stated stall width dimensions shall be increased to sixteen (16) feet or to the width required by state law, whichever is greater, for handicapped parking spaces. 
Ninety (90) degree parking stalls that abut a landscape area a minimum of twenty (20) feet in width may be reduced to seventeen (17) feet in length, with a one (1) foot overhang. 
(i)  Landbanking to reduce long term parking dimensions. Except for parallel parking spaces, the above-stated dimensions may be reduced in order to increase the amount of landscaped open space to seventeen and one-half (17½) feet in length and eight and one-half (8½) feet in width in parking lots and structures in accordance with the procedures of subsection 10.5-7(E). 
(j)  Maintenance. All tree planting areas, landscaped islands, parking lots, garages and areas shall be properly maintained at all times so as to be free of weeds, pot holes, broken curbs and other damaged or neglected features. 
(D)  Off-street parking use. No off-street parking lot or area shall be used for any purpose other than parking of fleet vehicles, and temporary storage of other motor vehicles related to the premises. 
(E)  Landbanking of required parking. 
(1)  Landbanking authorized. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Section, the total number of off-street parking spaces required to be paved pursuant to subsection 10.5-7(F) may be reduced subject to acceptance by the owner or its successors or assignees of the conditions set forth in the following three (3) subparagraphs. 
(2)  Termination of landbanking. The city, upon consultation with the owner of the property, shall have the right to require the occupant of the property to increase the stall length and width to the dimensions required by subsection 10.5-7(C) or to increase the number of parking spaces provided to serve said zoning lot up to the maximum required by subsection 10.5-7(F) for the property in question if the required parking becomes necessary to serve the development. 
(3)  Alternate plans required. Every application to allow landbanking of required parking spaces shall be accomplished by alternate detailed parking plans. One (1) plan shall show the full stall length and width required and the full number of parking spaces required pursuant to this section; the other plan shall show the reduced stall length and width or the reduced number of parking spaces, or both, as the case may be, proposed to be provided pursuant to the special permit being sought and shall also show the landscaping treatment of areas proposed to be reserved for future parking requirements. Both such plans shall show the location on the lot of all parking areas, the exact number of parking spaces to be provided and complete details for: 
(a)  Markings, 
(b)  Curbing, 
(c)  Surfacing, 
(d)  Screening and landscaping, 
(e)  Lighting, 
(f)  Grading, 
(g)  Stormwater calculations demonstrating compliance with City Code, 
(h)  Signage, and 
(i)  Access. 
The design plans for such parking areas shall be subject to the approval of the authority and the city. 
(4)  Open space covenant. The applicant shall file with the city an unconditional agreement and covenant in form and substance satisfactory to the city that areas reserved for future parking shall be maintained as landscaped open space until and unless required to be used for off-street parking. 
(F)  Required spaces (commercial parcels zone). Within the commercial parcels zone, all of the off-street parking regulations of article XIII of the City Zoning Code, shall be applicable. 
(Ord. No. 18-O-0049, § 1(Exh. B), 7-16-2018)  
10.5-8. - Off-street loading. 
(A)  Authorization. Subject to the limitations of section 10.5-8 and section 10.5-4, off-street loading shall be permitted as an accessory use. Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the right of any person to provide off-street loading in excess of the requirements herein established. 
(B)  General requirements. 
(1)  Applicability to existing, new and expanded uses. 
(a)  General applicability. Except as provided in this subsection 10.5-8(B), off-street loading spaces sufficient to satisfy the requirements of this section shall be provided for all existing and new uses. 
(b)  Change in existing use. Whenever a use lawfully existing on the effective date of this Airport Zoning District Ordinance is changed thereafter to a new use, loading facilities shall be provided as required herein for such new use; provided, however, that when any such new use is required to have no more than the same number of loading spaces required of such existing lawful use, then such new use may be established with a deficiency in required loading spaces equal in number to not more than the number of spaces such existing use was deficient on the date of this Airport Zoning District Ordinance. 
(c)  Increase in use intensity. Whenever the intensity of use of any structure or use is increased through the lawful addition of floor area, seating capacity or other units of measurement specified herein for required loading spaces, loading spaces as required herein shall be provided for such increase in intensity of use. 
(d)  Exception. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this subsection 10.5-8(B), no building or use lawfully existing on the effective date of this Airport Zoning District Ordinance, or any amendment to it establishing loading requirements with respect to such structure or use, shall be required to provide any additional loading spaces pursuant to this subsection 10.5-8(B) unless and until the aggregate increase in units of measurement shall equal the full number of units for which one (1) additional loading space would be required pursuant to subsection 10.5-8(D), in which event loading spaces as required herein shall be provided for the total aggregate increase. 
(2)  Location of required loading spaces. All areas utilized for loading shall be located on the same lot as the use they serve. Loading docks shall be an integral part of the building. 
(C)  Design and maintenance. All areas utilized for loading shall be designed, constructed and maintained in accordance with subsection 10.5-4(B): 
(1)  Location on lot. There shall be no loading in the required minimum yards. No loading space shall be located closer to any public right-of-way than the facade of the building facing such right-of-way. All loading spaces shall be located and arranged to provide logical and convenient access thereto from the use they serve. 
(2)  Loading-screening. All areas utilized for loading shall comply with the screening requirements set forth in subsection 10.5-4(B). 
(3)  Design. 
(a)  Access to a street. All areas utilized for loading shall be designed and arranged to provide access to a street or alley in a manner that will create the least possible interference with through traffic movements. No curb cut across public property shall exceed thirty (30) feet in width without the written approval of the city. 
(b)  Maneuvering space. All areas utilized for loading shall be provided with sufficient maneuvering space on the zoning lot where it is located to allow vehicles to access and exit the space without having to make any backing movement on or into any public or private street. 
(c)  Surface, drainage and markings. All areas utilized for loading shall be paved in accordance with City Code. 
(d)  Space dimensions. Each loading space, excluding required maneuvering areas, shall have the following minimum dimensions, in feet: 
Standard 	10W × 25L × 14H 
Tractor-trailer 	12W × 50L × 15H 
 
(D)  Required spaces. 
(1)  General requirements. All areas utilized for loading or receiving areas shall be provided in sufficient number, of sufficient size and so located that no loading and unloading operations infringe upon any street or sidewalk. 
(2)  Minimum requirements. For the following uses, the following minimum number of loading spaces shall be provided: 
Required loading spaces by land use: 
Use 	Required spaces 
(a) Hotels 	One (1) for ten thousand (10,000) to one hundred fifty thousand (150,000) square feet of gross floor area plus one (1) for each additional two hundred thousand (200,000) square feet of floor area or fraction thereof. 
(b) Other uses 	One (1) for the first one hundred fifty thousand (150,000) square feet of gross floor area or fraction thereof plus one (1) for each additional two hundred thousand (200,000) square feet of gross floor area or fraction thereof. 
 
The first space required for any building having in excess of ten thousand (10,000) square feet shall be sized to accommodate a tractor-trailer, and all other spaces may be standard sized. 
(Ord. No. 18-O-0049, § 1(Exh. B), 7-16-2018)  
10.5-9. - Signs. 
All signs shall comply with article XIII of the City's Zoning Code. 
(Ord. No. 18-O-0049, § 1(Exh. B), 7-16-2018)  
10.5-10. - Variance procedure. 
(A)  Zoning board of appeals (ZBA). The membership, appointment, compensation, term of office, meetings, quorum and voting for the ZBA is set forth in section 5.3 of the City's Zoning Code. 
(B)  Authority. A variance may be recommended only in those specific instances enumerated in subsection 10.5-10(F), and then only when the ZBA has made findings of fact, based upon the standards set out in subsection 10.5-10(G), that owing to special conditions a literal enforcement of the provisions of this Airport Zoning District Ordinance in an individual case, results in practical difficulties or particular hardship for the owner, lessee or occupant of land or a structure. 
(C)  Application for a variance. An application for a variance shall be filed with the city. The application shall contain the following information as well as such additional information as may be prescribed by rule of the ZBA: 
(1)  The particular requirements of this district which prevent the proposed use or construction. 
(2)  The characteristics of the subject property which prevent compliance with said requirements of this district. 
(3)  The reduction of the minimum requirements of this district which would be necessary to permit the proposed use or construction. 
(4)  The practical difficulty or particular hardship which would result if said particular requirements of this district were applied to the subject property. 
(D)  Public hearing notice. The ZBA shall hold a public hearing on each variance request within forty-five (45) days after the variance application is submitted to the city. At the hearing any interested party may appear and testify, either in person or by authorized agent. Notice indicating the location of property, the time, date and place of the hearing and the nature of the proposed variance shall be given not more than thirty (30) days nor less than fifteen (15) days before the hearing: 
(1)  By certified mail return receipt requested of all persons residing within two hundred fifty (250) feet of property; and a certified mailing sent to all persons at the addresses appearing on a roll prepared by the County Clerks of DuPage and Kane Counties, listing to whom the tax bills are sent concerning parcel(s) of property which are within two hundred fifty (250) feet of the subject property will satisfy this requirement. 
(2)  By publication in a newspaper of general circulation within the municipality. 
(E)  Jurisdiction. The ZBA is hereby vested with the following jurisdiction and authority and it shall be its duty: 
(1)  To hear and make recommendation on all applications for variances from the regulations and restrictions imposed by this district. 
(2)  To hear and report to the mayor and city council on such matters as may be referred to it by the mayor and city council subject to the provisions of this district. 
(3)  To hear and decide all other matters upon which it is authorized or required to pass under this district or applicable Illinois statutes. 
(F)  Limitations on variations. Variations from the regulations of this district shall be considered by the ZBA only in accordance with the standards set forth in this section and may be considered in the following instances and no others: 
(1)  To permit any yard of less dimension than required by the applicable regulations. 
(2)  To permit any building or structure to exceed the floor area ratio, height, yard and bulk limitations imposed by this district. 
(3)  To reduce the applicable off-street parking or loading facilities required by not more than twenty (20) percent of the required number. 
(4)  To permit the same off-street parking facilities to qualify as a required facility for two (2) or more uses, provided the substantial use of such facility by each user does not take place at approximately the same hours of the same days of the week. 
(5)  To permit any fence, wall or hedge of less or greater dimension than required by the applicable regulations. 
(6)  To permit any signage to exceed height and area limitations by not more than twenty (20) percent. 
(7)  Variations in flood prone areas. 
(G)  Standards for variances. The ZBA shall not recommend and the city council shall not grant variances from the regulations of this district unless affirmative findings of fact shall be made as to all of the standards hereinafter set forth, which findings of fact shall be based upon evidence adduced upon the hearing held thereon that: 
(1)  The physical condition of the premises is unique and does not apply to neighboring premises in the same district. 
(2)  The aforesaid unique conditions are not the result of actions taken after the adoption of the Zoning Code or relevant amendment thereof by any person personally having an interest in the property. 
(3)  Strict application of the regulations of the airport zoning district would deprive the owner of the reasonable use of his premises equivalent to the use of neighboring premises within the district. 
(4)  Granting of the variance will be in harmony with the intent of the Zoning Code and will not be detrimental to any neighboring premises. 
(H)  Decisions on variations. The concurring vote of four (4) members of the ZBA shall be necessary to recommend the grant of a variation to the city council. Any recommendation that a variation be granted shall be accompanied by a conclusion or statement of the relief to be granted, supported by findings of fact, which statement and findings shall be transmitted to the city council. The city council shall make a final determination as to whether or not any variation requested shall be granted. The decision of the city council shall occur by ordinance supported by a statement containing specific findings of fact, which findings shall specify the reason or reasons for making the variation and shall refer to any exhibits containing plans and specifications for the proposed variation which have been made part of the application or which were introduced at the public hearing as evidence. Such exhibits shall remain part of the permanent record of the ZBA. The terms of relief granted shall be specifically set forth from the findings of fact. All variations granted pursuant to this authority shall be granted in conformance with the statutes of the State of Illinois. 
(Ord. No. 18-O-0049, § 1(Exh. B), 7-16-2018)  
ARTICLE XI. - MANUFACTURING 
 
11.1. - Manufacturing. 
The intent is to establish two (2) distinctly separate manufacturing classification within the city. This designation shall be: 
(1)  M-Manufacturing District. 
(2)  ORI-Office, Research and Light Industrial District. 
(Ord. No. 2733, § 21, 4-4-94)  
11.2. - M - Manufacturing district. 
To provide areas within the community of manufacturing facilities, research facilities, research park, warehouses and wholesale manufacturing. It is intended that this particular district will generally provide for manufacturing of an assembly nature from finished goods, warehousing and wholesale activities. Supportive services for manufacturing are generally of a non-retail or personal service character and should be encouraged to locate in this district.  
11.2-1. - Use restrictions. 
All permitted uses are subject to the following conditions: 
(A)  Any production, processing, cleaning, servicing, testing, repair or storage of goods, materials or products shall conform with the performance standards set forth in the City's Code of Ordinances. 
(B)  All business, production, servicing, processing and storage shall take place within completely enclosed buildings, unless approved by a special use permit for outside storage, pursuant to sections 11.2-1(C) and 11.2-4(T). 
(C)  Outside storage: 
(1)  All outside storage must be confined to an area that is surfaced with bituminous or concrete pavement or brick pavers. 
(2)  All outside storage must be enclosed by a material that provides a solid screen so that no stored materials, other than vehicles, are visible from the property boundary. Such material shall consist of: 
a.  A fence that shall be no shorter than six (6) feet nor taller than ten (10) feet; or 
b.  Landscaping consisting of evergreen trees and/or evergreen shrubs planted to grow so as to accomplish such screening within one (1) year of planting; or a combination of "a" and "b" 
(3)  No outside storage shall block, hinder, restrict, or render unusable any required parking spaces or fire lanes. 
(4)  No outside storage is permitted in the actual front yard. 
(D)  Accessory buildings shall not be located in any required yard. 
(E)  Only one (1) principal building may be erected on any one (1) lot. 
(F)  Crematoriums. 
(1)  No crematorium shall be maintained within six hundred fifty (650) feet of: 
(a)  Any residential district and any lot or parcel upon which one (1) or more residences are the primary use at the time of initial application for a special use permit for a crematorium 
(b)  Any school or public playground, park, or recreational area 
This six hundred fifty (650) foot distance shall be measured as a straight line, without regard to intervening structures, from a point on the property line upon which the proposed crematorium is to be located that is nearest to the property or the land use district boundary line from which the proposed use is to be separated. 
(2)  No loading doors shall be visible from any public right-of-way or from any of the uses from which the facility is to maintain a separation distance per section (1) above. 
(3)  All business vehicles associated with the facility shall not be visible from any public right-of-way. 
(4)  Must comply with all applicable state and federal laws and regulations. 
(G)  Salvage and recycling facilities. The distances provided for in this subsection shall be measured by following a straight line, without regard to intervening structures, from a point on the property line upon which the proposed salvage and recycling facility is to be located that is nearest to the property or the land use district boundary line from which the proposed use is to be separated. 
(1)  Shall not be located within one thousand (1,000) feet of the property line of another salvage and recycling facility. 
(2)  Shall not be located within four hundred (400) feet of any of the following zoning districts as provided for under this ordinance: ER-1, ER-2, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, R-6, B-1, B-2, B-3, A and ORI. 
(3)  Shall not be located within four hundred (400) feet of a zoned residential or commercial district lying within another municipality or within unincorporated portions of any county. 
(4)  Shall not be located within four hundred (400) feet of any educational institution that serves minors, day care center, cemetery, public park, forest preserve, historic district, public library, residential dwelling, place of religious worship, or other similar government agency operated facility. 
(5)  Shall not be located within the same building or structure, or on the same lot, as another salvage and recycling facility. 
(6)  Shall not be operated in a manner that permits the observation of the outdoor operations to be visible from any public right-of-way or property line. 
(7)  Shall be fully enclosed by a solid screen fence so that none of the outdoor operations are visible. Landscaping consisting of deciduous and/or evergreen trees and shrubs shall also planted to enhance the aesthetics of the screening requirements. 
(8)  The outdoor operations shall be confined to an area that is surfaced with bituminous asphalt, concrete pavement or brick pavers. 
(9)  Shall not block, hinder, restrict, or render unusable any required parking spaces or fire lanes. 
(10)  The outdoor operations shall not be permitted in the actual front yard. 
(11)  Shall be inspected annually, or more frequently as deemed necessary, by the city to ensure code compliance. 
(12)  No business related vehicles or equipment shall be parked or stored outside so that they are visible from any public right-of-way or property line. 
(13)  No salvage or recycling materials within the outdoor enclosure shall be visible over the height of the enclosure screening. 
(14)  Only vehicles and equipment directly associated with the operations may be stored or parked on the property. 
(15)  Shall be located on property that is contiguous to a railroad right-of-way. 
(16)  Shall be located on property a minimum of three (3) acres in area. 
(17)  Shall not sell new or used vehicles, equipment or machinery from the property. 
(18)  Only metal materials shall be salvaged or recycled, except other ancillary materials such as, but not limited to, batteries, glass, fluids, plastics and tires derived directly from the scrap metal materials being salvaged or recycled. 
(H)  Medical marijuana cultivation centers and dispensaries. 
(1)  The facilities shall comply with all applicable State Statutes and Regulations (410 ILCS 130/) as amended. 
(2)  The separation buffer, as required in the State Statutes, of these facilities from uses deemed incompatible shall be measured by following a straight line, without regard to intervening structures, from the property line or zoning lot boundary of the incompatible use. If the separation buffer crosses through or over any property or portion of a property thereof to be considered for one (1) of these facilities then said property shall be automatically excluded from consideration. 
(I)  Construction and demolition debris recycling. 
(1)  Shall be located on a lot having a minimum lot area of three (3) acres. 
(2)  Shall be located in a zoning district having a minimum district area of three (3) acres. 
(3)  Shall be located on a lot that is contiguous to both a railroad right-of-way and property that is zoned Airport District. 
(Ord. No. 2733, § 20, 4-4-94; Ord. No. 4123, § 7, 9-22-98: Ord. No. 4241, § 1, 11-5-2000; Ord. No. 03-O-0040, § 21, 6-16-2003; Ord. No. 04-O-0055, § 5, 6-21-2004; Ord. No. 05-O-0067, § 6, 9-19-2005; Ord. No. 09-O-0017, § 2, 3-16-2009; Ord. No. 14-O-0008, § 3, 6-16-2014; Ord. No. 15-O-0018, § 1, 5-18-2015) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 15-O-0018, § 1, adopted May 18, 2015, set out provisions adding subsection 11.2-1(H). To avoid subsection duplication, and at the editor's discretion, said provisions have been included as subsection 11.2-1(I), as set out herein.  
11.2-2. - Lot and building requirements. 
(A)  Minimum lot size: None. 
(B)  Minimum lot width: One hundred (100) feet at the established building line. 
(C)  Minimum setbacks: 
(1)  Front yard: Forty (40) feet for buildings and other structures, except parking areas, and twenty (20) feet for parking areas. A twenty (20) foot landscape yard shall be provided along the front lot line, with landscaping in accordance with the provisions of sections 14.4 through 14.8 hereof. 
(2)  Side yard: Twenty (20) feet for buildings and other structures, except parking areas, and fifteen (15) feet for parking areas, provided, however, that where two (2) adjacent uses share a common driveway, the parking setback shall be not less than eleven (11) feet. 
(3)  Corner side yard: Forty (40) feet for buildings and other structures, except for parking areas, and twenty (20) feet for parking areas. A twenty (20) foot landscape yard shall be provided along the corner side lot line, with landscaping in accordance with the provisions of sections 14.4 through 14.8 hereof. 
(4)  Rear yard: Twenty (20) feet for buildings and other structures, except parking areas, and fifteen (15) feet for parking areas. A fifteen (15) foot landscape yard shall be provided along the rear lot line. 
[(5)  Reserved.] 
(6)  Transitional yards: Where a lot line in the manufacturing district is adjacent to a lot line in another zoning district, or abuts a right-of-way that serves as a boundary between the manufacturing district and another zoning district, there shall be a setback for all buildings and other structures, except driveways, of not less than one hundred (100) feet if the other zoning district is a residence district, and not less than sixty (60) feet if the other zoning district is a business district. A landscape yard shall be provided along said lot line or lot lines, with landscaping in accordance with the provisions of sections 14.4 through 14.8 hereof. 
(D)  Floor area ratio: Not to exceed 1.5. 
(E)  Maximum structure height: Seventy-five (75) feet. 
(Ord. No. 4241, § 2, 11-5-99; Ord. No. 03-O-0074, § 4, 10-6-2003; Ord. No. 05-O-0067, § 4, 9-19-2005)  
11.2-3. - Permitted uses. 
(A)  Abrasive manufacture. 
(B)  Apparel and other products manufactured from textile. 
(C)  Assembly, production, processing, wholesaling or warehousing, or manufacturing of any commodity from semifinished (other than raw) materials, provided explosives or livestock are not involved. 
(D)  Bakeries (nonretail). 
(E)  Bedding manufacture. 
(F)  Bicycle manufacture. 
(G)  Boot and shoe manufacture. 
(H)  Bottling companies. 
(I)  Furniture manufacture. 
(J)  Carpet and rug cleaning. 
(K)  Cleaning, pressing and dying plants. 
(L)  Cold storage plants. 
(M)  Dairy products processing. 
(N)  Dry cleaning establishments and laundries employing more than ten (10) employees. 
(O)  Electronic and scientific precision instruments manufacture. 
(P)  Food storage and manufacture, packaging and processing. 
(Q)  Glass products production and sales. 
(R)  Ice plants. 
(S)  Medical and dental clinics. 
(T)  Metal stamping, polishing and plating. 
(U)  Paper products manufacture. 
(V)  Plastics processing. 
(W)  Above ground service facilities. 
(X)  Printing and publishing. 
(Y)  Radio and television stations and studios. 
(Z)  Research and development facilities or parks, provided explosives or livestock are not involved. 
(AA)  Warehousing and distribution. 
(BB)  Adult business uses, subject to the following restrictions: 
(1)  Restrictions on the location of adult business uses. No adult business use shall be maintained: 
(a)  Within one thousand (1,000) feet of the property line of another adult business use; 
(b)  Within one thousand (1,000) feet of any of the following zoning district as provided for under this ordinance: ER-1, ER-2, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5 and R-6; 
(c)  Within one thousand (1,000) feet of a zoned residential district lying within another municipality or within unincorporated portions of any county; or 
(d)  Within one thousand (1,000) feet of any educational institution that serves minors; day car center; cemetery, public park; forest preserve; historic district; public library; residential dwelling; or place of religious worship. 
(e)  Within the same building or structure, or on the same lot, as another adult business use. 
The distances provided for in this subsection shall be measured by following a straight line, without regard to intervening structures, from a point on the property line upon which the proposed adult business use is to be located that is nearest to the property or the land use district boundary line from which the proposed use is to be separated. 
(2)  Restrictions on the operation of adult business uses. No adult business use shall be conducted in a manner that permits the observation of any material depicting, describing or relating to any specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas by display, decorations, sign, show window or other opening from any public right-of-way or property line. 
(CC)  Employment staffing agency, with no temporary employees reporting routinely to agency to obtain a job order or to collect compensation. 
(DD)  Offices. 
(EE)  Nurseries. 
(FF)  Contractor's offices with no outside storage. 
(GG)  Massage establishments. 
(HH)  Personal training and group exercise facility. 
(II)  Retail sales ancillary to a permitted or special manufacturing use. 
(Ord. No. 4138, § 2, 12-21-98; Ord. No. 4241, § 3, 11-5-99; Ord. No. 02-O-0062, § 1, 5-6-2002; Ord. No. 03-O-0040, §§ 17, 23, 6-16-2003; Ord. No. 03-O-0074, §§ 5, 6, 10-6-2003; Ord. No. 05-O-0067, §§ 2, 13, 9-19-2005; Ord. No. 07-O-0024, § 18, 3-19-2007; Ord. No. 08-O-0010, § 11, 2-18-2008; Ord. No. 13-O-0027, § 4, 8-19-2013; Ord. No. 18-O-0031, § 9, 6-18-2018)  
11.2-4. - Special uses. 
(A)  Alternative electric suppliers unless ancillary to a permitted or special manufacturing use. 
(B)  Asphaltic and concrete plants. 
(C)  Motor vehicle repair shops. 
(D)  Motor vehicle service stations. 
(E)  Motor vehicle body shops. 
(F)  Building material sales with outside storage. 
(G)  Cartage and express facilities and freight terminals, including air, motor and railroad. 
(H)  Chemical processing and manufacture. 
(I)  Cogeneration facilities unless ancillary to a permitted or special manufacturing use. 
(J)  Contractors equipment sales and leasing. 
(K)  Dwelling units for watchmen's quarters. 
(L)  Employment staffing agency, with any temporary employees reporting to agency to obtain a job order or to collect compensation. 
(M)  Fuel storage, sales and manufacturing, excluding public utilities. 
(N)  Governmental agency laboratories for the testing of radioactive materials from the City of West Chicago or the surrounding portions of the County of Du Page, over which the Illinois Department of Nuclear Safety, Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, United States Nuclear Regulatory Commission and/or the United States Environmental Protection Agency have jurisdiction, provided that such laboratories comply with all applicable laws, ordinances, codes, rules and regulations in their construction, use, operation and maintenance. 
(O)  Hotels. 
(P)  Kennels and animal hospitals and clinics. 
(Q)  Landscape waste transfer stations, provided, however, that in addition to the requirements of section 5.4-6 of the zoning ordinance, an applicant for a landscape waste transfer station special use permit shall demonstrate that the proposed use shall comply with all applicable local, state and federal statutes, ordinances, codes, rules and regulations, including, but not limited to, all applicable local, state and federal requirements relating to location, siting and design, licenses, permits and/or other governmental approvals and/or review. 
(R)  Reserved. 
(S)  Moving and storage facilities. 
(T)  Outside activity or storage ancillary to a permitted or special use. 
(U)  Planned unit developments on units of land not less than twenty (20) acres. 
(V)  Reserved. 
(W)  Self service storage facilities. 
(X)  Storage and distribution of flammable liquids, fats or oils unless ancillary to a permitted or special manufacturing use. 
(Y)  Trade schools and adult educational facilities. 
(Z)  Crematoriums, including those with facilities for conducting funeral services as accessory to the principal use. The space devoted to funeral services shall be less than that devoted to cremation. 
(AA)  Utility substations. 
(BB)  Salvage and recycling facilities. 
(CC)  Reserved. 
(DD)  Motor vehicle sales, internet based. 
(EE)  Medical marijuana cultivation centers and dispensaries. 
(FF)  Construction and demolition debris recycling. 
(GG)  Motor vehicle care centers. 
(Ord. No. 2762, § 1, 5-2-94; Ord. No. 2965, § 1, 2-5-96; Ord. No. 4241, §§ 4, 5, 11-5-99; Ord. No. 4363, § 1, 10-16-2000; Ord. No. 01-O-0118, § 6, 1-7-2002; Ord. No. 02-O-0084, § 15, 6-17-2002; Ord. No. 02-O-0117, § 1, 10-7-2002; Ord. No. 03-O-0040, §§ 18, 22, 24, 6-16-2003; Ord. No. 03-O-0074, §§ 7, 8, 10-6-2003; Ord. No. 04-O-0055, § 6, 6-21-2004; Ord. No. 05-O-0067, § 3, 9-19-2005; Ord. No. 07-O-0024, §§ 19, 20, 3-19-2007; Ord. No. 09-O-0017, § 3, 3-16-2009; Ord. No. 10-O-0093, § 2, 10-18-2010; Ord. No. 14-O-0008, § 4, 6-16-2014; Ord. No. 15-O-0018, § 2, 5-18-2015; Ord. No. 18-O-0031, §§ 7, 8, 10, 6-18-2018)  
11.2-5. - Adoption of studies and findings as to adult business uses. 
(A)  The city hereby adopts by reference the following studies and case law decisions, including the specific studies and findings contained therein, as to the negative secondary effects resulting from the location and concentration of adult business uses within a municipality: 
(1)  St. Paul Division of Planning at the Minnesota Crime Control Planning Board 1978 study of relationships between sexually-oriented and alcohol-oriented adult entertainment business; 
(2)  Minnesota Crime Prevention Center study on the effects of sex-oriented and alcohol-oriented adult entertainment upon property values and crime rates 1980; 
(3)  Indianapolis Department of Metropolitan Development, Division of Planning 1983 study of sexually oriented businesses and property values; 
(4)  Indianapolis Department of Metropolitan Development, Division of Planning 1984 "Adult Entertainment Business in Indianapolis"; 
(5)  Phoenix Planning Department 1979 "Relation of Criminal Activity and Adult Businesses"; 
(6)  Rochester/Olmsted Consolidated Planning Department and Office of the Rochester City Attorney 1988 "Adult Entertainment, Land Use and Legal Perspectives"; and, 
(7)  Northend Cinema, Inc. v. City of Seattle (Supreme Court, Wash., 1978) 90 Wash. 2d 709, 585 P.2d 1153. 
(B)  The city finds that the negative secondary effects associated with adult business uses, as adopted pursuant to subsection (A) above, are applicable to the location of adult business uses in the city and that the regulation of adult business uses is necessary to lessen said negative secondary effects including but not limited to lessening the following negative secondary effects: 
(1)  There is a statistically significant correlation between the location of adult business uses and neighborhood deterioration. 
(2)  That the location of an adult business use in a neighborhood has a negative impact on property value. 
(3)  That the negative impact on property values increases when more than one (1) adult business use is located within a given area. 
(4)  That the effect of adult business uses on the crime rate is positive and significant. 
(5)  That there is a significantly higher crime rate associated with two (2) adult businesses located in a given area than is associated with only one adult business use in a given area. 
(6)  That adult business uses should be located in areas of the city which are not in close proximity to residential uses, schools and other retail business uses as well as areas frequented by minors. 
(7)  That residents of the city and persons who are nonresidents but use the city for shopping and other needs will move from the city or shop elsewhere if adult business uses are allowed to locate in close proximity to residential dwellings, schools or other retail business uses. 
(8)  That the location of adult business uses in a given area creates the perception in the city that such area is an unsafe and undesirable part of the city. 
Therefore, adult business uses should be separated from other dissimilar uses just as any other land use should be separated from uses with characteristics different from itself. The reasonable regulation of the location of adult business uses will provide for the protection of the image of the city and its property values, and protect the residents of the city from the negative secondary effects of such business uses, while providing to those who desire to patronize adult business uses such an opportunity in areas of the city which are appropriate for location of adult business uses. 
(Ord. No. 4138, § 3, 12-21-98)  
11.2-6. - Amortization of existing adult business uses. 
Any adult business use which lawfully existed on December 31, 1998, and which became nonconforming by reason of the adoption of the amendments to this chapter pertaining to adult business uses shall be considered a nonconforming adult business use and amortized as hereinafter provided. On or before December 31, 1999, all nonconforming adult business uses shall be amortized and eliminated. Thereafter, it shall be unlawful for any nonconforming adult business use to continue the use of or occupy any building except in full compliance with the provisions of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 4138, § 4, 12-21-98)  
11.2-7. - Performance standards. 
Any use established in the manufacturing district which involves the manufacture, production, processing, assembly, repairing, storing, cleaning, servicing, or testing of materials, goods or products shall be operated in such a manner as to comply with applicable performance standards as hereinafter set forth governing noise, smoke, particulate matter, toxic or noxious matter, odors, fire and explosive hazards, vibration, radiation, or glare or heat; and no use already established on the effective date of this ordinance shall be so altered or modified as to conflict with, or further conflict with, applicable performance standards for the manufacturing district. 
A.  Noise. Each land use must conform to the standards set forth from time to time by the state Environmental Protection Agency. Such standards shall include, but not be limited to, the requirements as outlined in the latest edition of the State of Illinois Noise Pollution Control Regulations , dated August 9, 1973, as amended. 
B.  Vibration. 
(1)  In the manufacturing district, no activity or operation shall cause or create earthborne vibrations in excess of the displacement values given below. Measurements shall be made at or beyond the adjacent lot line or the nearest residence district boundary line, as described below: 
Vibration displacements shall be measured with an instrument or complement of instruments capable of simultaneously measuring in three (3) mutually perpendicular directions. The maximum vector shall be less than the vibration displacement permitted. For the purpose of this Section, steady state vibrations are vibrations which are continuous, or vibrations in discrete impulses more frequent than one hundred (100) per minute. Discrete impulses which do not exceed one hundred (100) per minute shall be considered impact vibrations. 
(2)  The maximum permitted displacements shall be determined by the following formula: 
D = K ° f 
D = Displacement in inches 
K = A constant to be determined by reference to the following tables 
f = The frequency of the vibration transmitted through the ground expressed in cycles per second 
(3)  The maximum earth displacement permitted at the points described below shall be determined by use of the formula in the proceeding division (D)(2)(b) and the appropriate K constant shown in Table 1. 
Table 1: 
Values of K to be used in Vibration Formula: 
Location K 
In any neighboring lot: 
Steady state 0.008 
Impulsive 0.015 
Less than 8 pulses per 24 hour period 0.037 
In any residence district: 
Steady state 0.003 
Impulsive 0.006 
Less than 8 pulses per 24 hour period 0.015 
C.  Smoke and particulate matter. Each land use must conform to the standards set forth from time to time by the state Environmental Protection Agency. Such standards shall include, but not be limited to, the latest edition of the standards adopted by the state Air Pollution Control Board, dated April 14, 1972, as amended, entitled State of Illinois Air Pollution Control Regulations . 
D.  Toxic matter. Each land use must conform to the standards set forth from time to time by the state Environmental Protection Agency. Such standards shall include, but not be limited to, the latest edition of the standards adopted by the state Air Pollution Control Board. 
E.  Odorous matter. Each land use must conform to the standards set forth from time to time by the state Environmental Protection Agency. Such standards shall include, but not be limited to, the latest edition of the standards adopted by the state Air Pollution Control Board, dated April 14, 1972, as amended, entitled State of Illinois Air Pollution Control Regulations . 
F.  Fire and explosion hazards. 
(1)  Flammable or detonable materials: 
(a)  In the manufacturing district, the storage, utilization, or manufacture of solid materials or products ranging from incombustible to moderate burning is permitted, provided that all city building codes and fire prevention codes are complied with. 
(b)  In the manufacturing district, the storage, utilization, or manufacture of solid materials or products ranging from free to active burning to intense burning is permitted, provided that all city building codes and fire prevention codes are complied with. 
G.  Radiation hazards. 
(1)  Release outside property lines: in the manufacturing district, the release of radioactive materials or the emission of ionizing radiation outside of property lines shall be in accordance with the latest edition of the rules and regulations as set forth from time to time by the state, as published in Rules and Regulations for Prevention of Radiation Hazards , adopted April 18, 1961, as amended. 
(2)  Unsealed radioactive materials: in the manufacturing district, unsealed radioactive materials shall not be manufactured, utilized, or stored except when such materials are stored in a fireproof and radiation proof container at or below ground level. 
H.  Water pollution. Each land use must conform to the latest edition of the standards set forth from time to time by the state Environmental Protection Agency. Such standards shall include, but not be limited to, the requirements as published in the pamphlet entitled Water Pollution Regulations of Illinois , dated March 7, 1972, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 05-O-0067, § 15, 9-19-2005)  
11.3. - ORI Office, research and light industrial district. 
The purpose of the ORI district is to provide an environment suitable for research and development activities, engineering and testing activities, office complexes, and limited commercial and manufacturing uses. The requirements of this district are designed to permit and encourage orderly and attractive development which provides for a high proportion of open space and is comparable with any adjacent residential, commercial and airport development. 
(Ord. No. 02-O-0004, § 1(Exh. B), 2-4-2002)  
11.3-1. - Use restrictions. 
(A)  All activities including business, service, research, product development, sales, storage, merchandise, display, testing and manufacturing operations, except off-street parking and loading, shall be conducted within completely enclosed buildings. 
(B)  Warehousing or indoor storage or goods or material, beyond that normally incidental to the permitted uses of the ORI district, shall be prohibited. 
(C)  No use is permitted which would be or would create a nuisance due to excessive noise, smoke, vibration, odor, glare or light. 
(D)  Accessory buildings shall not be located in any required yard. 
(E)  All areas on a zoning lot not occupied by structures, pavement or similar improvements shall be landscaped. 
(F)  Off-street loading facilities must be located such that they shall not face either a collector or arterial street. 
(G)  Crematoriums. 
(1)  No crematorium shall be maintained within six hundred fifty (650) feet of: 
(a)  Any residential district and any lot or parcel upon which one (1) or more residences are the primary use at the time of initial application for a special use permit for a crematorium. 
(b)  Any school or public playground, park, or recreational area. 
This six hundred fifty (650) foot distance shall be measured as a straight line, without regard to intervening structures, from a point on the property line upon which the proposed crematorium is to be located that is nearest to the property or the land use district boundary line from which the proposed use is to be separated. 
(2)  No loading doors shall be visible from any public right-of-way or from any of the uses from which the facility is to maintain a separation distance per section (1) above. 
(3)  All business vehicles associated with the facility shall not be visible from any public right-of-way. 
(4)  Must comply with all applicable state and federal laws and regulations. 
(H)  Banks and financial institutions. 
(1)  Shall consist of a minimum leasable floor area of six thousand five hundred (6,500) square feet if located in a stand alone building. 
(2)  Shall consist of a minimum leasable floor area of three thousand five hundred (3,500) square feet if located in a multi-tenant office building. 
(3)  Shall not be permitted in a multi-tenant retail building. 
(Ord. No. 02-O-0004, § 1(Exh. B), 2-4-2002; Ord. No. 02-O-0084, § 6, 6-17-2002; Ord. No. 04-O-0055, § 5, 6-21-2004; Ord. No. 09-O-0047, § 10, 8-17-2009)  
11.3-2. - Lot and building requirements. 
Every building erected in the ORI District shall conform to the requirements indicated below: 
(A)  Minimum lot area: 20,000 square feet 
(B)  Minimum lot width: One hundred (100) feet at the established building line. 
(C)  Minimum setbacks: 
(1)  Front yard: Thirty (30) feet for buildings and structures. A twenty (20) foot landscape yard shall be provided along the front lot line, with landscaping in accordance with the provisions of Sections 14.4 through 14.8 hereof. These yards shall be increased by one (1) foot for each one (1) foot in height by which any building on the lot exceeds thirty (30) feet. 
(2)  Corner side yard: Thirty (30) feet for buildings and structures. A twenty-foot landscape yard shall be provided along the corner side lot line, with landscaping in accordance with the provisions of Sections 14.4 through 14.8 hereof. These yards shall be increased by one (1) foot for each one (1) foot in height by which any building on the lot exceeds thirty (30) feet. 
(3)  Side yard: Fifteen (15) feet for buildings and structures. A ten-foot landscape yard shall be provided along the side lot line in accordance with the provisions of Section 14.4 through 14.8 hereof. These yards shall be increased in depth by one (1) foot for each one (1) foot in height by which any building on the lot exceeds thirty (30) feet. 
(4)  Rear yard: Fifteen (15) feet for buildings and structures. A ten-foot landscape yard shall be provided along the rear lot line in accordance with the provisions of Section 14.4 through 14.8 hereof. These yards shall be increased in depth by one (1) foot for each one (1) foot in height by which any building on the lot exceeds thirty (30) feet. 
(D)  Floor area ratio: The floor area ratio shall not exceed 0.6, except for hotels and motels, which may have a floor area ratio of 1.0. 
(E)  Maximum structure height: Four (4) stories or fifty (50) feet, whichever is less, except for hotels and motels, which may be sixty (60) feet or five (5) stories, whichever is less. 
(Ord. No. 02-O-0004, § 1(Exh. B), 2-4-2002; Ord. No. 05-O-0067, § 5, 9-19-2005)  
11.3-3. - Permitted uses. 
Provided that all the use restrictions of this district are observed, the following uses are permitted: 
(A)  Accessory retail sales operations. 
(B)  Auditoriums and meeting rooms. 
[(C)  Reserved.] 
(D)  Business, professional and medical offices. 
(E)  Computer and data processing centers. 
(F)  Cultural facilities. 
(G)  Electronic and communications industries. 
(H)  Employment staffing agency, with no temporary employees reporting routinely to agency to obtain a job order or to collect compensation. 
(I)  Engineering and testing laboratories and offices. 
(J)  Laboratories, offices and other facilities for research and development. 
(K)  Medical and dental clinics. 
(L)  Government facilities. 
(M)  Pharmaceutical industries. 
(N)  Places of assembly. 
(O)  Places of worship. 
(P)  Production of prototype products. 
(Q)  Radio and television broadcasting studios. 
(R)  Showroom space. 
(S)  Veterinary clinics. 
(T)  Printing and publishing facilities less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet. 
(U)  Telemarketing centers less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet. 
(V)  Warehousing ancillary to permitted and other special uses and comprising not more that thirty-three (33) percent of a building's floor area. 
(W)  Light manufacturing, occupying a space that does not exceed ten thousand (10,000) square feet. 
(X)  Massage establishments that are associated with a medical facility, physician's office, health care facility or full service health and beauty salon. 
(Y)  Offices. 
(Z)  Above ground service facilities. 
(AA)  Personal training and group exercise facility. 
(Ord. No. 02-O-0004, § 1(Exh. B), 2-4-2002; Ord. No. 02-O-0084, § 7, 6-17-2002; Ord. No. 03-O-0040, § 19, 6-16-2003; Ord. No. 03-O-0115, § 5, 12-15-2003; Ord. No. 05-O-0067, § 14, 9-19-2005; Ord. No. 05-O-0078, § 9, 10-17-2005; Ord. No. 07-O-0024, § 21, 3-19-2007; Ord. No. 09-O-0047, § 11, 8-17-2009; Ord. No. 13-O-0027, § 5, 8-19-2013)  
11.3-4. - Special uses. 
(A)  Governmental agency laboratories for the testing of radioactive materials from the City of West Chicago or the surrounding portions of the County of DuPage, over which the Illinois Department of Nuclear Safety, Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, United States Nuclear Regulatory Commission and/or the United States Environmental Protection Agency have jurisdiction, provided that such laboratories comply with all applicable laws, ordinances, codes, rules and regulations in their construction, use, operation and maintenance. 
(B)  Health clubs. 
(C)  Hotels and motels. 
(D)  Nursery schools and day care facilities. 
(E)  Planned unit developments. 
(F)  Printing and publishing facilities. 
(G)  Restaurants. 
(H)  Schools, commercial or trade, including those teaching music, dance, business, commercial or technical subjects. 
(I)  Services or commercial uses intended primarily to service the immediate convenience needs of persons employed in the area, including stationary and office supply stores, restaurants (but not drive-in facilities) and similar uses. 
(J)  Telemarketing centers. 
(K)  Uses ancillary to permitted and other special uses. 
(L)  Light manufacturing, occupying a space of more than ten thousand (10,000) square feet. 
(M)  Warehousing ancillary to permitted and other special uses and comprising between thirty-three (33) and fifty (50) percent of a building's floor area. 
(N)  Reserved. 
(O)  Banks and financial institutions. 
(Ord. No. 02-O-0004, § 1(Exh. B), 2-4-2002; Ord. No. 02-O-0084, § 8, 6-17-2002; Ord. No. 03-O-0115, § 6, 12-15-2003; Ord. No. 05-O-0031, § 2, 5-2-2005; Ord. No. 09-O-0047, § 12, 8-17-2009; Ord. No. 16-O-0036, § 1, 10-17-2016) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 02-O-0004, § 1(Exh. B), adopted Feb. 4, 2002, deleted App. A, §§ 11.3—11.3-5.12.1, and enacted a new App. A, §§ 11.3—11.3-4, as set out herein. The former App. A, §§ 11.3—11.3-5.12.1, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2733, § 22, adopted Apr. 4, 1994; and Ord. No. 4123, § 8, adopted Sept. 12, 1998.  
ARTICLE XII. - SIGNS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 08-O-0067, § 1, adopted August 5, 2008, amended app. A, article XII, §§ 12.1—12.6-7, in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, article XII, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 2010, § 1, adopted October 19, 1992; Ord. No. 2722, §§ 1, 2, adopted December 6, 1993; Ord. No. 2733, §§ 23, 24, adopted April 4, 1994; Ord. No. 4123, § 9, adopted September 22, 1998; Ord. No. 01-O-0017, § 1, adopted June 18, 2001; Ord. No. 01-O-0108, § 1, adopted October 14, 2001. 
 
12.1. - Purpose. 
This section establishes comprehensive regulations for the control of signs and other street graphics in order to preserve, protect and promote the public health, safety and general welfare. More specifically, this section is intended to assist in achieving the following objectives: 
(A)  To foster high quality commercial and industrial development and to enhance the economic vitality of existing businesses/industries by promoting the reasonable, orderly and effective display of street graphics; 
(B)  To encourage sound street graphics display practice and to mitigate the objectionable effects of competition in respect to the size and placement of street graphics; 
(C)  To protect pedestrians and motorists from any damage or injury that might result from the improper construction, placement or use of street graphics; 
(D)  To protect the public investment in streets and highways by reducing the obstructions and distractions which might cause traffic accidents; and 
(E)  To preserve the value of private property by assuring the compatibility of street graphics with nearby land uses. 
(Ord. No. 08-O-0067, § 1, 8-5-2008)  
12.2. - Sign permit. 
(Ord. No. 08-O-0067, § 1, 8-5-2008)  
12.2-1. - Permit required. 
Upon the effective date of this ordinance, no sign or other street graphic, except those listed in section 12.3, shall be erected, expanded, altered, relocated or reconstructed without a sign permit issued by the administrator. 
(Ord. No. 08-O-0067, § 1, 8-5-2008)  
12.2-2. - Application. 
Every applicant for a sign permit shall submit to the administrator in narrative and/or graphic form all of the items of information listed below: 
(A)  Name, address and telephone number of the applicant; 
(B)  Name and address of the owner of the premises on which the sign is to be erected, if different from section A.; 
(C)  Location of the building, structure or lot where the proposed project is located, dimensions, area, overall height, illumination and method of support/attachment; 
(D)  Description of the proposed sign indicating proposed location, dimensions, area, overall height, illumination and method of support/attachment; 
(E)  Relationship of the proposed sign to nearby traffic control devices. 
(F)  Amount of street frontage that the building which proposes to display the sign has and the total area of all existing signs on said premises; and 
(G)  Such other information as the administrator shall reasonably require in determining full compliance with this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 08-O-0067, § 1, 8-5-2008)  
12.2-3. - Certificate of appropriateness. 
(A)  The historic preservation commission shall review each permanent sign application for any establishment located within any established historic district or otherwise designated as a historical landmark. Such signs shall follow these procedures: 
(1)  The applicant shall complete and submit a sign permit application, as set forth in section 12.2-2, and a certificate of appropriateness application to the administrator. 
(2)  The administrator shall review the sign permit application for compliance with the regulations set forth in this article and forward the certificate of appropriateness application to the historic preservation commission. 
(3)  The historic preservation commission shall review the application for compatibility with the historic district and the historic site on which it is located and return its findings to the administrator: 
(4)  If the proposed sign is in full compliance with the regulations set forth in this article and the certificate of appropriateness has been approved by the historic preservation commission, the administrator shall issue the applicant a sign permit. No sign permit shall be issued without an approved certificate of appropriateness. 
(B)  A certificate of appropriateness shall be issued when a sign or street graphic is found to be compatible with the character of the historic district and of the historic site on which it is located. The historic preservation commission may consider the following when determining the compatibility of a sign: 
(1)  Design. The design of the sign related to the building's architectural style. 
(2)  Placement. The location of the sign related to the architectural details of the building. 
(3)  Size. The scale and proportions of the sign related to the scale and proportions of the available sign area on the building and the building itself. 
(4)  Material. The quality and durability of the material of the sign and the relation of the material to the building's materials. 
(5)  Mounting. The method by which the sign is mounted related to the architectural style and material of the building. 
(6)  Color. The color(s) of the sign related to the color(s) of the building. 
(7)  Number. The proliferation of signs on a building or lot. 
(8)  Other. Any feature that may impact the visual character of the historic district or of the historic site on which the sign is located. 
(C)  In order to protect the distinctive visual character of the historic district or of the specific historic site, the historic preservation commission may require changes to a proposed sign or street graphic that are more restrictive than the regulations established elsewhere in this article. 
(Ord. No. 08-O-0067, § 1, 8-5-2008)  
12.3. - Exempt signs. 
Every sign enumerated below that complies with the indicated requirements may be erected in any zoning district of this municipality without a permit. The area of said signs shall not be debited against the displaying establishment's sign area allowance. 
(A)  Construction signs. Such signs shall be limited to one (1) sign per lot in residential districts, shall be limited to one (1) per street frontage in nonresidential districts, shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area per sign, shall be confined to the site of the construction and shall be removed within fourteen (14) days after the issuance of an occupancy permit. 
(B)  Directional and informational signs. Such signs shall not exceed three (3) square feet in area per sign. 
(C)  Flags. Flags shall be limited to four (4) permanent flags per lot, provided that the flagpole for any such flag shall not exceed thirty (30) feet in height (including the height of any structure upon which it is mounted), and the length of any such flag shall not exceed one-third ( 1/3 ) of the height of the flagpole to which it is attached (including the height of any structure upon which it is mounted). 
(D)  Garage, yard, or estate sale signs on private residential property. Such signs shall not exceed four (4) square feet in area per sign, shall be confined to the premises on which the sale is conducted and shall not be posted for longer than three (3) days. 
(E)  Government facility signs, including signs used for identification, information, or directional purposes and other signs incidental thereto. Such signs shall not be located within the vision triangle as defined in section 12.6-3 and shall comply with the regulations set forth in section 12.7. 
(F)  Governmental or public signs, such as traffic control signs, railroad crossing signs, legal notices, etc. 
(G)  Holiday signs, or similar signs such as happy birthday signs, provided that such signs shall not be displayed more than thirty (30) days prior to or after the holiday, except when the date of the holiday is between December 1 st and March 1 st , in which case such signs shall not be displayed more than ninety (90) days after the holiday. 
(H)  Home occupation signs identifying only the name and occupation of the resident. Not more than one (1) such sign shall be displayed on any zoning lot. Such signs shall be non-illuminated, flush-mounted, and shall not exceed two (2) square feet in area. 
(I)  House numbers and/or name of occupant signs located on the lot to which the sign pertains. Such signs shall neither exceed three (3) square feet in area for single-family dwellings nor six (6) square feet for multiple-family dwellings. 
(J)  Integral signs carved into stone or inlaid so as to become part of the building and memorial tributes. 
(K)  Interior signs located in the interior of any building or within an enclosed lobby or court of any building or group of buildings, provided such signs do not attract attention from the exterior of said buildings. 
(L)  Political campaign signs announcing candidates, seeking public office and/or political issues and other pertinent information. Such signs shall be confined to private property. Political campaign signs in residential districts shall not exceed sixteen (16) square feet in area, except for properties having frontage along Neltnor Boulevard (IL Route 59), North Avenue (IL Route 64), or Roosevelt Road (IL Route 38), in which case such signs shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet. 
(M)  Property regulation signs. Such signs shall not exceed three (3) square feet in area. 
(N)  Public interest signs publicizing a charitable or nonprofit event of general public interest. Signs shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in size, ten (10) feet in height and shall be located on private property, with a maximum of one (1) sign per lot frontage. Public interest signs may be erected twenty-one (21) days before an event and shall be removed no more than two (2) days after an event. 
(O)  Real estate signs indicating the sale, rental or lease of the single-family or two-family residential property on which they are located. Such signs shall not exceed four (4) square feet in area and shall be limited to one (1) sign per street frontage. All such signs shall be removed within seven (7) days after the sale, rental, or lease. 
(P)  Real estate signs indicating the sale, rental or lease of the multiple-family residential property on which they are located. Such signs shall not exceed sixteen (16) square feet in area when indicating the sale, rental or lease of a dwelling located in a building consisting of greater than ten (10) units and shall not exceed four (4) square feet in area when indicating the sale, rental or lease of a dwelling located in a building consisting of ten (10) or fewer units. All such signs shall be limited to one (1) per street frontage and shall be removed within seven (7) days after the sale, rental, or lease. 
(Q)  Real estate signs indicating the sale, rental or lease of the nonresidential property on which they are located. Such signs shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area, except when located in the Turner Junction Historic District, in which case such signs shall not exceed twenty-four (24) square feet in area. All such signs shall be limited to one (1) sign per street frontage and shall be removed within seven (7) days after the sale, rental, or lease. 
(R)  Special events signs when approved by the city council. 
(S)  Utility company signs that serve as an aid to public safety or that show the location of public telephones, underground cables, etc. 
(T)  Window signs displayed for a temporary period of not more than thirty (30) days provided such signs comply with regulations set forth in section 12.7-5. 
(Ord. No. 08-O-0067, § 1, 8-5-2008; Ord. No. 11-O-0012, § 1, 5-16-2011)  
12.4. - Prohibited signs. 
The following signs are strictly prohibited: 
(A)  Mobile/portable signs. This section shall not apply to temporary signs as described in section 12.10. 
(B)  Signs painted directly on the surface of any exterior wall of any building. 
(C)  Pennants, streamers, ribbons, strings of light bulbs, spinners and similar signs. This section shall not apply to temporary signs as described in section 12.10 or holiday and special event signs as permitted by section 12.3(G). 
(D)  Signs attached to trees, fences or public utility poles, other than warning signs issued by public utilities. 
(E)  Defunct signs, including the posts or other supports therefore, that advertise or identify an activity, business, product or service no longer conducted on the premises where such sign is located. 
(F)  Roof-mounted signs. 
(G)  Billboards (including all off-premises advertising signs). 
(H)  Signs or other street graphics that shall revolve, rotate or mechanically move in any manner. 
(I)  Signs or other street graphics erected, relocated or maintained so as to prevent free access or egress from any door, window, fire escape or driveway. 
(J)  Signs or other street graphics erected or maintained in such a manner that they interfere with, obstruct the view of or are likely to be confused with any authorized traffic sign, signal or device. Accordingly, no street graphic shall contain the words "stop," "go," "caution," "danger," "warning," or similar words. 
(K)  Neon tubing around the perimeter of a window or other opening visible from the property boundary. 
(L)  Any sign or other street graphic not expressly permitted by this ordinance shall be deemed prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 08-O-0067, § 1, 8-5-2008)  
12.5. - Sign area. 
(Ord. No. 08-O-0067, § 1, 8-5-2008)  
12.5-1. - Calculation of sign area. 
The area of every sign shall be calculated as follows: 
(A)  If a sign is enclosed by a box or outline, the total area (including the background) within that outline shall be deemed the sign area. 
(B)  If a sign consists of individual letters, parts or symbols, the area of no more than two (2) imaginary squares or rectangles, which would completely enclose all the letters, parts or symbols shall be deemed the sign area. 
(C)  In calculating the sign area, only one (1) side of any multi-faced sign shall be counted. 
(Ord. No. 08-O-0067, § 1, 8-5-2008; Ord. No. 12-O-0008, § 2, 4-16-2012)  
12.5-2. - Sign area exclusions. 
(A)  In calculating sign area for freestanding signs, the area displaying the property's address or range of addresses shall not be counted. 
(B)  In calculating sign area for temporary signs, pennants, streamers, ribbons, strings of light bulbs, spinners, and similar signs shall not be counted. 
(C)  The area of any base or support structure shall not be counted in calculating sign area, unless it is used to display signage. 
(Ord. No. 08-O-0067, § 1, 8-5-2008)  
12.6. - General sign regulations. 
(Ord. No. 08-O-0067, § 1, 8-5-2008)  
12.6-1. - Design standards. 
All signs shall be designed in accordance with the standards set forth in article VII, section 7.13(I) of the Zoning Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 08-O-0067, § 1, 8-5-2008)  
12.6-2. - Illumination. 
Illumination of signs and other street graphics is permitted, subject to the following requirements: 
(A)  Only white light is permitted in residential zoning districts and within two hundred (200) feet thereof. 
(B)  The light from any illuminated sign shall not cause illumination in excess of one-tenth (0.10) foot candles at any property line of an adjoining residential use or four (4) foot candles at any property line of an adjoining a nonresidential use. 
(C)  No red, yellow, green or other colored light shall be used at any location in such a manner as to confuse or interfere with vehicular traffic. 
(D)  No sign shall have blinking, flashing or fluttering lights or other illuminating devices which have a changing light intensity, brightness or color. Beacon lights and illumination by flame are prohibited. 
(E)  The light from any illuminated sign or other street graphic shall be shaded, shielded or directed so as to avoid the creation or continuation of any nuisance or traffic hazard. 
(F)  Signs shall not exceed a maximum illumination of five thousand (5,000) candelas per square meter during daylight hours and a maximum illumination of five hundred (500) candelas per square meter between dusk to dawn, as measured from the sign's face, at maximum brightness. 
(G)  Changeable copy signs for institutional uses in residential districts shall not be illuminated between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(Ord. No. 08-O-0067, § 1, 8-5-2008; Ord. No. 12-O-0008, § 10, 4-16-2012)  
12.6-3. - Intersection visibility. 
All signs shall be designed and installed to minimize potential obstruction of critical sight lines associated with visibility triangles. Within a visibility triangle, unobstructed visibility between two and one-half (2½) feet and eight (8) feet above grade shall be maintained. 
(Ord. No. 08-O-0067, § 1, 8-5-2008; Ord. No. 17-O-0002, § 5, 1-16-2017)  
12.6-4. - Landscaping required. 
All freestanding, development identification and shopping center identification signs shall minimize the impact on surrounding properties and rights-of-way by providing vegetative enhancement in accordance with the following: 
(A)  A landscape area equal to one and one half (1 and ½) times the sign area installed around the base of the sign. Where the area around the base of a sign is insufficient in size to accommodate landscaping, the administrator may permit installation of a portion of the required landscaping at an alternate location on the site. 
(B)  The landscaped area shall consist of any combination of flowering annuals, perennials, shrubs or trees. Sod or turf areas shall not qualify as part of the required landscape area. 
(C)  The landscaped area shall not be located or maintained within a public right-of-way. 
(D)  A landscape plan shall be submitted with the sign permit application and shall conform to the landscaping regulations set forth in article XIV of the Zoning Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 08-O-0067, § 1, 8-5-2008)  
12.6-5. - Structural and maintenance requirements. 
(A)  Every sign or street graphic shall be designed and constructed in conformity with the applicable provisions of the city's building code, and shall be free of any exposed bracing, angle iron, guywire, cables, etc. 
(B)  The electrical component of any illuminated sign or other street graphic shall conform to the applicable requirements of the city's electrical code. 
(C)  Every sign or street graphic shall be maintained in a neat and attractive condition by its owner. The street graphic supports shall be kept painted/treated to prevent rust or deterioration. 
(Ord. No. 08-O-0067, § 1, 8-5-2008)  
12.7. - Regulation based on sign type. 
(Ord. No. 08-O-0067, § 1, 8-5-2008)  
12.7-1. - Changeable copy signs. 
Not more than one (1) changeable copy sign shall be displayed on any zoning lot. All such signs shall comply with the following regulations: 
(A)  Shall only be allowed when incorporated into the design of a freestanding sign. Flush-mounted signs, projecting signs, and window signs containing changeable copy shall be prohibited. 
(B)  Allowable area: 
(1)  For signs for institutional uses in residential districts, the changeable copy portion of the sign shall not exceed the area (in square feet) determined by the following formula: (total freestanding sign area + six (6) square feet) x 0.5 = maximum area of the changeable copy portion of the sign. 
(2)  For all other signs, the changeable copy portion of the sign shall not exceed thirty (30) percent of the sign area of the freestanding sign of which it is a part. 
(C)  Shall be located at least fifty (50) feet from any residential district property line. 
(D)  Shall comply with the following regulations when containing changeable copy that may be changed by electronic means: 
(1)  The display shall not be animated, flashing, or scrolling. Messages must instantaneously change without transitions or off time. 
(2)  The frequency of message change shall be restricted to no more than once every ten (10) seconds, except that the frequency of message change for signs for institutional uses in residential districts shall be restricted to no more than once every (60) seconds. 
(E)  Sidewalk signs shall be exempt from this subsection. 
(Ord. No. 08-O-0067, § 1, 8-5-2008; Ord. No. 11-O-0042, § 1, 8-15-2011; Ord. No. 12-O-0008, § 11, 4-16-2012)  
12.7-2. - Flush-mounted signs. 
An establishment may have multiple flush-mounted signs, provided the total area of such signs does not exceed that of what is permitted below: 
(A)  The sign area allowance per unit for facades having street frontage shall be computed according to the following formula: 
One and one-half (1 and ½) square feet of sign per every one (1) foot of linear street frontage for the first one hundred (100) feet of such frontage, plus one (1) square foot of sign area per every one (1) foot of frontage in excess of one hundred (100) feet. 
(B)  The sign area allowance per unit for facades without street frontage shall be computed according to the following formula: 
One (1) square foot of sign per every one (1) linear foot of length for the first one hundred (100) feet of the facade, plus one-half (½) square foot of sign area per every one (1) foot of length in excess of one hundred (100) feet. 
(C)  The sign shall not project more than eighteen (18) inches from the wall or surface to which it is attached (if such wall/surface is not vertical, the projection shall be measured from the closest point of the wall/surface to the sign). 
(D)  The sign shall not extend above the roofline of the building to which it is attached. 
(E)  The sign shall not be painted directly on any exterior wall. 
(F)  The sign shall not contain changeable copy. 
(Ord. No. 08-O-0067, § 1, 8-5-2008)  
12.7-3. - Freestanding signs. 
Not more than one (1) freestanding sign shall be displayed on any zoning lot, unless otherwise approved by the city council. All freestanding signs shall comply with the following regulations: 
(A)  Shall not intrude into any public right-of-way. 
(B)  Shall not be erected closer than five (5) feet to any lot line, except when located in the Turner Junction Historic District, in which case no setback shall be required. 
(C)  Shall be located at least fifty (50) feet from any residential district property line. 
(D)  Shall not exceed eighty-four (84) square feet in area. 
(E)  Shall not exceed twelve (12) feet in height. 
(F)  Shall display the address or range of addresses for the property on which it is located. 
(Ord. No. 08-O-0067, § 1, 8-5-2008)  
12.7-4. - Projecting signs. 
An establishment may have no more than one (1) projecting sign. All projecting signs shall comply with the following regulations: 
(A)  Shall not project more than four (4) feet from the wall or surface to which it is attached (if such wall/surface is not vertical, the projection shall be measured from the closest point of the wall/surface to the sign). 
(B)  Shall maintain a minimum of eight (8) feet of clearance from the ground to the bottom of any such sign that projects over a walkway. 
(C)  Shall be debited against the displaying establishment's sign area allowance for flush-mounted signs. 
(D)  Shall not exceed twelve (12) square feet in area. 
(E)  Shall not project higher than the building height. 
(F)  Shall contain only the name of the business, business owner, and/or appropriate logo. 
(G)  Shall not be internally illuminated. 
(H)  Shall not contain changeable copy. 
(I)  Shall only be permitted for first and second floor establishments. Signs for second floor establishments shall be located over or within two (2) feet of the first floor pedestrian access. 
(J)  All structural supports shall be removed at the time of removal of any sign or signs for which they provide support, except that a structural support may remain for a period of not more than thirty (30) day following the issuance of a permit to change the face of a sign, or erect a different sign, using the same structural support. 
(K)  No sign projecting over a public right-of-way shall be erected without complying with the following insurance or bond requirements: 
(1)  Insurance required prior to permit: Every applicant for a permit or for a sign which will project over a public right-of-way or which is so located that it may fall upon the same, shall file with the community development department, before the permit is granted, a liability insurance policy covering all damage or injury that might be caused by the sign, or a certificate of insurance, issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in the State of Illinois. 
(2)  Coverage required: The policy shall be a multi-peril policy with the limits of liability not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000). The city, its officers, agents and employees shall be named as additional parties insured. 
(3)  Length of coverage: Such liability insurance policy shall be maintained in force throughout the life of the permit; and if at any time it is not in full force, the permit shall be revoked. 
(4)  Bond in lieu of insurance: In lieu of insurances as provided for in this section, the applicant may file an indemnity bond, with a corporate surety satisfactory to the administrator, in the amount on one million dollars ($1,000,000), which will provide that the principal surety will indemnify and hold harmless the City, its officers, agents and employees from all claims, loss or suits resulting from such sign. 
(Ord. No. 08-O-0067, § 1, 8-5-2008)  
12.7-5. - Window signs. 
An establishment may display multiple permanent or temporary window signs. All window signs shall conform to the following regulations: 
(A)  Shall not cover more than fifty (50) percent of the total window space of a building facade. 
(B)  Permanent window signs shall be debited against the displaying establishment's sign area allowance for flush-mounted signs, but temporary window signs shall not. 
(C)  Shall not contain changeable copy. 
(D)  Temporary window signs shall not be displayed for more than thirty (30) days. 
(Ord. No. 08-O-0067, § 1, 8-5-2008)  
12.7-6. - Sidewalk signs. 
An establishment may not display more than one (1) sidewalk sign. The city reserves the right the limit the number of sidewalk sign permits issued in order to ensure proper flow of pedestrian and vehicular traffic and otherwise promote the health, safety and welfare of the public. In that event permit applications shall be processed and accepted on a first come, first serve basis. All sidewalk signs shall comply with the following regulations: 
(A)  Shall only be allowed in the B-1, Central Business Zoning District and in the Turner Junction Historic District. When located in the Turner Junction Historic District the city's historic preservation commission shall also approve the sign. 
(B)  Shall only be permitted when the sign is incidental to the operation of a business on private property contiguous to the sidewalk. 
(C)  Shall not be attached or affixed to the sidewalk, parkway, pole, tree or any other public facility. 
(D)  Shall not unreasonably interfere with pedestrian or vehicular traffic or with access to parked vehicles and in no event shall the sidewalk sign reduce the open portion of any sidewalk to less than four (4) feet in width. 
(E)  Shall not exceed six (6) feet in height. 
(F)  Shall not exceed eight (8) square feet in area. 
(G)  Shall not be displayed during times of inclement weather such as high winds, heavy rain or snow fall. 
(H)  The location and height shall conform with section 12.6-3 of this chapter with respect to intersection visibility. 
(I)  Shall only be allowed to be displayed on the sidewalk during the establishment's business hours. 
(J)  Shall be not be illuminated. 
(K)  Shall comply with the following insurance and bond requirements: 
(1)  Insurance required prior to permit: Every applicant for a permit or for a sign which will be located in a public right-of-way or which is so located that it may fall upon the same, shall file with the community development department, before the permit is granted, a liability insurance policy covering all damage or injury that might be caused by the sign, or a certificate of insurance, issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in the State of Illinois. 
(2)  Coverage required: The policy shall be a multi-peril policy with the limits of liability as determined by the city from time to time. The city, its officers, agents and employees shall be named as additional parties insured. 
(3)  Length of coverage: Such liability insurance policy shall be maintained in force throughout the life of the permit; and if at any time it is not in full force, the permit shall be revoked. 
(4)  Bond in lieu of insurance: In lieu of insurances as provided for in this section, the applicant may file an indemnity bond, with a corporate surety satisfactory to the administrator, in an amount as determined by the city from time to time, which will provide that the principal surety will indemnify and hold harmless the city, its officers, agents and employees from all claims, loss or suits resulting from such sign. 
(L)  The permittee shall indemnify, defend, protect, and hold harmless the city, its corporate authorities, officers, employees, agents and volunteers from and against any and all claims, demands, losses, damages, liabilities, fines, charges, penalties, administrative and judicial proceedings and orders, judgments remedial actions of any kind, all costs and cleanup actions of any kind, and all costs and expenses incurred in connection therewith, including but not limited to reasonable attorney's fees, expert witness fees and costs of defense (collectively, the "losses") directly or proximately resulting from permittee's acts or omissions, except to the extent that the city is the sole legal cause of said losses. The foregoing notwithstanding, under no circumstances shall the issuance of any permit provided for under the West Chicago Municipal Code, including but not limited to a sidewalk sign permit, to the permittee or any other person or entity constitute an act of negligence or willful misconduct. Nothing set forth in the said permit shall be deemed a waiver by the city of any defenses or immunities relating to the permittee or its property, or to any person or entity or their property, that are or would be otherwise available to the city or its corporate authorities, officers, employees, agents, and volunteers under the provisions of the Illinois Local Government and Governmental Employees Tort Immunity Act, or that are otherwise available to local governments and their corporate authorities, officers, employees, agents and volunteers under the common law of the State of Illinois or the United States of America. The provisions of this section shall survive the expiration or earlier termination of each sidewalk sign permit, or the renewal thereof. 
(M)  The city may suspend or revoke the permit for any reason including, but not limited to, violations of any provision of the West Chicago Municipal Code after providing at least three (3) days written notice, except in an emergency, to the permittee. 
(N)  Permits issued hereunder shall be obtained annually and shall be valid from January 1 or the date of permit issuance, whichever is later, through December 31 of the same year. 
(Ord. No. 11-O-0042, § 2, 8-15-2011)  
12.8. - Regulation based on use. 
Certain business or development types are hereby found to be unique with respect to their sign requirements and are therefore justified to have unique sign regulations. 
(Ord. No. 08-O-0067, § 1, 8-5-2008)  
12.8-1. - Automobile service station signs. 
In addition to the signs permitted by other sections of this article, the following signs are permitted uniquely for automobile service stations: 
(A)  Two (2) signs per pump island which designate the function of the island as "self-service" or "full service." Such signs shall not have more than two (2) faces and shall not exceed three (3) square feet per face. 
(B)  One (1) sign per pump island which advertises the sale of ancillary goods or services available on the premises. Such signs shall not have more than two (2) faces and shall not exceed two (2) square feet per face. 
(C)  Pump safety or instructional signs such as "no smoking" or "stop motor," shall be allowed as necessary and in reasonable size, provided that such signs are not combined with the company brand name, company logo, or company colors in a manner to be construed as both advertising and instructional in purpose. 
(Ord. No. 08-O-0067, § 1, 8-5-2008)  
12.8-2. - Development identification signs. 
(A)  Development identification signs shall be permitted for subdivisions, business parks, and multiple-family complexes. 
(B)  All signs shall contain only the name of the subdivision, business park or multiple-family complex and appropriate logo. 
(C)  One (1) sign may be erected on each side of each street leading into such development entrance, for a total of two (2) single-faced signs per entrance. 
(D)  If there is more than one street leading into such development, the distance between entrance signs along the perimeter of such development shall be at least five hundred (500) feet. 
(E)  All signs placed at each entrance shall be uniform in appearance. 
(F)  The sign area of an individual sign shall not exceed eighty-four (84) square feet. 
(G)  The maximum height of an individual sign shall not exceed ten (10) feet. 
(H)  Shall be located at least ten (10) feet from adjacent right-of-way lines. 
(I)  Shall be located at least fifty (50) feet from any residential district property line. 
(J)  Shall be located in a sign easement or outlot for maintenance purposes. 
(Ord. No. 08-O-0067, § 1, 8-5-2008)  
12.8-3. - Drive-through restaurant signs. 
In addition to the signs permitted by other sections of this article, drive-through restaurants shall be permitted to have menu display signs for drive-through customers. All menu display signs shall comply with the following regulations: 
(A)  Menu display signs shall be freestanding or flush-mounted. 
(B)  Each drive-through restaurant shall be permitted to have a maximum of two (2) menu display signs. 
(C)  The area of an individual sign shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet. 
(D)  The maximum sign height shall not exceed eight (8) feet. 
(E)  The sign(s) shall be located in the side or rear yard only and shall be placed so as not to be readable from the public right-of-way. 
(F)  Shall be located at least fifty (50) feet from any residential district property line. 
(Ord. No. 08-O-0067, § 1, 8-5-2008)  
12.8-4. - Institutional signs. 
Institutional signs located in nonresidential zoning districts shall comply with the regulations for freestanding signs as set forth in section 12.7-3. Institutional signs located within a residential zoning district shall be limited to one (1) sign per street frontage and shall comply with the following regulations: 
(A)  The maximum sign height shall not exceed ten (10) feet. 
(B)  The area of an individual sign shall not exceed fifty (50) square feet. 
(C)  Shall be located at least ten (10) feet from adjacent right-of-way lines. 
(D)  Shall be located at least fifty (50) feet from any residential district property line. 
(Ord. No. 08-O-0067, § 1, 8-5-2008)  
12.8-5. - Shopping center identification signs. 
In addition to the sign area allowed for the individual businesses therein, shopping centers shall be allowed identification signs in compliance with the following regulations: 
(A)  Shopping centers with less than five hundred (500) linear feet of frontage shall comply with the regulations set forth in section 12.7-3. 
(B)  Shopping centers with more than five hundred (500) linear feet of frontage shall have no more than two (2) identification signs placed no closer together than two hundred (200) feet. 
(C)  The maximum area for such signs shall not exceed one hundred twenty (120) square feet individually or two hundred (200) square feet in the aggregate. 
(D)  The maximum height of such signs shall not exceed twenty-two (22) feet. 
(E)  Shall be located at least one hundred (100) feet from any residential district property line. 
(F)  Such signs shall be used solely to identify the shopping center and businesses or activities conducted therein. All such signs shall include an area to identify all of the individual businesses or activities conducted within the shopping center. 
(G)  Shall display the address or range of address for the property on which it is located. 
(H)  All signs shall be located in a sign easement or outlot for maintenance purposes. 
(Ord. No. 08-O-0067, § 1, 8-5-2008)  
12.9. - Regulation based on location. 
(Ord. No. 08-O-0067, § 1, 8-5-2008)  
12.9-1. - Residential districts. 
The following signs shall be permitted in all residential districts: 
(A)  Exempt signs as set forth in section 12.3. 
(B)  Changeable copy signs ancillary to institutional signs. 
(C)  Development identification signs. 
(D)  Institutional signs. 
(Ord. No. 08-O-0067, § 1, 8-5-2008)  
12.9-2. - Business and manufacturing districts. 
The following signs shall be permitted in all business and manufacturing districts: 
(A)  Exempt signs as set forth in section 12.3. 
(B)  Changeable copy signs. 
(C)  Flush-mounted signs. 
(D)  Freestanding signs. 
(E)  Window signs. 
(F)  Automobile service station signs. 
(G)  Development identification signs. 
(H)  Drive-through restaurant signs. 
(I)  Institutional signs. 
(J)  Shopping center identification signs. 
(K)  Temporary signs. 
(L)  Projecting signs. 
(M)  Sidewalk signs (only in the B-1 Central Business District). 
(Ord. No. 08-O-0067, § 1, 8-5-2008; Ord. No. 11-O-0042, § 3, 8-15-2011)  
12.9-3. - Historic districts. 
The following types of signs shall be permitted within the historic districts: 
(A)  Exempt signs as set forth in section 12.3. 
(B)  Changeable copy signs ancillary to institutional signs or ancillary to freestanding signs designating fuel prices at an automobile service station. 
(C)  Flush-mounted signs. 
(D)  Freestanding signs. 
(E)  Projecting signs. 
(F)  Window signs. 
(G)  Automobile service station signs. 
(H)  Development identification signs. 
(I)  Drive-through restaurant signs. 
(J)  Institutional signs. 
(K)  Shopping center identification signs. 
(L)  Temporary signs. 
(M)  Sidewalk signs (only in the Turner Junction Historic District). 
(Ord. No. 08-O-0067, § 1, 8-5-2008; Ord. No. 11-O-0042, § 4, 8-15-2011)  
12.10. - Temporary signs. 
The provisions of this section shall regulate all temporary signs, with the exception of all signs specifically described and regulated in section 12.3. If an establishment does not have an existing sign, a temporary sign may be used. Temporary signs may also be used by establishments with an existing sign, but shall be limited to events outside of the normal business activities to promote a special event. 
(Ord. No. 08-O-0067, § 1, 8-5-2008)  
12.10-1. - Temporary sign permit. 
(A)  Every applicant shall submit an application to the administrator, as set forth in section 12.2-2. 
(B)  An individual permit shall be limited to a maximum of fourteen (14) days. 
(C)  Such signs shall be removed within twenty-four (24) hours after the expiration of the permit unless a new permit has been obtained. 
(D)  No more than four (4) permits shall be issued for any one business in any calendar year. 
(Ord. No. 08-O-0067, § 1, 8-5-2008)  
12.10-2. - Temporary sign regulations. 
(A)  Not more than four (4) temporary signs, none of which shall exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area or forty-eight (48) square feet in the aggregate, shall be permitted on a parcel of property. Pennants, streamers, ribbons, strings of light, bulbs spinners and similar signs shall be counted as one (1) temporary sign but shall not be counted towards the total sign area. 
(B)  Temporary signs shall be set back a minimum of five (5) feet from all property lines and shall not be placed within the vision triangle as set forth in section 12.6-3. 
(C)  Any temporary sign suspended over a walkway shall maintain a minimum of eight (8) feet of clearance from the ground to the bottom of such sign. 
(D)  Temporary signs shall not contain changeable copy. 
(E)  Temporary signs shall be anchored and supported in a manner that prevents the signs from becoming hazards to the public health and safety. 
(Ord. No. 08-O-0067, § 1, 8-5-2008)  
12.11. - Nonconforming signs. 
A nonconforming sign that does not pose an important peril to life or property may remain and be maintained by ordinary repairs, but shall not be: 
(A)  Altered or enlarged in such a way as to increase its nonconformity. 
(B)  Replaced by another nonconforming sign (provided that changing the message on a changeable copy sign shall not be deemed a violation of this provision). 
(C)  Relocated, unless it is made to conform with this ordinance. 
(D)  Reconstructed after incurring damage in an amount exceeding fifty (50) percent of its market value at the time of loss as determined by the administrator. 
(E)  Permitted after the activity, business, product or service no longer is conducted on the premises. 
(Ord. No. 08-O-0067, § 1, 8-5-2008)  
ARTICLE XIII. - OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING 
 
13.1-1. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to alleviate or prevent congestion of the public streets and to promote the safety and welfare of the public by establishing minimum requirements for the off-street parking and loading and unloading of motor vehicles in accordance with the use to which property is put.  
13.1-2. - Applicability of article. 
Off-street parking and loading shall be provided and perpetually maintained in accordance with this article for all structures and uses erected or established after the effective date of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 4123, § 10, 9-22-98)  
13.1-3. - Existing parking/loading facilities. 
(A)  Existing off-street parking or loading facilities located on the same lot as the use served shall not be reduced, or if already less than, shall not be further reduced, below the requirements and standards for similar new structures or uses. 
(B)  When the existing use of a structure is damaged or destroyed and subsequently repaired or rebuilt, parking/loading facilities equivalent to any maintained at the time of such damage or destruction shall be restored, but additional parking/loading facilities need not be provided. 
(C)  Whenever the use of any structure or premises is intensified through addition of dwelling units, increased floor area, greater seating capacity, etc., additional parking and loading facilities commensurate with such increases in use, intensity shall be provided in accordance with this code. 
(D)  Whenever the existing use of a structure is changed to a different use, parking or loading facilities shall be provided as required herein for such new use.  
13.1-4. - Submission of plot plan. 
Any application for a building permit, or for a certificate of occupancy where no building permit is required, shall include therewith a plot plan drawn to scale and fully dimensioned showing any parking or loading facilities to be provided in compliance with the zoning code.  
13.1-5. - Accessible parking. 
All areas providing off-street parking for employees or visitors shall provide accessible parking for persons with disabilities in accordance with Illinois State Law. 
(Ord. No. 08-O-0080, § 1, 1-19-2009)  
13.1-6. - Parking area design standards. 
All areas providing off-street parking shall conform to the standards indicated in the subsections which follow: 
(A)  Minimum Aisle and Space Dimensions 
Angle 
of 
Parking 	Minimum Width 
of Space 
Parallel 
to Aisle 	Minimum Length 
of Space 
Perpendicular 
to Aisle 	Minimum 
Width of 
Aisle 
0° (Parallel) 	8' — 0? 	22' — 0? 	12' (one-way) 
24' (two-way) 
45° 	12' — 9? 	18' — 0? 	12' (one-way) 
60° 	10' — 5? 	18' — 0? 	15' (one-way) 
90° 	 9' — 0? 	18' — 0? 	24' (one-way) 
 
(B)  Markings shall be laid and restored as often as necessary to clearly delineate each parking space. 
(C)  Ninety (90) degree parking stalls that abut a landscape area a minimum of twenty (20) feet in width may be reduced to seventeen (17) feet in length, with a one (1) foot overhang, if the parking lot is curbed. 
(D)  Off-street parking spaces, aisles, and driveways shall have a minimum vertical clearance of seven (7) feet. 
(Ord. No. 02-O-0084, § 9, 6-17-2002; Ord. No. 08-O-0080, § 2, 1-19-2009)  
13.1-7. - Access ways. 
(A)  Parking area shall be designed so that ingress to or egress from a parking space is from an aisle or driveway, not directly from the public right-of-way; except in single-family residence districts. 
(B)  No access way to any parking area shall be located within thirty (30) feet of any corner formed by the intersection of the rights-of-way of two (2) or more streets. At intersections where traffic control devices are installed, the administrator may increase this requirement as necessary to prevent hazards. 
(C)  Parking area access ways (including residential driveways) and public streets shall be aligned to form—as closely as feasible—right angles. 
(D)  The access way to every parking lot located in any business district or in the manufacturing district shall be at least twenty-four (24) feet wide unless two (2) one-way drives, each twelve (12) feet wide are provided. 
(E)  Access ways in the B-3 Regional Shopping District shall be designated and located in accordance with the following additional requirements: 
(1)  All lots are restricted to not more than one (1) driveway for each two hundred fifty (250) linear feet of street frontage. Each driveway must be spaced a minimum of two hundred fifty (250) feet from the nearest driveway (measured center to center at the lot line adjoining the street) and/or cross-street intersection (measured center of driveway to nearest edge of right-of-way of cross-street at the lot line adjoining the street). 
(2)  Whenever possible, access to a project shall be provided from cross-streets, in place of an additional driveway from major roadway. 
(3)  Driveways shall be located and designed to minimize interference with the operation of left-turn lanes at street intersections. 
(4)  Whenever possible, access between properties should be provided in order to minimize the number of driveways from a property. 
(Ord. No. 4123, § 11, 9-22-98)  
13.1-8. - Surfacing. 
All open off-street parking areas shall be surfaced with a bituminous and/or concrete material. All parking lots shall be designed to meet a structural number equal to or greater than DT = 2.2, as designed in section 7 of the Illinois Department of Transportation Design Manual.  
13.1-9. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 12-O-0008, § 12, adopted April 16, 2012, repealed § 13.1-13, which pertained to paving of existing unpaved parking facilities and derived from Ord. No. 2010, adopted Oct. 19, 1992.  
13.1-10. - Lighting. 
(A)  All lighting used to illuminate off-street parking areas shall be shielded or otherwise optically controlled so as to provide glareless illumination in such a manner as not to create a nuisance on adjacent property. 
(B)  Permitted illumination levels for off-street parking areas in foot-candles (f/c): 
	Minimum at any point 	Minimum Average 	Maximum 
Single Family Residential Districts 	None 	None 	 .1 f/c 
Multiple Family Residential Districts 	None 	None 	 .2 f/c 
Business Districts 	 .1 f/c 	1.0 f/c 	2.0 f/c 
Manufacturing Districts 	 .1 f/c 	1.0 f/c 	5.0 f/c 
 
(1)  In determining the minimum foot-candle standard provided above, all foot-candle measurements shall be taken from the ground at any point within the area of activity. 
(2)  In determining the minimum average foot-candle standard provided above, all foot-candle measurements shall be taken from the ground at ten (10) foot horizontal increments throughout the area of activity. 
(3)  In determining the maximum foot-candle standards provided above, all foot-candle measurements shall be taken at ground level at any point along the property line. 
(C)  Lights or supporting poles shall have a maximum height of twenty-two (22) feet in residential districts, twenty-five (25) feet in business districts, and thirty (30) feet in manufacturing districts. The maximum height shall be measured from the ground directly below the centerline of the light to the top of the pole or light, whichever is higher. 
(D)  All luminaries erected twenty-one (21) to thirty (30) feet above ground level: 
(1)  Shall be flat bottom optically controlled sharp cut-offs, as approved by the city engineer; and 
(2)  Shall not be installed with diffusing refractors. 
(E)  All luminaries erected zero feet to twenty (20) feet above ground level: 
(1)  Shall be of translucent materials and not transparent materials, as approved by the city engineer; and 
(2)  Shall not be installed with diffusing refractors. 
(F)  All present non-conforming off-street parking areas shall be equipped with the lighting required by this section upon the obsolescence or replacement of the existing lighting. 
(G)  Definitions and terms used in this section shall be defined by the Illumination Engineering Societies in the 1973 edition of the IES Lighting Handbook. 
(Ord. No. 4123, § 12, 9-22-98; Ord. No. 08-O-0080, § 3, 1-19-2009; Ord. No. 12-O-0008, § 13, 4-16-2012)  
13.1-11, 13.1-12. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 03-O-0115, § 7, adopted Dec. 15, 2003, repealed §§ 13.1-11, 13.1-12 which pertained to bordering and landscaping, respectively. Section 13.1-11 bore no history note and § 13.1-12 derived from Ord. No. 4123, § 13, Sept. 22, 1998.  
13.1-13. - Location of parking. 
All off-street parking shall be located in conformance with the following requirements: 
(A)  Residential districts. 
(1)  Driveway coverage of a lot. A new driveway shall cover no more than fifteen (15) percent of a lot. However, in the event that a new driveway leads to a detached garage located behind the rear building line, the driveway shall cover no more than twenty (20) percent of the lot. All existing driveways that are to be repaired or replaced at or less than the same dimensions and areas that they currently exist shall be exempt from the aforementioned lot coverage regulations in this subsection. 
(2)  Driveway coverage of front yard. A driveway shall not cover more than the following percentages of an actual front yard of a residential lot: 
a.  R-1 ..... 40% 
b.  R-2 ..... 40% 
c.  R-3 ..... 42.5% 
d.  R-4 ..... 45% 
e.  R-5 ..... 45% 
(3)  Driveway width: 
a.  Driveways (other than ribbon driveways): The maximum width of a driveway in the actual front yard shall not exceed forty-five (45) percent of the lot width. The minimum width of a driveway, at any point in the driveway, shall not be less than eight (8) feet. 
b.  Ribbon driveways: The maximum width of a ribbon driveway in the actual front yard, as measured from the outermost edges of each strip, shall not exceed forty-five (45) percent of the lot width. The minimum width of each strip in a ribbon driveway shall be not less than two (2) feet and the strips shall have a minimum separation of five (5) feet on center. 
(4)  Parking spaces accessory to dwellings located in any residential zoning district shall be located on the same lot as the dwelling. Each parking space accessory to a multifamily dwelling shall be unobstructed so that no vehicle need be moved in order to allow another vehicle to enter/exit the parking area. 
(5)  There shall be no parking except on driveways, parking lots, or in enclosed garages, constructed consistent with the provisions of this section. 
(6)  New driveways accessory to dwellings located in any residential zoning district shall be surfaced with bituminous pavement, concrete pavement or interlocking pavers approved for vehicle parking. 
(7)  All new dwellings shall be required to provide two (2) completely enclosed parking spaces. 
(8)  It shall be prohibited to use a garage as a dwelling space unless it is attached to a house and another garage providing the same number of parking spaces is provided on the same property. 
(9)  Any and all driveways and residential parking areas lawfully existing on the effective date of the parking ordinance amendment, which would not be permitted under the terms of the new ordinance, may lawfully continue and remain nonconforming after the adoption of the parking ordinance amendment until July 1, 2004. All driveways or parking areas so affected shall be removed or converted to be in compliance with the parking ordinance within the amortization period. Any driveways or parking areas that are not in compliance with the parking ordinance within the amortization period are subject to enforcement under the zoning code, including fines and costs set forth therein. 
(10)  All parking spaces accessory to permitted non-dwelling uses located in any residential district generally shall be located on the same lot as the use served. An exception: The administrator may allow such parking facilities to be located on another parcel within two hundred (200) feet of the use served if the "same lot" requirement is not feasible. 
(11)  Paved and concrete driveways and sidewalks may only be expanded using the same or higher quality surface material as approved by the Code Official. 
(12)  Driveway location. 
a.  Residences having primary access off of Neltnor Boulevard (IL Route 59) or North Avenue (IL Route 64) shall be exempt from these regulations. 
b.  Shall have a minimum setback of one (1) foot from an interior side lot line, excluding driveways in the R-5 zoning district that lead to a detached garage. 
c.  Shall be prohibited in an actual interior side yard, except when leading to a detached garage. 
d.  When leading to an attached garage the driveway shall only be located in the area directly in front of the garage or in that portion of the actual front yard between the closest interior side lot line and the garage. Driveways in front of the non-garage portion of the residence shall be prohibited. 
e.  Any portion of a driveway that leads to an attached garage and is located in that portion of the actual front yard between the closest interior side lot line and the garage shall be tapered so that the maximum width of the driveway at the property line is equal to or less than the width of the garage. This portion of the driveway shall have a maximum width of nine (9) feet and a maximum length of eighteen (18) feet, measured from the front of the garage to the start of the taper. The taper shall reduce at a maximum ratio of one (1) foot length for every one (1) foot in width of that portion of the driveway. 
(13)  Carports shall be prohibited. 
(14)  Recreational vehicles. 
a.  The following types of recreational vehicles shall be restricted in size as follows: 
1.  Travel trailer, thirty-five (35) feet or less in length and not to exceed eight (8) feet in width. 
2.  Camper trailer (pop-up), twenty-four (24) feet or less in length and not to exceed five (5) feet six (6) inches in height, stored in a collapsed position. 
3.  Watercraft, thirty-five (35) feet or less in length, but not to exceed twelve (12) feet in height, either mounted on a boat trailer or not mounted; also boat trailer without boat mounted. 
4.  Motor home, forty (40) feet or less in length and not to exceed twelve (12) feet in height. 
b.  Not more than one (1) recreational vehicle shall be parked on any one (1) lot. No recreational vehicle shall be parked on any one (1) lot where the outdoor overnight storage of a commercial vehicle is present. 
c.  The parking of a recreational vehicle shall be prohibited in the required front yard, actual front yard, and required corner side yard between October 15 and April 15. 
d.  A recreational vehicle shall not be located closer than five (5) feet to the rear lot line and shall not be located closer than three (3) feet to the side lot lines. 
e.  The parking area, permanent or temporary, shall be paved. 
f.  Outdoor overnight parking and storage of recreational vehicles shall not be permitted on lots containing apartment units/condominiums. 
g.  Occasional use of travel trailers or other recreational vehicles shall be permitted as set forth in Section 6.8. 
h.  Any recreational vehicle that does not comply with regulations established herein shall be removed or made to comply with said regulations by May 1, 2008. 
(15)  Commercial vehicles. 
a.  The parking and storage of semi-trailers, semi-tractors, farm machinery, tractors and any commercial vehicle that exceeds eight thousand one (8,001) pounds in gross vehicle weight or has greater than a B-truck license plate shall be permitted only within a completely enclosed structure. Such vehicles providing service may be temporarily parked outdoors, but only for the period of time required to provide the service. 
b.  Commercial vehicles other than semi-trailers, semi-tractors, farm machinery, tractors and any vehicle of eight thousand (8,000) pounds or less in gross vehicle weight or having no greater than a B-truck license plate may be parked or stored outdoors. 
c.  Not more than one (1) commercial vehicle shall be parked on any one (1) lot, except on lots containing apartment units. The outdoor overnight storage of a commercial vehicle shall not be permitted on any one (1) lot where the outdoor overnight storage of a recreational vehicle is present. 
d.  The parking area, permanent or temporary, shall be paved. 
(B)  Business and manufacturing districts. 
(1)  Parking spaces accessory to any building or use located in any business district shall either be located on the same lot therewith or on another parcel within two hundred (200) feet of the premises. Parking lots accessory to any building or use located in any manufacturing district shall be located on the same lot therewith or on another parcel within five hundred (500) feet of the use serviced. 
(2)  In any business district or manufacturing district, off-street parking facilities for different buildings or uses may be provided collectively; but only if the total number of spaces provided is not less than the sum of the separate requirements for each use and if such spaces comply with all regulations governing location or parking spaces in relation to the uses served. 
(3)  No vehicle repair work shall be conducted on any parking lot located in any business or manufacturing district. 
(4)  Delivery and service vehicles that are used in the normal day-to-day operation of a permitted or special use shall be permitted, subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Such vehicles shall fit within a standard parking space but shall not be parked within any required parking spaces. 
b.  Such vehicles shall only be classified as weight class A or B per the Illinois Vehicle Code. 
c.  A maximum of one (1) such vehicle shall be allowed per fifteen hundred (1,500) square feet of area occupied by the tenant. 
d.  Such vehicles shall be located on the same lot as the use served. 
(Ord. No. 2733, § 25, 4-4-94; Ord. No. 4123, § 14, 9-22-98; Ord. No. 4364, § 1, 12-4-2000; Ord. No. 01-O-0087, § 1(Exh. B), 8-20-2001; Ord. No. 02-O-0084, §§ 10(Exh. B), 11, 6-17-2002; Ord. No. 03-O-0039, § 3, 5-19-2003; Ord. No. 05-O-0067, § 7, 9-19-2005; Ord. No. 08-O-0010, §§ 13—15, 2-18-2008; Ord. No. 08-O-0080, §§ 4, 5, 1-19-2009; Ord. No. 09-O-0042, § 3, 7-20-2009; Ord. No. 10-O-0095, § 1, 10-18-2010; Ord. No. 12-O-0008, § 14, 4-16-2012)  
13.1-14. - Design and location of off-street loading facilities. 
All off-street loading facilities shall conform to the minimum standards indicated below: 
(A)  Size of space. Off-street loading spaces intended for use by straight trucks only shall be at least twelve (12) feet wide and forty-two (42) feet long, exclusive of aisle and maneuvering space, and shall have vertical clearance of at least fourteen (14) feet. Off-street loading spaces intended for use by truck tractor-semitrailer combinations shall be at least twelve (12) feet wide and sixty-five (65) feet long, exclusive of aisle and maneuvering space, and shall have vertical clearance of at least fourteen (14) feet. In no case shall a vehicle being loaded or unloaded overhang into the public right-of-way. 
(B)  Access way. Every off-street loading space shall have a safe means of vehicular access to a street or alley. Such access way shall comply with the minimum aisle widths established in section 13.1-6(A). 
(C)  Surfacing. Every off-street loading area shall be improved with a compacted stone base at least seven (7) inches thick, surfaced with at least two (2) inches of asphaltic concrete. 
(D)  Buffer strips. No loading space or area for vehicles over two-ton cargo capacity shall be developed closer than fifty (50) feet to the lot line of any residential district unless space/area is completely enclosed by walls, a solid fence or closely planted landscaping of sufficient density to block the view from the residential property. 
(E)  Location. Every off-street loading space that is provided shall be located on the same parcel of land as the use served and not closer than fifty (50) feet to the intersection of the rights-of-way of two (2) or more streets or in required front yards. 
(F)  It shall be prohibited to maneuver vehicles within the public right-of-way in commercial and manufacturing zoning districts. 
(Ord. No. 4364, § 2, 12-4-2000; Ord. No. 08-O-0010, § 16, 2-18-2008)  
13.1-15. - Maintenance requirements. 
(A)  The owner and/or occupant of each lot shall maintain all driveways and parking lots serving such lot, including portions located in public rights-of-way. All pavement that represents a hazard to vehicular or pedestrian travel shall be repaired. 
(B)  Hazards shall be defined as including, but not limited to, one (1) or more of the following: 
(1)  A pothole one (1) inch or more in depth covering one (1) square foot or more in area. Potholes must be repaired within the time frame indicated on the notice of violation. During winter months a temporary patch must be provided and maintained until permanent repairs can be performed. Materials used for cold patching must be approved by the administrator. 
(2)  A rut two (2) inches or more in depth. 
(3)  A fault with a one (1) inch or greater difference in elevation. 
(4)  A crack one-half (½) inch or greater in width. 
(5)  Settlement or sinking one (1) inch or greater in depth. 
(6)  Disintegration covering a one (1) square foot or greater area or any other condition that is determined by the administrator to be a hazard. 
(C)  The administrator shall notify the owner and/or occupant of any violations of this subsection. Such notification shall be in writing and indicate the nature of the hazard and an amount of time given to correct same. Time to comply shall not exceed a maximum of thirty (30) days. If weather or other conditions beyond the owner and/or occupant's control prevent permanent repairs from being made within said thirty-day period, temporary repairs shall be made within such period and permanent repairs shall be made within thirty (30) days of the date upon which such impeding conditions ends. Upon receipt of said notice, such owner and/or occupant shall notify the administrator of his plans for corrective action. An inspection shall be performed by the administrator of areas to be replaced prior to commencing major repairs. A striping plan will be required whenever a parking lot is to be overlaid or restriped. 
(Ord. No. 4123, § 15, 9-22-98)  
13.2. - Computation of required parking/loading spaces. 
In computing the number of parking spaces required by this ordinance, the zoning administrator shall apply the following rules: 
(A)  In computing parking space requirements based on the number of employees, the maximum number of employees on the premises at any period of the day shall be used. "Employee parking" means "one parking space shall be required per one and one-half (1.5) employees," unless otherwise stated. 
(B)  In computing parking or loading space requirements on the basis of building floor area, the gross floor area shall be used. When two (2) or more uses are located on the same lot or within the same building, the minimum number of parking and loading spaces shall be the sum of the separate parking and loading requirements for each individual use applied to the portions of the lot and/or building devoted to that individual use. 
(C)  Whenever it is necessary to translate gross parking lot area into number of parking spaces; three hundred fifty (350) square feet of gross area shall be deemed one (1) parking space. 
(D)  If computation of the minimum number of required parking or loading spaces results in a fractional space, such fractional space shall be counted as one (1) full space. 
(E)  No space or portion thereof needed to satisfy the minimum applicable requirement for number of off-street parking or loading spaces shall be counted as part of the off-street parking or loading spaces required for another structure or use. 
(Ord. No. 4123, § 16, 9-22-98)  
13.3. - Number of parking and loading spaces required. 
(A)  Parking Spaces. For each use and structure hereafter established, erected, structurally altered or enlarged except in the B-1 zoning district, there shall be provided the minimum number of accessory off-street parking spaces in accordance with this subsection. In the event that a proposed use is not listed in this subsection, the minimum number of parking spaces required for such use shall be based upon the most similar listed use. The administrator shall make the determination of which listed use is most similar to any proposed unlisted use. 
	Use 	Required Number 
(1) 	Dwelling and Lodging Uses 	
	a. Residential dwellings 	2 spaces per dwelling unit 
	b. Hotels, motels, boarding houses, lodges 	1 space per lodging unit 
	c. Nursing homes 	2 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. of floor area 
	d. Senior housing (assisted and supportive living): 	0.5 spaces/dwelling unit 
	   Senior housing (independent living): 	1 space/dwelling unit 
(2) 	Commercial, Office, Service, Institutional, Educational and Recreational Uses 	
	a. Generally 	4 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. of floor area 
	b. Auditoriums, theaters, and other fixed-seating places of assembly 	1 space per 4 seats of designed seating capacity 
	c. Drive-in theaters 	On review by the administrator 
	d. Health, fitness and exercise centers 	6 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. of floor area when located within a multi-tenant commercial building and 10 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. of floor area when located in a commercial building as a sole tenant. 
	e. Laundromats 	4 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. of floor area within a strip center or shopping center and 6 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. of floor area in a stand alone facility. 
	f. Funeral establishments and crematoriums 	5 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. of floor area plus 1 space per 100 sq. ft. of chapel or assembly area 
	g. Recreation centers 	4 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. of floor area, plus an additional number of spaces determined by the administrator to be adequate to serve the needs of the public 
	h. Restaurants 	10 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. of floor area 
	i. Warehouses, attached to retail uses 	2 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. of floor area 
	j. Self-service storage facilities 	1 space per 100 storage units. 
	k. Elementary and junior high schools 	1 space per full-time employee, plus 2 spaces per classroom, and 1 drop-off space per two classrooms which may be used as a parking space during off-peak hours, separate from any bus lane 
	l. High schools 	1 space per full-time employee, plus 1 space per 6 students (based on design capacity) 
	m. Colleges, junior colleges and universities 	1 space per full-time employee, plus 1 space per 3 students (based on design capacity) 
	n. Business, commercial, and trade schools 	1 space per full-time employee, plus 1 space per 2 students (based on design capacity) 
	o. Personal training and group exercise facility 	4 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. of floor area 
	p. Banquet halls 	10 spaces per every 1,000 sq. ft. of floor area 
(3) 	Manufacturing, warehousing or other industrial use 	1 space for each 1,000 sq. ft. of space up to 100,000 sq. ft.; plus 1 space for each 2,000 sq. ft. in excess of 100,000 sq. ft. 
 
(B)  Landbanking of required parking spaces as greenspace may be permitted when approved as a special use permit, provided the petitioner demonstrates through employee counts and other parking studies that the total number of parking spaces required using the square footage parking requirements outlined in this section are not necessary and there is sufficient usable land area available on the subject property to provide the parking spaces if deemed necessary by the city in the future. Preliminary engineering plans addressing storm water management needs for all required and landbanked parking spaces shall be submitted and approved as part of the special use permit application. The city has the ability to require installation of the landbanked parking spaces if it determines there is inadequate parking provided. 
(C)  Stacking spaces. All drive-up and drive-through uses shall adhere to the following stacking space requirements: 
(1)  The minimum dimension of a stacking space shall be nine (9) feet in width and twenty (20) feet in length. 
(2)  Stacking spaces shall be located so that, when in use, they do not obstruct ingress/egress to the site, they do not obstruct access to required parking or loading spaces and do not otherwise interfere with vehicle circulation on the site. 
(3)  Vehicle stacking and equipment associated with the drive-up or drive-through use shall be prohibited in the actual front yard or actual corner side yard unless approved by the city council. 
(4)  Schedule of stacking space requirements. 
(a)  Automobile laundries are shall provide stacking spaces equal to five (5) times the maximum capacity of the car wash. Maximum capacity, in this instance, shall mean the greatest number of automobiles undergoing some phase of laundering at the same time. 
(b)  Drive-up or drive-through facilities that do not have a separate order station or menu board shall provide five (5) stacking spaces per service area. The spaces shall be counted beginning at the service area or pick-up window. 
(c)  Drive-up or drive-through facilities that have an order station or menu board separate from the service area shall provide five (5) stacking spaces per order station however are not required to provide stacking spaces at the service area or pick-up window. The spaces shall be counted beginning at the order station. 
(5)  An escape/bypass lane with a minimum width of ten (10) feet shall be provided for all drive-up or drive-through facilities. An adjacent drive aisle may be used to satisfy this requirement. 
(D)  Loading spaces. For each use and structure hereafter established, erected, structurally altered or enlarged, there shall be provided the minimum number of accessory off-street loading spaces as follows: 
(1)  Business districts. 
Gross Floor Area 	Required Number 
0 to 5,000 square feet 	0 
5,001 to 50,000 square feet 	1 
50,001 to 100,000 square feet 	2 
For each additional 100,000 square feet, or fraction thereof, in excess of 10,000 square feet 	1 additional space 
 
(2)  Manufacturing districts. 
Gross Floor Area 	Required Number 
0 to 5,000 square feet 	0 
5,001 to 10,000 square feet 	1 
10,001 to 50,000 square feet 	2 
50,001 to 100,000 square feet 	3 
For each additional 50,000 square feet, or fraction thereof, in excess of 100,000 square feet 	1 additional space 
 
(Ord. No. 4123, § 17, 9-22-98; Ord. No. 4408, § 4, 4-16-2001; Ord. No. 02-O-0084, § 12, 6-17-2002; Ord. No. 03-O-0040, § 25, 6-16-2003; Ord. No. 03-O-0115, § 8, 12-15-2003; Ord. No. 04-O-0055, § 7, 6-21-2004; Ord. No. 05-O-0064, § 1, 8-15-2005; Ord. No. 06-O-0085, § 1, 10-16-2006; Ord. No. 08-O-0010, § 17, 2-18-2008; Ord. No. 08-O-0080, § 6, 1-19-2009; Ord. No. 13-O-0027, § 6, 8-19-2013; Ord. No. 16-O-0018, § 4, 4-18-2016)  
ARTICLE XIV. - LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 08-O-0079, §§ 1—16, adopted March 16, 2009, amended Appendix A, Article XIV, §§ 14.1—14.11 to read as herein set out. Formerly, Article XIV pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 03-O-0115, § 9, adopted December 15, 2003. 
 
14.1. - Scope of regulations. 
The provisions of this article shall apply to the following: 
(A)  New construction except single-family districts when retention and/or detention ponds and basins are not required. 
(B)  When screening and/or buffering is required under the zoning ordinance. 
(C)  Construction of a parking lot containing eight (8) or more spaces. 
(Ord. No. 08-O-0079, §§ 1,2, 3-16-2009)  
14.2. - Plan preparation. 
All landscape plans required by this section shall be prepared and signed by a professional landscape architect or landscape designer. 
(Ord. No. 08-O-0079, § 4, 3-16-2009)  
14.3. - Submittal requirements. 
The submittal package shall include the following information: 
(A)  Site elements. 
(1)  Title block including the name of the project, designer's name, scale of the plan (minimum 1"=30'), identification of the plan as either a "Preliminary" or "Final" Landscape Plan, north arrow and date of the plan. The plan shall be sized no smaller than 24" x 36" and no larger than 36" x 48". 
(2)  Property lines. 
(3)  Location, dimensions, height, and use of all existing and proposed buildings and other structures, and all entry/exit points. 
(4)  Location and dimensions of all existing and proposed parking lots (including striping and curbs), driveways, rights-of-way, sidewalks, bicycle paths, signs, lighting, fences, walls, refuse disposal areas, freestanding decorative and recreational equipment including street furniture, screens, sculptures, fountains, setbacks, and easements. 
(5)  Zoning and use of all abutting properties. 
(6)  Natural features such as ponds, lakes, streams, large boulders, rock outcroppings, and delineation of 100-year floodplain and wetland boundaries. 
(7)  Existing and proposed stormwater management ponds and areas 
(8)  Required landscape setbacks. 
(9)  Approved grading plan at one (1) foot contour interval, with slopes of 4:1 labeled. 
(10)  Proposed size, construction materials, drainage and scheduled maintenance of landscaped islands and planting beds. 
(B)  Planting elements. 
(1)  Location, general type and quality of existing vegetation, specimen trees of 4" caliper and greater, and natural areas. Note methods and details for protection of existing vegetation during construction. Location and keyed labels of all proposed plants. 
(2)  Location of all proposed areas to be seeded and/or sodded. 
(3)  Plant list or schedule with key symbols, quantity, correct botanical and common names, size, condition, and category of all proposed plants. The following categories shall be used: shade trees, ornamental trees, evergreen trees, tall shrubs, short shrubs, groundcover plants, grasses, and perennials. 
(4)  Plant names shall be in accordance with "Hortus Third..." by L.H. Bailey, 2000. 
(5)  All plant sizes and conditions listed shall conform to the "American Standards For Nursery Stock," as published by the American Association of Nurserymen, latest edition. 
(6)  Planting installation details as necessary to insure conformance with "American Standards For Nursery Stock," latest edition, and standards as specified in this section. 
(7)  Explanation of proposed construction procedures. 
(C)  Temporary occupancy permit. A temporary occupancy permit may be issued when the project's buildings may be occupied but landscaping has not been installed due to weather conditions. A final occupancy permit will be issued, and any posted bond released, upon completion of all landscaping and any other outstanding required work. 
(Ord. No. 08-O-0079, §§ 3,5, 3-16-2009)  
14.4. - Landscape standards. 
Appropriateness: The landscape plan should consider the proposed project's intensity of activity and use plants that will integrate the site into the surrounding area. Adjacent existing uses will determine the type and extent of screening and buffering required. 
(A)  Screening. Screening may be accomplished with plants, fences, walls, and berms. Screens shall be arranged in plant clusters (rather than spaced equally) to create optimum screening according to site conditions. 
(B)  Fences and Walls. Screening fences and walls should be built of materials compatible with that of the main building. The use of corrugated metal, corrugated fiberglass, sheet metal, chain link or wire mesh shall not be counted as a screen in landscape yard calculations. Long stretches of a single wall or fence shall not be continued to the point of visual monotony, but shall be varied by using change in height, different material combinations, offset angles or other types of articulation in combination with landscaping. 
(C)  Berms. Berms shall be at least two and one-half (2½) feet high and twelve (12) feet wide. Slopes shall not exceed 4:1. Berms should be designed with gently curving slopes to reduce erosion. Staggering berms allows for drainage and provides visual variety. Ground cover plants may be utilized on berms to reduce mowing. 
(D)  Groundcover. All drainage swales and slopes with slope of 3:1 or greater shall be sodded. All other ground areas not covered by buildings, parking, sidewalks, or other impervious surfaces, or occupied by planting beds shall be graded smooth with a minimum of six (6) inches of black dirt after compacting and removing stumps, rocks and other debris, and shall be seeded or sodded to prevent soil erosion and sedimentation of public drainage systems, creeks, streams, rivers and wetlands. 
(Ord. No. 08-O-0079, § 6, 3-16-2009)  
14.5. - Plant materials standards. 
(A)  All plants shall conform to the "American Standards for Nursery Stock," latest edition, and shall be installed according to the current standards of the American Association of Nurserymen, latest edition. 
(B)  All plants shall be readily available and shall be proven to be reliably hardy and disease- and pest-resistant in USDA Zone 5. Plants shall have a vigorous root system and shall be free from defects, insects and diseases. 
(C)  Deciduous trees shall be fully branched, have a minimum caliper of three (3) inches for nonresidential and two and one-half (2½) inches for residential development measured six (6) inches above ground level. Specimens shall be properly pruned to maintain a natural form. 
(D)  Evergreen trees shall be a minimum of six (6) feet in height and fully branched to the ground. Shrubs shall be supplied on one (1) gallon or larger containers or balled and burlapped and at least eighteen (18) inches in height or spread, whichever applies. 
(E)  Ground cover plants shall be planted so that an effective covering is obtained within two (2) growing seasons. 
(F)  Perennials shall be supplied in one (1) gallon or larger containers. 
(Ord. No. 08-O-0079, § 7, 3-16-2009)  
14.6. - Safety and maintenance. 
(A)  Plant materials, including deciduous and evergreen trees, shall not cause a hazard. Landscape plant material overhanging walks, pedestrian or bicycle paths and seating areas shall be pruned to a minimum height of eight (8) feet; to a minimum height of fifteen (15) feet over streets and highways; and to a minimum height of twelve (12) feet above parking lot aisles and spaces. 
(B)  Landscape plant materials shall be selected which do not generally interfere with utilities above or below ground level at maturity. 
(C)  Parking Lot Clearance—No shrub or tree shall be planted closer than two (2) feet from any curb face. 
(D)  A curb shall be provided for all parking spaces adjacent to planting or pedestrian areas to prevent vehicle overhang, except in the case of handicapped access ramps. 
(E)  Planting Space Required—Trees planted in cutouts, walks, or in pedestrian areas shall have an open area of soil at least 4' x 4' in size or 5' in diameter, and shall be protected by the use of tree grates or edging that do not pose a hazard to pedestrians. 
(F)  Landscape plant materials shall be properly guyed and staked in accordance with current industry standards, where necessary. Stakes and guy wires shall not interfere with vehicular or pedestrian traffic. 
(G)  Landscape plant materials shall be protected from damage due to foot and vehicular traffic by protective tree grates, pavers, curbs or other suitable methods that prevent soil compaction. 
(H)  Each landscaped island shall be protected by a continuous barrier curb. The width shall be measured back-of-curb to back-of-curb. 
(I)  Planting beds shall be mulched in their entirety with shredded bark or other similar organic material a minimum of three (3) inches deep. Lava rock, bark chips larger than one and one-half (1½) inches in diameter, gravel, and stone mulches are not permitted. Mulch beds at the time of planting shall extend a minimum of two (2) feet beyond the center of a shrub. 
(J)  Appropriate methods of care and maintenance of the landscape shall be provided by the owner of the property. All plantings that die or are destroyed shall be replaced within the first two (2) months of the next planting season, as specified in Section 302.10 of the adopted International Property Maintenance Code. 
(Ord. No. 08-O-0079, § 8, 3-16-2009)  
14.7. - Intersection visibility. 
Landscaping shall be designed and installed to minimize potential obstruction of critical sight lines associated with visibility triangles. Within a visibility triangle, unobstructed visibility between two and one-half (2½) feet and eight (8) feet above grade shall be maintained. No berms, shrubs, or other landscape material that will reach a mature height greater than two and one-half (2½) feet shall be permitted within a visibility triangle. Trees may be permitted within visibility triangles provided the lowest branching begins not less than eight (8) feet above grade. 
(Ord. No. 08-O-0079, § 9, 3-16-2009; Ord. No. 17-O-0002, § 6, 1-16-2017)  
14.8. - Landscape yards. 
A continuous perimeter landscape yard is required in two instances: a) to satisfy landscape yard requirements, and b) for screening and buffering dissimilar uses. 
(A)  The applicant shall provide a landscape screen/buffer for all landscape yards as indicated in the regulations for each business and manufacturing district. Such buffer may include plant materials, fences, walls and berms, and must provide a certain number of points. Such number is determined by the following formula: 
(Yard length (parallel to property line) in feet) x (5) = points required for that yard 
All plant materials, fences, wall, and berms used to provide the required number of points shall be located within the required landscape yard, except when otherwise approved by the city council. 
(B)  The applicant shall provide a landscape yard with a full screen/buffer along corner-side, interior side, and/or rear lot lines, according to the following schedule. The setbacks required may overlap the general landscape setbacks required for each district. 
Subject 
Property 	Adjacent to 	Side and rear 	Corner-side 	Points Required 
B-2, B-3, ORI districts 	Single-family residential districts 	Same as landscape setbacks 	Yard length x 6 
B-2, B-3, ORI districts 	Multi-family residential districts 	Same as landscape setbacks 	Yard length x 5 
Manufacturing district 	Single-family residential districts 	15' 	20' 	Yard length x 7 
Manufacturing district 	Multi-family residential districts 	15' 	20' 	Yard length x 6 
Manufacturing district 	B-1, B-2, B-3, ORI districts 	15' 	20' 	Yard length x 5 
 
(C)  Point values: 
Ornamental grasses ..... 1 point 
Perennials ..... 1 point 
Low shrubs ..... 10 points 
Tall shrubs ..... 15 points 
Ornamental trees ..... 50 points 
Evergreen trees ..... 60 points 
Shade trees ..... 100 points 
(D)  Solid screening fences or walls at least six (6) feet in height may contribute up to fifty (50) percent of the required landscape points for full screen/buffers. The location and size of a proposed fence is subject to the provisions of Section 7.1. The determination of the value of a proposed fence is calculated as follows: 
(fence length) x (2.5) = points achieved by fence 
(E)  Continuous or staggered berms may contribute up to fifty (50) percent of the total landscape points for that portion of a landscape yard. The determination of the value of a proposed berm is calculated as follows: 
((berm height) x (length of berm)) / (2) = points achieved by berm 
(F)  Fencing may be used in combination with berms. If so, the contributions from fence points plus berm points shall not exceed sixty (60) percent of the required points, and at least fifty (50) percent of the remaining required points shall be achieved by trees. 
(G)  In any landscaping scheme not using fences and/or berms that is utilized to satisfy the requirements of subsections (A) and (B) above, at least fifty (50) percent of the points to be achieved by vegetation shall be achieved by trees. 
(H)  The proposed landscaping must function so that maximum effective screening is provided. Both overhead and lower screening and buffering is required in order to meet these requirements. Plant selection should include a variety of plant types. Fences, walls or berms may be used to increase effective screening. Trees and shrubs should be used on berms and in front of fences and walls. 
(I)  Additional landscape screening/buffering may be required when an incompatible use occurs which may have a high impact on adjacent development, as determined by the city. A high impact use is one that is expected to have a strong adverse effect on adjacent properties. 
(J)  Ornamental grasses and perennial shall not account for more than fifteen (15) percent of the required landscape points. 
(Ord. No. 08-O-0079, §§ 10—13, 3-16-2009)  
14.9. - Landscaping required. 
The following landscaping is required in addition to the landscaping required in section 14.8 and shall not be counted towards satisfying any landscape yard point requirement: 
(A)  Parking lots. To define circulation within a parking lot and to visually and physically break up long rows of parking spaces, landscaped islands shall be provided within parking lots. The applicant shall provide a landscaped island at the end of each parking row. The island shall have a minimum width of nine (9) feet and shall have a depth equal to the adjoining parking space. Each landscaped island shall contain one (1) shade tree if at the end of a single row of parking spaces, and two (2) shade trees if at the end of a double row of (head-to-head) parking spaces. The applicant shall also satisfy the requirements of at least one of the following. 
(1)  Provide one (1) landscaped island having a minimum width of nine (9) feet and a depth equal to the adjoining parking spaces, for each twenty (20) parking spaces in the parking row. Said landscaped islands shall be dispersed throughout the parking row. Each said landscaped island shall contain one (1) shade tree if within a single row of parking, and two (2) shade trees if within a double row of parking spaces. 
(2)  Provide a continuous landscaped island having a minimum depth of nine (9) feet between parking rows. Said landscaped island shall not be used in parking rows along the perimeter of a parking lot. Each said landscaped island shall contain one (1) shade tree for each twenty (20) parking spaces in the parking row. 
(3)  Provide a twenty (20) percent increase in the width of all required landscape setbacks. 
(4)  Increase the width of one (1) required landscaped end island for every twenty (20) existing and proposed parking spaces in the parking lot. Such islands shall be eighteen (18) feet in width and planted with at least two (2) shade trees. 
(B)  Building foundations. Foundation landscaping shall be provided around the perimeter of all new buildings in the business and manufacturing districts, except for the B-1, Central Business District. Such landscape areas shall be: 
(1)  Provided to achieve a certain number of points. Such number shall be determined by the following formula: 
(length of building perimeter in feet) X (4) = points required 
Point values shall be calculated as established in subsection 14.8(C). 
(2)  Provided continuously around the entire perimeter of the building, except where walkways, driveways, or loading areas provide necessary access to the building. Where foundation landscaping cannot be installed because of pedestrian or vehicular access to the building, up to a fifty (50) percent reduction in the number of points required may be permitted. 
(3)  A minimum of four (4) feet wide and shall be located immediately adjoining the building wall. 
(4)  Planted with materials that range in size and type and that relate to the size of the building. A coordinated design including at least four (4) of the following shall be provided: shade trees, ornamental trees, evergreens, shrubs, ornamental grasses, and perennials. Turf grass shall not be counted as foundation landscaping. 
(5)  Designed to soften large expanses of building walls, accent building entrances and architectural features, screen mechanical equipment, and separate parking areas from buildings. 
(C)  Signs. All freestanding, development identification and shopping center identification signs shall minimize the impact on surrounding properties and rights-of-way by providing vegetative enhancement in accordance with the following: 
(1)  A landscape area equal to one and one half (1½) times the sign area installed around the base of the sign. Where the area around the base of a sign is insufficient in size to accommodate landscaping, the administrator may permit installation of a portion of the required landscaping at an alternate location on the site. 
(2)  The landscaped area shall consist of any combination of flowering annuals, perennials, shrubs or trees. Sod or turf areas shall not qualify as part of the required landscape area. 
(3)  The landscaped area shall not be located or maintained within a public right-of-way. 
(D)  Retention and detention basins. Landscaping shall be provided in accordance with this section for all basins designed for holding storm water either temporarily or permanently. 
(1)  Location. Landscaping shall be provided around the perimeter of retention and detention ponds, primarily at least ten (10) feet outside of the high water level. Only plants adaptable to inundation may be planted within ten (10) feet of the high water level. 
(2)  Design. All landscaping elements shall be planted in a natural and nonlinear design. Water edge planting shall be designed to discourage Canadian Geese and other nuisance water fowl. Ornamental grasses shall be planted in small groupings of three (3) to seven (7) plants to minimize the potential for bird nesting areas. 
(3)  Quantity. The quantity of required landscaping improvements shall be based upon the length of the perimeter of the retention or detention pond area measured at the designed high water level. 
(4)  Trees and planting beds. A minimum of one (1) of the following landscaping elements shall be provided for detention or retention pond areas having a perimeter dimension of fifty (50) linear feet or less. Detention or retention pond areas having a perimeter dimension of fifty-one (51) linear feet or greater shall provide a combination of at least two (2) of the following landscaping elements for every fifty (50) linear feet or portion thereof: 
a.  One (1) shade tree, 
b.  Three (3) ornamental trees, 
c.  A planting bed or beds containing a total of at least twenty (20) deciduous or evergreen shrubs and/or perennials. Planting beds shall contain a sufficient quantity of plants to provide full ground coverage at plant maturity. For purposes of this subsection, perennials are considered to be mature at two (2) years after planting, and shrubs at four (4) years after planting. 
(5)  Turf. Except where occupied by planting beds or permanently covered by water, all pond or basin perimeters shall be sodded or seeded. Where pedestrian traffic and/or significant recreational use of the area are not issues, these areas shall be planted with native alternatives to lawn grasses such as prairie, meadow, and wetland plants." 
(Ord. No. 08-O-0079, §§ 14, 15, 3-16-2009)  
14.10. - No plant zones. 
The following no plant zones shall apply around a utility structure (i.e., fire hydrant, buffalo box, water shut off valve, valve vault, manhole, catch basin, inlet, etc.): 
(A)  Trees (evergreen, shade, ornamental, etc.) shall not be planted within fifteen (15) feet of a utility structure. 
(B)  Shrubs (low or tall) shall not be planted within ten (10) feet of a utility structure. 
(C)  Perennials shall not be planted within five (5) feet of a utility structure. 
(Ord. No. 08-O-0079, § 16, 3-16-2009)  
14.11. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 08-O-0079, § 16, adopted March 16, 2009, deleted section 14.11 in its entirety, which pertained to definition of terms and derived from Ord. No. 03-O-115, § 9, adopted December 15, 2003. For current provisions relating to definition of terms see appendix A, article IV, section 4.1.  
14.12. - Prohibited vegetation. 
(A)  TREES: 
Botanical Name 	Common Name 	Remarks 
Acer negundo 	Box Elder 	Weak wood; invasive 
Acer saccharinum 	Silver Maple 	Surface roots 
Ailanthus altissima 	Tree-of-Heaven 	Weak wood; invasive 
Betula pendula 	European Birch 	Borers; disease 
Catalpa species 	Catalpa 	Weak wood; litter; invasive 
Fraxinus species 	Ash 	Borers 
Ginkgo biloba (female) 	Female Ginkgo 	Offensive fruit; seeds 
Gleditsia triacanthos 	Thorny Honey Locust 	Thorns; seed pods; thornless varieties acceptable 
Maclura pomifera 	Osage-orange 	Large fruit; thorns 
Morus species 	Mulberry 	Weak wood; fruit; invasive 
Platanus occidentalis 	Sycamore 	Brittle; surface roots; litter 
Populus deltoides (female) 	Cottonwood 	Weak, litter 
Rhamnus frangula 	Buckthorn 	Weak wood; fruit; invasive 
Robinia species 	Locust 	Weak wood; litter; invasive 
Sorbus aucuparia 	European Mountain Ash 	Borers; disease 
Ulmus americana 	American Elm 	Disease; insects; disease resistant varieties are acceptable upon prior approval 
Ulmus pumila 	"Chinese" (Siberian) Elm 	Weak wood; disease; insects; invasive 
 
(B)  SHRUBS AND HERBACEOUS PLANTS: 
Botanical Name 	Common Name 	Remarks 
Coronilla varia 	Crownvetch 	Invasive; intolerant of other plants 
Highway/large embankments only: 		
Lonicera japonica 	Japanese Honeysuckle 	Very invasive; crowds out native understory vegetation 
Lythrum salicaria 	Purple Loosestrife 	Very invasive; replaces native vegetation in wetlands 
Rosa multiflora 	Multiflora Rose 	Very invasive; thorns 
 
(Ord. No. 03-O-0115, § 9, 12-15-2003; Ord. No. 17-O-0002, § 7, 1-16-2017) 
Editor's note— At the city's request the schedule of regulations from App A, § 14.12 was deleted. 
 
LOT TYPES 
 
Lot Types 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
ARTICLE XV. - PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 01-O-0127, § 1(Exh. B), adopted Dec. 17, 2001 amended by deleting App A. Art. XV, §§ 15.1—15.9 and enacted a new App. A, Art. XV, §§ 15.1—15.10 as set out herein. The former App. A, Art. XV pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 3049, § 1, adopted Dec. 2, 1996; Ord. No. 4356, § 1, adopted Dec. 20, 1999; Ord. No. 4281, § 1, adopted Feb. 21, 2000. 
 
15.1. - Purpose and intent. 
The planned unit development is a concept which encourages improved design in the development of land, providing relief from strict compliance with district requirements which are designed for conventional developments but which may inhibit creative development of property, unfavorably impact on property with unique features, or cause hardship or complication for desirable but unconventional development, where such relief will result in greater utility and/or enhanced amenities for the public, in order that the following objectives may be obtained: 
(A)  Provide environmental design and preservation of natural features of the site, in the development of land that would be more desirable than what is possible through the strict application of this ordinance. 
(B)  Diversification in the uses permitted and variation in the relationship of uses, structures, open spaces and heights of structures in developments conceived as cohesive, unified projects. 
(C)  Provisions for functional, aesthetic and beneficial use of open areas. 
(D)  Allow for phasing of development to encourage comprehensive project design and review. 
(E)  Shall not be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety, morals, comfort or general welfare. 
(Ord. No. 01-O-0127, § 1(Exh. B), 12-17-2001)  
15.2. - Application and interpretation. 
(A)  The provisions of this article shall apply to all planned unit developments in the City of West Chicago. In interpreting and applying the provisions of this article, planned unit developments will be held to the minimum requirements for the promotion and effectuation of the purposes set forth in section 15.1 of this article. 
(B)  Except as otherwise provided for herein, all planned unit developments shall be developed in accordance with all applicable provisions of this code. When this article imposes restrictions or requirements greater than those imposed by any other provisions of this code, the provisions of this article shall control. 
(C)  Nothing herein shall interfere with, abrogate or annul any easement, covenant, deed restrictions or agreement between parties which impose restrictions greater than those imposed by this article. 
(D)  Based on submission of a high quality site plan, planned unit developments may vary from strict compliance with provisions of this zoning ordinance or deviate from strict compliance with the provisions of the subdivision regulations, except for minimum standards set forth herein. Any proposed variance or deviation shall be considered based on the following factors: 
(1)  That any variance or deviation is justified by an independent analysis. 
(2)  That the physical conditions of the property cause a hardship in compliance with code requirements. 
(3)  That the proposed variance or deviation results in a cohesive, high quality development. 
(4)  That any reduction from minimum requirements are offset by sufficiently exceeding zoning standards elsewhere in the development to provide a greater benefit to the community. 
(E)  Based on submission of a high quality site plan, permission may be granted for construction of a planned unit development with two (2) or more principal buildings or uses on a single zoning lot. Any mixed use development shall follow both the residential and nonresidential standards set forth in this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 01-O-0127, § 1(Exh. B), 12-17-2001)  
15.3. - Procedure for planned unit development. 
(A)  Preapplication and sketch plans: 
(1)  Any owner, or agent, with respect to land within or adjacent to the city may submit to the administrator a sketch plan setting forth the information required in section 15.6 of this article in order to obtain the views of the appropriate city officials, so as to provide such owner and/or agent guidance in the development of their property under the terms of this article. 
(2)  The administrator shall review said sketch plan and informally discuss the merits and/or problems of the proposed development. 
(B)  Preliminary plan and plat stage: 
(1)  Following the sketch plan and preapplication stage, if utilized, the owner or his representative shall submit to the administrator a completed application for a special use permit for a planned unit development and copies of the associated preliminary plan and plat, containing such information and in such form as required in section 15.6 of this article. As part of any such application, the applicant may request the ability to submit final planned unit development plans and plats, and develop the planned unit development, in phases. 
(2)  The administrator shall refer said plan and plats to the zoning board of appeals for public hearing and review, and to any other staff deemed necessary in order to provide review and comment to the zoning board of appeals. 
(3)  The zoning board of appeals shall, after public notice in the manner required for special use requests, as set forth in this ordinance, hold a public hearing on the application for a special use permit for the planned unit development and the preliminary plan and plat, and shall recommend to the city council approval, approval with modifications or denial of the application based on specific findings of fact. The zoning board of appeals may call any additional witnesses and/or receive independent testimony as it may deem necessary and may continue said hearing from time to time in order to explore all outstanding questions and to achieve thorough findings of fact. 
(4)  The city council shall receive the recommendations of the zoning board of appeals and other recommendations of staff as have been requested, and shall either approve, approve with modification or deny the application. If the city council elects to approve the application in any form, the city council shall by ordinance approve the preliminary plan and plat, and grant a special use permit for a planned unit development. Said ordinance may authorize, in the discretion of the city council, the submission of final plans and plats, and the development of the planned unit development, in phases, and include such conditions as the city council may deem appropriate. 
(5)  No building permit or occupancy certificate shall be issued until the recording of the final plan and plat for the proposed planned unit development, or the phase thereof in which the property to which such permit or certificate relates is located. 
(C)  Final plan and plat stage: 
(1)  Within one (1) year after the adoption of the ordinance approving the preliminary plan and plat and granting a special use permit for the planned unit development, the owner or his agent shall file with the administrator an application, final development plan, and subdivision plat if necessary, containing in final form all the information required in the preliminary plan and approval ordinance, along with all such other documents as may be necessary to implement the plan or to comply with all applicable requirements of this Article XV. Upon receipt, the administrator shall refer said plan and plat to the zoning board of appeals. The administrator may also refer said plan and plat to any other staff as he deems necessary in order to provide review and comment to the zoning board of appeals. Notwithstanding any provision contained herein to the contrary, when the city council has approved the phasing of any planned unit development, the final plan and plat for each phase shall be filed within the time frames established by the city council. 
(2)  Within thirty (30) days after receipt of all documentation, if the final plan and plat are, in the opinion of the zoning board of appeals, deemed to be sufficient in compliance with all applicable city ordinances and in substantial conformity with the approved preliminary plan and plat, they shall be approved by the zoning board of appeals and recommended to the city council. Copies of the final plan and plat, along with a recommendation, shall be transmitted to the city council. 
(3)  Within thirty (30) days after receipt of the zoning board of appeals' recommendation, and in no event later than sixty (60) days after the filing of the final plan and plat, or the last required document or other paper, whichever is later, and provided all requirements set forth in subsection 15.6(C) of this article have been met, the city council shall receive said recommendation and approve said final plan and plat, approve said plan and plat with modifications or deny said final plan and plat. 
(D)  Conditions and guarantees. As a condition to the approval of any planned unit development, the zoning board of appeals may recommend and the city council may stipulate such conditions and restrictions upon the establishment, location, design, layout, height, density, construction, maintenance, aesthetics, operation and other elements of the planned unit development as deemed necessary for the protection of the public interest, improvement of the development and protection of the adjacent area. In all cases in which planned unit developments are granted, the city council shall require such evidence and guarantees as it may deem necessary as proof that the conditions stipulated in connection therewith are being and will be complied with. 
(Ord. No. 01-O-0127, § 1(Exh. B), 12-17-2001; Ord. No. 02-O-0021, § 1, 6-17-2002)  
15.4. - Changes and Modifications of the planned unit development. 
(A)  Changes in the final plan and plat before approval: If the final plan and plat are not in substantial conformity with the approved preliminary plan and plat, the zoning board of appeals shall not approve said final plan and plat, but instead, shall require a new application. The city council may, however, approve variations from any phasing schedule contained within the ordinance granting the special use permit without a new application. 
(B)  After the approval of the final plan, the use of land and the construction, modification, or alteration of any buildings or structures within the planned unit development, will be governed by the approved final plan. 
(C)  No changes may be made in the approved final plan, except upon application to the appropriate body according to the following procedure: 
(1)  Minor changes in the location, siting, and height of buildings and structures, and in the location of streets and ways of public access and in the size and location of open space, may be authorized by the administrator as required by engineering or other circumstances not foreseen at the time that the final plan was approved if they are consistent with the purpose and intent of the final plan. 
(2)  All changes in land uses, any rearrangement of lots, blocks, and building tracts, minimum setbacks, any major changes in the provision of open space and all other changes in approved final plans must be made by the city council under the procedures authorized by the zoning ordinance for a special use permit, including adequate notice and a public hearing before the zoning board of appeals. 
(Ord. No. 01-O-0127, § 1(Exh. B), 12-17-2001)  
15.5. - Revocation of a special use permit for a planned unit development. 
(A)  Revocation of a special use permit: Planned unit developments are permitted based upon conditions and considerations existing at the time zoning relief (any rezoning together with the grant of a special use permit) is granted approving the planned unit development. Planned unit developments shall be constructed and completed in a timely manner. Any special use permit authorizing a planned unit development shall be automatically revoked under the following conditions: 
(1)  The developer fails to follow the schedule detailed in section 15.3(C)(1), except where the developer has diligently worked with the city or other governmental agencies to address outstanding issues, and those issues have not been resolved through no fault of the developer, as determined by the administrator; or 
(2)  Construction of the planned unit development has not commenced, and proceeded diligently, within one (1) year after the date of approval of the final plan and plat; or 
(3)  The developer fails to adhere to the deadlines in the phasing plan as approved by the city council in the ordinance granting the special use permit for the planned unit development. 
(B)  Where the ordinance granting a special use permit for a planned unit development also provides for the zoning or rezoning of the subject realty, such ordinance may also provide for the reversion of such zoning to the underlying zoning classification existing at the time of application for a planned unit development was filed. 
(C)  Upon making a determination that a special use permit for a planned unit development has been automatically revoked pursuant to this subsection, the administrator shall send written notice of said determination to the owner of the subject property by certified mail, return receipt requested. 
(D)  If the terms and conditions set forth in the approval ordinance for a special use permit have not been met, the city council may revoke a special use permit for a planned unit development after providing the owner with reasonable notice. 
(E)  Upon the revocation of a special use permit for a planned unit development and/or reversion of any zoning with respect to any property, such property shall be developed, used and maintained only in conformity with the permitted uses and other requirements of the zoning district in which it is located. 
(F)  Prior to expiration of the one-year period to apply for final planned unit development approval or the expiration of the approved phasing plan, the owner may apply for an extension. Upon written application for said extension and for good cause shown, the city council may, by ordinance, in its sole discretion, grant one (1) extension of time not to exceed one (1) year from the time limitations set forth in this subsection or in any approved phasing plan. Any request for an extension of timing not related to the approved phasing schedule shall require the owner to follow the procedure for a special use permit including a public hearing and consideration by the zoning board of appeals. 
(Ord. No. 01-O-0127, § 1(Exh. B), 12-17-2001; Ord. No. 02-O-0021, § 2, 6-17-2002)  
15.6. - Content of plans and plats. 
(A)  Sketch plan: A drawing of the proposed planned unit development prepared at a scale that provides a clear understanding of the way in which the property is intended to be developed. The plan shall indicate the overall concept of the development including the land use pattern, general circulation system, open space and/or park system and other major features. The plan shall indicate: 
(1)  Boundary lines, approximate distances. 
(2)  General areas around the site, including land use and streets. 
(3)  Proposed streets. 
(4)  Proposed land uses. 
(5)  Map data, name of development, owner, north-point scale, acreage and date of preparation. 
(6)  Site data listing in tabular form of the various land uses and areas thereof, number of dwelling units and/or square footage of nonresidential buildings. 
(7)  A list of anticipated variances and deviations. 
(8)  A statement of existing and proposed ownership. 
(9)  A general statement describing the existing site features, including topography and flooding conditions, vegetation and other factors. 
(10)  A general statement of the current status of necessary utilities. 
(11)  Other information as the administrator may from time to time deem necessary. 
(B)  Preliminary plan and plat stages: 
(1)  An application form. 
(2)  The application fee. 
(3)  Preliminary plan and plat: A drawing of the planned unit development shall be prepared at a scale of not less than one inch equals one hundred feet (1" = 100') and shall show such designations as proposed streets (public and private), all buildings and their uses, common open space, recreation facilities, parking areas, service areas and other facilities to indicate the character of the proposed development. The submission may be composed of one (1) or more sheets and drawings and shall include: 
(a)  Legal description. 
(b)  Boundary line: Bearings and distance. 
(c)  Location of proposed buildings. 
(d)  Setbacks. 
(e)  Site data table: Acreage, density, floor area ratio, parking, open space, lot size and other site information. 
(f)  Map data: Name of development, name of site planner, north-point, scale, date of preparation and acreage of site. 
(g)  Zoning: Show zoning districts on and adjacent to the tract. 
(h)  Open space: All parcels of land intended to be dedicated for public use or reserved for the use of all property owners with the purpose indicated. 
(4)  Civil engineering plans: 
(a)  Easements: Location, width and purpose. 
(b)  Streets on and adjacent to the tract: Street name, right-of-way width, existing or proposed centerline elevations, pavement type, walks, curbs, gutters, culverts, etc. 
(c)  Utilities on and adjacent to the tract: Location, size and invert elevation of sanitary, storm and combined sewers; location and size of water mains; location of gas lines, fire hydrants, electric and telephone lines and street lights; direction and distance to and size of nearest usable water mains and sewers adjacent to the tract showing invert elevation of sewers. 
(d)  Ground elevations on the tract: For land that slopes less than one-half (½) percent, show one (1) foot contours; for land that slopes more than one-half (½) percent, show two (2) foot contours; also show spot elevations at all breaks in grades, along all drainage channels or swales and at points of special significance. 
(e)  Surface hydrology and geological conditions: Identification of existing surface drainage patterns, topography, major and minor watersheds, flood limits of record with elevations as set forth in the hydrological investigations atlas numbers published by the United States Geological Survey, and the location and results of tests made to generally ascertain surface and subsurface soil, rock and ground water conditions, including a soil analysis indicating soil types, code numbers, limitations for urbanized areas, conservation and agricultural productivity, soil wetness and erosion potential; depth to ground water unless test pits are dry at a depth of five (5) feet, location and results of soil percolation tests if individual sewage disposal systems are proposed. 
(f)  Other conditions on the tract: Watercourses, floodplains, marshes, rock outcrops, wooded areas, isolated preservable trees one (1) foot or more in diameter, other natural and environmental resources, houses, barns, accessory buildings and other significant features. 
(g)  Other conditions on adjacent land: Approximate direction and gradient of ground slope, including any embankments or retaining walls; character and location of major buildings, railroads, power lines, towers or other nonresidential land uses or adverse influences; owners of adjacent unplatted land; for adjacent platted land, refer to subdivision plat by name and show approximate percent built-up, typical lot size and dwelling type. 
(5)  Facilities plans that indicate that the proposed development can be serviced, including: 
(a)  Roads, including classification, width of right-of-way, width of pavement and typical construction details. 
(b)  Sanitary sewers. 
(c)  Storm drainage. 
(d)  Water supply system. 
(e)  Lighting program. 
(f)  Sidewalks, parks and cycle trails. 
(g)  Proposed public improvements: Highways or other major improvements planned by public authorities for future construction on or near the tract. 
(6)  Miscellaneous: Such additional information, independent study or analysis as may be required by the administrator, at the cost of the applicant. 
(7)  Objectives: A statement of planning objectives to be achieved by the planned unit development. This statement should include a description of the character of the proposed development and the rationale behind the assumptions and choices of the developer. 
(8)  Character: Explanation of the character of the planned unit development and the manner in which it has been designed to take advantage of the flexibility of these regulations, including a statement explaining the applicant's need for any deviations from strict compliance with any provision of this code, and the public benefits to accrue from the development. 
(9)  Ownership: Statement of present and proposed ownership of all land within the project, including present tract designation according to official records in offices of the county recorder of deeds. 
(10)  Names and addresses: The names and addresses of the persons to whom any notices required under this ordinance must be sent, including the applicant, the developer and the owners of adjoining property. 
(11)  Phasing schedule: 
(a)  Configuration of each phase with emphasis on the area, density, uses and public facilities or required improvements to be developed within each phase. Design of each phase shall be shown on the plan, plat and through supporting graphic material. 
(b)  The sequence in which phases will be developed. 
(c)  The time within which any such phase will be submitted for final plan and plat approval. 
(d)  The time within which building permit applications will be submitted and construction will be commenced with respect to each phase. 
(e)  The time within which each phase will be completed. 
(f)  The sequence and timing of construction of all public or other required on-site and/or off-site improvements. 
(g)  Provisions for the maintenance and landscaping of any phases prior to the submission of final plans and plats with respect thereto. 
(12)  Covenants, conditions, restrictions, easements: Proposed covenants, conditions, restrictions and easements which will provide for the perpetual use, maintenance, and conformity of the planned unit development in accordance with the approved planned unit development documents and this ordinance. 
(13)  Service facilities: Provide information on all public improvements, quasi-public or common improvements and off-street parking facilities. 
(14)  Landscape plans: Preliminary plans for plant materials, earth sculpturing, berming and aesthetic features, in compliance with the requirements of this code, shall be submitted. 
(15)  Tax impact study: Provide information on the taxes to be generated by the proposed project and the cost to the various taxing bodies to provide the necessary services to the project. 
(16)  Traffic analysis: Provide information on the adequacy of the local transportation and thoroughfare system to handle anticipated traffic volumes generated by the planned unit developments. Also, an analysis should be made of the adequacy of the internal vehicular circulation pattern. 
(17)  Market study: Provide economic feasibility study of the proposed development, including information on land utilization, and marketing potential. Evidence should be presented showing the need and feasibility of the proposed development 
(18)  Nonresidential developments. In addition to the submittal requirements listed above, all requests for nonresidential development shall include the following items: 
(a)  Structures: General location, purpose and height, in feet or stories, of each building. 
(b)  Architectural plans: Preliminary architectural plans for all primary buildings shall be submitted in sufficient detail to permit an understanding of the style of the development, the design and materials of the buildings and the number, size and type of building, the floor area of each building type and total ground coverage of buildings. 
(19)  Residential developments. In addition to the submittal requirements listed above, all requests for residential development shall include the following items: 
(a)  Density: Provide information on the density of residential uses, including the number of dwelling units by type, the number of buildings by type and the number of bedrooms in each building and dwelling unit type. 
(b)  Provide information on the type and amount of ancillary and nonresidential uses, including the amount of open space. 
(c)  Architectural plans: Preliminary architectural plans for all primary buildings shall be submitted in sufficient detail to permit an understanding of the style of the development, the design and materials of the buildings and the number, size and type of dwelling units, the square footage of each building type and total ground coverage of buildings. 
(d)  Land/cash study: A summary of the estimated donation for taxing districts in conformance with the land/cash regulations of the subdivision ordinance. 
(e)  Letters of approval from appropriate taxing districts regarding the land/cash donations as set forth in the subdivision regulations. 
(f)  School impact study: Provide information on the student load and financial impact on the local school districts, including expected scheduling of potential students. 
(g)  Anti-monotony plan: Provide detailed plan that will ensure anti-monotony within the development including such items as materials, elevations and setbacks. 
(C)  Final plan and plat stage: 
(1)  Final plan and plat: A final planned unit development plan and plat, suitable for recording with the county recorder of deeds, shall be prepared. The purpose of the final plan and plat is to designate with particularity the land subdivided into conventional lots as well as the division of other land, not so treated, into open areas and building areas. The final plan and plat shall include, but not be limited to: 
(a)  An accurate legal description of the entire area under immediate development within the planned unit development, or phase thereof, being finally approved. 
(b)  A subdivision plat of all subdivided lands in the same form and meeting all the requirements of a normal subdivision plat. 
(c)  An accurate legal description of each separate, unsubdivided use area, including open space. 
(d)  Designation of the exact location of all buildings to be constructed. 
(e)  Certificates, seals and signatures required for the dedication of lands and recording the document. 
(2)  Open space documents: All open space shall either be conveyed to a municipal or public corporation, conveyed to a not-for-profit corporation or entity established for 
the purpose of benefiting the owners and residents of the planned unit development or retained by the developer with legally binding guarantees, in a form approved by the corporation counsel, that the open space will be permanently preserved as open area. All land conveyed to a not-for-profit corporation or like entity shall be subject to the right of said corporation to impose a legally enforceable lien, for maintenance and improvement of the open area, against the portion or portions of the planned unit development to be benefitted by the open space. 
(3)  Public facilities: All public and quasi-public or common improvements made necessary as a result of the planned unit development shall either be constructed in advance of the approval of the final plat or a letter of credit shall be posted to guarantee construction of the required improvements. The letter of credit, payable to the city, shall be sufficient to cover the full cost of the improvements plus twenty-five (25) percent. Detailed construction plans shall be submitted for all public facilities to be built. 
(4)  Final Civil Engineering Plans: Plans depicting all public improvements, stormwater management provisions, site improvements, utilities, grading, soil erosion and other necessary engineering detail. 
(5)  Elevation drawings: Plans depicting proposed elevations of all structures, including materials, color, height, and other appropriate detail. 
(6)  Final landscape plan: Plans depicting the type, location, size of all proposed landscape material. 
(7)  Construction schedule: A final construction schedule shall be submitted for that portion of the planned unit development for which approval is being requested. 
(8)  Guarantee deposit: Deposits shall be made to the city in cash, impound accounts and/or letters of credit approved and in a form acceptable to the corporation counsel as provided under the Land Subdivision Regulations of the city, Appendix B of this code. 
(9)  Covenants, conditions, restrictions, easements: Final covenants, conditions, restrictions and easements, in forms acceptable to the corporation counsel, which will provide for the perpetual use, maintenance and conformity of the planned unit development in accordance with the approved planned unit development documents and this ordinance. 
(10)  Residential development. In addition to the submittal requirements listed above, all requests for residential development shall include residential tabulation of separate, unsubdivided use area, including land area, number of buildings and number of dwelling units per acre. 
(Ord. No. 01-O-0127, § 1(Exh. B), 12-17-2001)  
15.7. - General Standards. 
Planned unit developments shall meet the following general standards: 
(A)  Comprehensive plan and planned unit development purpose and intent: A planned unit development must conform with the intent and spirit of the planning objective of the city's comprehensive plan and the planned unit development purpose and intent. 
(B)  Ownership: At the time of application, the site of the planned unit development must be under single ownership and/or unified control. 
(C)  Compatibility: The uses permitted in the planned unit development must be of a type and so located as to avoid adverse impact upon surrounding properties. 
(D)  Need: A clear showing of need for why a planned unit development is appropriate must be made. 
(E)  Yards: Each required yard along the periphery of the planned unit development shall be at least equal in width or depth to those provided under the requirements of the underlying zoning district, including any provision for increased width or depth for transition yards between different zoning districts. Preliminary engineering plans shall be approved prior to zoning board of appeals consideration of a preliminary planned unit development proposal. 
(F)  Final engineering plans shall be approved prior to zoning board of appeals consideration of a final planned unit development proposal. 
(G)  Access: Adequate provision shall be made to provide ingress and egress so designed as to minimize the traffic congestion in the public streets. 
(H)  Any planned unit development with common open space shall have a property owners' association. 
(Ord. No. 01-O-0127, § 1(Exh. B), 12-17-2001; Ord. No. 08-O-0079, §§ 17, 18, 3-16-2009)  
15.7.1. - Residential standards. 
(A)  Residential planned unit developments shall only be permitted in the R-3 and R-6 zoning districts. 
(B)  Lot size: The minimum size for a residential planned unit development shall be ten (10) acres. 
(C)  Density: Planned unit developments, or the portions thereof, devoted to residential uses shall be limited to a maximum number of dwelling units equal to the result of the net residential area divided by the minimum lot area provided under the requirements of the applicable underlying zoning district. The net residential area shall be determined by subtracting twenty (20) percent from the gross area of the planned unit development for streets and other required improvements, regardless of the amount of land actually devoted to same. The area of land devoted to common open space, public use and/or recreational use shall be included in the net residential area. Individual lots may be less than permitted by the underlying district provided that additional open space is provided in excess of any land provided to comply with the land/cash provisions of the subdivision regulations. In no event shall a lot for a single family home be less than eight thousand (8,000) square feet. 
(D)  Setbacks: In addition to the minimum perimeter setbacks, there shall be an additional ten (10) foot setback along arterial or collector streets. 
(E)  Unit size: Two-family and multi-family developments shall comply with the minimum dwelling unit size set forth in the R-6 residential district standards set forth in this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 01-O-0127, § 1(Exh. B), 12-17-2001)  
15.7.2. - Nonresidential standards. 
(A)  Nonresidential planned unit developments shall only be permitted in the B-2, B-3, M and ORI zoning districts. 
(B)  Lot size: The minimum size for a nonresidential planned unit development shall be five (5) acres. 
(C)  Parking: A variance from the parking regulations may be permitted if supported by a parking study by an independent consultant justifying any reduction in required parking. 
(D)  Shared parking: Shared parking may be permitted if supported by a parking study by an independent consultant justifying an arrangement. Shared parking could allow two or more uses to share the same minimum number of parking stalls provided that the uses would not use the parking spaces to be shared at the same time. In allowing any reduction, the city may require landbanking of additional parking spaces. 
(E)  Parking lot landscaping: Parking lots shall be landscaped no less than the minimum standards set forth in other sections of this ordinance. 
(F)  Landscape setbacks: Landscape setbacks shall be maintained in accordance with the minimum landscape setbacks set forth within the underlying district as set forth in this ordinance. 
(G)  Signage: Signs for a development shall be minimized to provide the planned unit development with an overall identity that does not lead to a proliferation of signage that may cause confusion or safety concerns. Signage shall include a complimentary design throughout the planned unit development. 
(H)  Architectural style: Developments shall include complimentary architectural styles and materials to ensure a cohesive development. 
(Ord. No. 01-O-0127, § 1(Exh. B), 12-17-2001; Ord. No. 03-O-0040, § 26, 6-16-2003)  
15.8. - Findings. 
The zoning board of appeals shall, after the public hearing, set forth to the city council the reason for the recommendation, and said recommendation shall set forth with particularity what respects the proposal would be in the public interest including, but not limited to, findings of fact on the following: 
(A)  In what respects the proposed plan is consistent with the comprehensive plan and the stated purpose and intent of the planned unit development regulations. 
(B)  The extent to which the proposed plan meets the requirements and standards of the planned unit development regulations. 
(C)  The extent to which the proposed plan departs from the zoning and subdivision regulations otherwise applicable to the subject property including, but not limited to, the density, dimension, area, bulk and use and the reasons why such departures are deemed to be in the public interest. 
(D)  The method by which the proposed plan makes adequate provision for public services, provides adequate control over vehicular traffic, provides for and protects designated common open space and furthers the amenities of light and air, recreation and visual enjoyment. 
(E)  The relationship and compatibility of the proposed plan to the adjacent properties and neighborhood. 
(F)  The desirability of the proposed plan as regards physical development, tax base and economic well being of the city. 
(Ord. No. 01-O-0127, § 1(Exh. B), 12-17-2001)  
15.9. - Administration and enforcement. 
(A)  Administrative and enforcing officer: The administrator shall be the enforcing and administrative officer of this article including the following: 
(1)  Administratively process all zoning changes involving a special use permit for a planned unit development. 
(2)  Maintain permanent and current records of this article, including all amendments thereto. 
(3)  Receive and file all sketch, preliminary and final planned unit development plans and plats. 
(4)  Forward all copies of proposed planned unit development plans and plats to the zoning board of appeals and to other agencies, or boards of the city, as directed by the zoning board of appeals or the city council. 
(5)  Make all other determinations and perform all other administrative actions required by this article. 
(B)  Fee: A fee shall accompany each application for planned unit development approval. Such fee shall be paid to the city at the time of the filing of each such application. No plan shall be approved nor shall any building or other permit be issued thereon without the fee required herein having first been paid. 
The fee shall be in any amount established from time to time by ordinance adopted by the city council. Any fee collected pursuant to this section shall be in addition to and not in lieu of any other fee imposed by the terms of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 01-O-0127, § 1(Exh. B), 12-17-2001)  
15.10. - Maintenance and use of planned unit development. 
Every planned unit development shall at all times be maintained, used and kept in full conformance with the provisions of this code and those plats, plans and specifications expressly incorporated in any ordinance or resolution specifically governing the construction and development of the planned unit development. 
(Ord. No. 01-O-0127, § 1(Exh. B), 12-17-2001)  
APPENDIX B - SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1654, § 1, adopted June 20, 1983, amended App. B to read as herein set out. Prior to amendment, App. B pertained to similar subject matter, consisted of §§ I-XXI, and was derived from Ord. No. 719, adopted Jan. 18, 1960; Ord. No. 923, §§ 1, adopted Dec. 5, 1966; Ord. No. 1202, adopted March 18, 1974; Ord. No. 1262, adopted April 7, 1975; Ord. No. 1291, adopted Nov. 3, 1975; Ord. No. 1365, § 1, adopted April 3, 1978; Ord. No. 1466, § 1, adopted March 3, 1980; Ord. No. 1477, § 1, adopted June 2, 1980; and Ord. No. 1510, § 1, adopted Jan. 19, 1981. 
Cross reference— Fees and charges for costs of consultants, etc., § 2-11; fire limits, § 4-1; housing code, § 7-16 et seq.; water and sewer services, § 18-1 et seq. 
 
Article I. - Title 
This ordinance shall hereafter be known, cited and referred to as the "Land Subdivision Regulations" of the City of West Chicago and is adopted pursuant to the authorization of Chapter 24 of the Illinois Revised Statutes.  
Article II. - Purpose 
The subdivision of land is the first step in the process of urban development. The arrangement of land parcels in the community for residential, commercial, and industrial uses and for streets, alleys, schools, parks and other public purposes will determine to a large degree the conditions of health, safety, economy and amenity that prevail in the urban area. Piecemeal planning of land subdivisions, without correlation to the City of West Chicago's Comprehensive Plan, could bring about a disastrous disconnected patchwork of plats resulting in poor circulation of traffic and unattractive neighborhoods and communities. Therefore, these regulations and standards for the subdivision and improvement of land for urban use to make provision for adequate light, air, open space, drainage, transportation, public utilities and other needs to ensure the development and maintenance of a healthy, attractive and efficient community that provides for the conservation and protection of its human and natural resources. 
These regulations are designed, intended and should be administered in a manner: 
(a)  To implement the general development plan; 
(b)  To promote the public health, safety, and general welfare; 
(c)  To harmoniously relate the development of various tracts of land to the existing community and facilitate the future development of adjoining tracts; 
(d)  To avoid undue concentration of population and overcrowding of land; 
(e)  To lessen congestion in the streets and highways; 
(f)  To provide for adequate light and air; 
(g)  To facilitate adequate provision for transportation, water, sewage, schools, parks, playground, and other public requirements, and to reconcile any differences of interest; 
(h)  To provide for proper ingress and egress; and 
(i)  To ensure proper legal description, and proper monumenting of subdivided land; to establish and maintain adequate and accurate records of all land subdivision. 
These regulations are established with reasonable consideration for the character of the city with a view toward conserving the value of buildings upon the land and providing the best possible environment for human habitation. It is intended that these regulations shall supplement and facilitate the enforcement of the provisions and development standards contained in the building codes, official map regulations, zoning ordinance, housing code and the comprehensive plan of the City of West Chicago.  
Article III. - Jurisdiction 
The City of West Chicago Land Subdivision Regulations shall apply to all subdivisions of land, as defined herein, located within the City of West Chicago and within one and one-half (1½) miles of the corporate limits of the city, in accordance with authority vested in the municipality under the provisions of Chapter 24 of the Illinois Revised Statutes as amended.  
Article IV. - Rules and Definitions 
For the purpose of these regulations, certain terms and phrases used herein are defined as follows: 
4.1. Rules. In the construction of this ordinance, the rules and definitions contained in this section shall be observed and applied, except when the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
(a)  Words used in the present tense shall include the future, the words used in the singular number shall include the plural number, and the plural the singular. 
(b)  The word "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary. 
(c)  The word "may" is permissive. 
(d)  The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter. 
(e)  Whenever a word or term defined hereinafter appears in the text of this ordinance, its meaning shall be construed as set forth in the definition thereof, and any word appearing in parentheses directly after a word herein defined shall be construed in the same sense as that word; and 
(f)  The following words and terms, wherever they occur in this ordinance, shall be construed as herein defined. 
4.2. Definitions. 
Administrative officer is the city administrator or city official designated by the mayor and city council of West Chicago as the officer responsible for administering and enforcing all of the requirements and provisions of the City of West Chicago Land Subdivision Regulations. 
Alley is a public right-of-way designed to serve as secondary access to the side or rear of those properties whose principal frontage is on a street. 
Block is a tract of land bounded by streets, or by a combination of streets and public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights-of-way, shorelines of waterways, or boundary lines of the City of West Chicago. 
Building is any structure built for the support, shelter, or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels, or moveable property of any kind, and which is permanently affixed to the land. 
Building setback line is a line within a lot or other parcel of land so designated on the preliminary plan. Between said line and the adjacent street the erection of an enclosed structure, or a fence or hedge over three (3) feet in height is prohibited. 
City council is the Mayor and Aldermen of the City of West Chicago. 
City staff is any combination of employees or consultants of the city deemed necessary by the administrative officer for enforcement of the provisions of this ordinance. 
Comprehensive plan is the general development plan reviewed and recommended by the plan commission and adopted by the city council, and all subsequent amendments and supplements thereto, indicating the general locations recommended for the principal streets, parks, public buildings, zoning district, character and extent of community development and other physical aspects of urban planning on file in the office of the City Clerk of the City of West Chicago, Illinois, and in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of DuPage County or Kane County, as applicable. 
Contour map is a map on which irregularities of the land surface are shown by lines connecting points of equal elevations. Contour intervals is the vertical height between contour lines. 
Cul-de-sac is a local street with only one outlet and having an appropriate terminal for the safe and convenient reversal of traffic movement. 
Easement is a grant by a property owner of the use of land for a specific purpose. 
Final plat is the map or plan of record of a subdivision, and accompanying material, as described in Article XI. 
Frontage is the length of the front property line of the lot, lots or tract of land abutting a public street. 
Grade is the slope of a road, street, or other public way, specified in percent (%). 
Grade, landing is the grade required on streets entering major thoroughfares, at points of intersection, as specified herein. 
Improvement, public is any sanitary sewer, storm sewer, drainage ditch, water main, roadway, parkway, sidewalk, pedestrianway, planting strip, off-street parking area, or other facility for which the City of West Chicago may ultimately assume the responsibility for maintenance and operation. 
Limited access expressway or highway is a trafficway, including toll roads, for through traffic in respect to which owners or occupants of abutting property or lands and other persons have no legal right of access to or from the same, except at such points and in such manner as may be determined by the public authority having jurisdiction over such trafficway. 
Lot is a parcel of land located within a single block, occupied by or intended for occupancy by one principal building or principal use and having its principal frontage on a street. 
Lot, corner is a lot situated at the junction of and abutting on two (2) or more intersecting streets; or a lot at the point of deflection in alignment of a single street, the interior angle of which does not exceed one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees. 
Lot, flag (reserve) is a lot where access is obtained by way of a narrow strip of land (the reserve) from a dedicated right-of-way. 
Lot line is a boundary line of any lot, except that where any portion of the lot extends into the abutting street or alley, such portion of the lot line thereof shall be deemed to be the street or alley line. 
Lot, through is a lot which has a pair of opposite lot lines along two (2) substantially parallel streets and which is not a corner lot. On a through lot, both street lines shall be deemed front lot lines, but in the case of two (2) or more contiguous through lots, there shall be a common front lot line. 
Lot width is the horizontal distance between the side lot lines of a lot, measured at the front building setback line. 
Metes and bounds is a method of property description whereby properties are described by means of their direction and distances from an easily identifiable location or point. 
Outlot is a parcel of land within a subdivision and which has been included on a preliminary or final plat but not designated as a buildable lot due to insufficient size and/or frontage or peculiar siting or topographical problems. 
Owner is any person, group of persons, firm or firms, corporate or corporations, or any other legal entity having legal title to the land sought to be subdivided under this ordinance. 
Pedestrianway or crosswalk is a right-of-way across or within a block, for use by pedestrian traffic whether designated as a pedestrianway, crosswalk, or however otherwise designated, and may include utilities where necessary. 
Person is any individual, firm, association, partnership, corporations, trust, or any other legal entity. 
Planned development shall mean a parcel of land or contiguous parcels of land; of a size sufficient to create its own environment; controlled by a single landowner or by a group of landowners in common agreement as to control; to be developed as a single entity, the enforcement of which is compatible with adjacent parcels and the intent of the zoning district or districts in which such land area is located. The developer or developers may be granted relief from specific land use regulations and design standards, and may be awarded certain premiums, in return for assurance of an overall quality of development, including any specific features which will be of exceptional benefit to the community as a whole and which would not otherwise be allowed by the zoning ordinance. 
Plan commission is that body authorized to consider matters relative to planning, zoning, and subdivision platting, and make recommendations to the City Council of West Chicago, Illinois. 
Preapplication is a preliminary consultation between the developer and city staff in order to discuss the developer's intent to subdivide land. The preapplication procedure is designed to provide direction for the developer and to eliminate needless costs. 
Preliminary plat is a map showing the salient features of a proposed subdivision, submitted to the plan commission for purposes of preliminary consideration. 
Right-of-way is a strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a street, crosswalk, railroad line, electric transmission line, oil or gas pipeline, water main, sanitary or storm sewer main, or for another special use. The usage of the term "right-of-way" for land platting purposes in West Chicago shall mean that every right-of-way hereafter established and shown on a final plat is to be separate and distinct from the lots or parcels adjoining such right-of-way and not included within the dimensions of areas of such lots or parcels. Rights-of-way intended for streets, crosswalks, watermains, sanitary sewers, storm drains, or any other use involving maintenance by a public agency, shall be dedicated to public use by the maker of the plat on which such right-of-way is established. 
Roadway is a paved portion of a street available for vehicular traffic. 
Sewerage disposal system, individual is a septic tank seepage tile sewage disposal system or any other sewage treatment device approved by the city engineer as being in accordance with the rules of the state department of public health and/or DuPage County Health regulations and servicing only one lot. 
Sidewalk is that portion of a street or crosswalk way right-of-way paved, intended for pedestrian use only. 
Street is a public or private right-of-way which affords a primary means of vehicular access to abutting properties, whether designated as a street, avenue, highway, road, boulevard, lane, throughway, or however otherwise designated, but excepting driveways to buildings. 
Street, collector is a street which carries traffic from minor streets to the system of major streets and highways including the principal entrance streets of a residential development and the principal circulating streets within a development. 
Street, major is a street designated as such in the comprehensive plan or official map for the City of West Chicago or by action of the city council which is intended to serve a relatively large volume of traffic not originating or terminating in the particular neighborhood. 
Street, frontage is a minor street which is parallel and adjacent to a major street or highway, and which provides access to abutting properties and protection from through traffic. 
Street, minor is a street of limited continuity used primarily for access to abutting properties and serving local needs of a neighborhood. 
Subdivider is any person or corporation or duly authorized agent who undertakes the subdivision of land as defined herein. 
Subdivision is the partitioning or dividing of a parcel or tract of land where the act of division creates a subdivision not exempt under the provisions of 765 Illinois Compiled Statutes, except that the exemption provided by 765 Illinois Compiled Statutes 205/1(b)9 shall not be applicable with respect to property subject to the jurisdiction of the city. In addition, as used herein, a subdivision shall be deemed to include a planned unit development. 
Subdivision, minor (lot split) is any subdivision of a parcel of land; along an existing public street; not involving the opening, widening, extension of any street or road; nor are any public improvements required; and involving no more than ten (10) lots. 
Subdivision design standards are the basic land planning standards established as guides for the preparation of preliminary plats. 
Thoroughfare is a street with a high degree of continuity including collectors, major arterials, and limited access highways. 
Water supply, individual is a well and appurtenances supplying only one lot, and subject to the approval of the city engineer as being in accordance with the rules of the state department of public health and DuPage County Health Department. 
Zoning ordinance is the City of West Chicago Zoning Ordinance as amended. 
(Ord. No. 3048, § 1, 12-2-96; Ord. No. 05-O-0067, § 16, 9-19-2005)  
Article V. - Interpretation and Separability 
5.1. Interpretation. 
5.1-1. Regarding interpretation and application, the provisions of this ordinance shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety and general welfare. 
5.1-2. Where the conditions imposed by any provisions of this ordinance upon the subdivision of land are either more restrictive or less restrictive than comparable conditions imposed by any other city ordinance or any other applicable law, the city ordinance or other applicable law which is more restrictive and imposes a higher standard or requirement shall govern. 
5.1-3. This ordinance is not intended to abrogate any easement, covenant, or any other private agreement provided that where the regulations of this ordinance are more restrictive or impose higher standard or regulations than such easement, covenant, or other private agreement, the requirements of this ordinance shall govern. 
5.1-4. Any subdivision of land which was not lawfully existing at the time of the adoption of this ordinance shall not be made lawful solely by reason of the adoption of this ordinance, and to the extent that said subdivision of land is in conflict in any manner with the requirements of this ordinance, said subdivision of land remains unlawful hereunder.  
Article VI. - Administration and Enforcement 
6.1. Administrative officer. The community development director shall be the administrative officer of this ordinance, and it shall be his duty to administer and enforce the provisions hereof. 
6.2. Plan review and inspections. The city engineer, or his duly designated representative, shall review all plans and specifications and shall inspect all improvements proposed to be made under this ordinance during the court [course] of construction. 
6.3. Transfers of lots, building permits and occupancy permits. 
(a)  No person shall sell, convey or transfer any lot in a subdivision until the final plat of subdivision has been approved by the city council in accordance with this ordinance, and recorded with the county recorder of deeds. 
(b)  No building permit shall be issued providing for the improvement of any lot in a subdivision until the final plat of subdivision and the plans and specifications for the public improvements have been approved by the city council, and the final plat of subdivision has been recorded with the county recorder of deeds. 
(c)  No occupancy permit shall be issued for any structure within any subdivision until all required utility facilities have been installed and made ready to serve the subdivision, and access to the property has been constructed, provided, however, that occupancy permits may be issued prior to the installation of the final lift of pavement on the street or streets serving the subdivision. 
6.4. Deviation. The city council may authorize a deviation from these regulations after review and recommendation by the plan commission when, in its opinion, undue hardship may result from strict compliance and provided the deviation applies only to the requirements of this ordinance. The city council may take such action only upon receipt from the plan commission of a written recommendation specifying the manner in which the findings required in this section have or have not been met by the facts pertinent to the requested deviation. 
Except in the case of planned unit developments approved pursuant to the city's zoning ordinance. No deviation shall be granted by the City Council except in the following circumstances: 
(a)  That there are special circumstances or conditions affecting said property such that the strict application of the provisions of this ordinance would deprive the applicant of the reasonable use of his land. 
(b)  That the deviation is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right of the applicant. 
(c)  That the granting of the deviation will not be detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to other property in the area in which said property is located. 
(d)  That the alleged hardship has not been created by any person having a present proprietary interest in the property. 
6.5. [ Fee. ] A fee shall accompany each application for any approval or relief pursuant to this ordinance. Such fee shall be paid to the city at the time of the filing of each such application. No plan shall be approved nor shall any building or other permit issued thereon without the fee required herein having first been paid. 
The fee shall be in such amount established from time to time by ordinance adopted by the city council. Any fee collected pursuant to this section shall be in addition to and not in lieu of any other fee imposed by the terms of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 3048, § 2, 12-2-96; Ord. No. 01-O-0127, § 2, 12-17-2001)  
Article VII. - Procedure for Subdivision Approval 
7.1. Preapplication consultation. Any owner or representative of land within or adjacent to the city may submit to the administrative officer a sketch plan setting forth the information required herein in order to obtain the views of the appropriate city officials, so as to provide such owner and/or agent guidance in the development of their property under the terms of this ordinance. The administrative officer shall review said sketch plan and informally discuss the merits and/or problems of the proposed subdivision. The sketch plan shall consist of a drawing of the proposed subdivision prepared at [a] scale that provides a clear understanding of the way in which the property is intended to be developed. The plan shall indicate the overall concept of the development including the land use pattern, general circulation system, open space and/or park system and other major features. The plan shall indicate: 
(a)  Boundary lines, approximate distances. 
(b)  General areas around the site, including land use and streets. 
(c)  Proposed streets. 
(d)  Proposed land uses. 
(e)  Map date, name of development, owner, north-point scale, acreage and date of preparation. 
(f)  Site data—A listing in tabular form of the various land uses and areas thereof, number of dwelling units and estimated population. 
(g)  A statement of existing and proposed ownership. 
(h)  A general statement describing the existing site features, including the utilities which will serve the site. 
(i)  A general statement of the current status of necessary utilities. 
(j)  Other information as the community development director may from time to time deem necessary. 
7.2. Preliminary plat. In planning the development of a subdivision within the jurisdiction of the City of West Chicago, the subdivider shall comply with the following procedure: 
7.2-1. Filing of preliminary plat. The subdivider shall prepare a preliminary plat of the proposed subdivision, along with preliminary engineering plans and specifications, in accordance with the requirements of Articles XI and XIII of this ordinance; and shall file with the city clerk an application in writing for the preliminary approval of said plat accompanied by twenty-five (25) black on white prints or other acceptable reproductions. 
7.2-2. Review and recommendations. The preliminary plat and all supporting documents shall be first reviewed by the city staff to determine conformity to this ordinance and all other ordinances and regulations in force which affect subdivisions. The staff recommendations and review comments are then transmitted to the plan commission within thirty (30) days from the date the plat is filed, or the date that all required documents are supplied to the city by the subdivider. The plan commission shall notify the applicant if the entire application is insufficient or if certain documents are required for the full consideration by the plan commission. Said notice shall be served by certified mail with return receipt requested. If the applicant fails to respond to the request for further information from the plan commission as required above, the plan commission may take whatever required steps are necessary including but not limited to the denial of the application. The preliminary plat becomes null and void within sixty (60) days from the date the plat is filed if the subdivider fails to submit all required documents and materials. 
7.2-3. Disposition of preliminary plat. The plan commission shall, within sixty (60) days of the date of receipt of staff recommendation, but in no event later than ninety (90) days after the filing of a complete application, unless such time is extended by mutual consent, recommend approval, disapproval or approval with modifications of the plat noting thereon any change that will be recommended. The city shall post one (1) or more signs on the property to which the application relates not less than fifteen (15) days prior to the meeting of the plan commission at which said application will be considered; provided, however, that failure to so post the property shall not invalidate any action taken by the city in connection with any application. The number and location of said sign(s) shall be left to the discretion of the community development director. Such sign(s) shall include the following information: 
Public Notice: 
This land is the subject of an application to the City of West Chicago for subdivision approval. For further information, contact the Community Development Director, City of West Chicago, 475 Main Street, West Chicago, Illinois (630) 293-2200, extension 140. 
If the preliminary plat as originally submitted, or as modified, meets the requirements of this ordinance, the plan commission shall refer it, with its recommendation, to the city council for action. The city council shall accept or reject by resolution or ordinance said plat within thirty (30) days after its next regularly scheduled meeting following the action of the plan commission. If the preliminary plat is disapproved, objections to it shall be noted and it shall be returned to the subdivider for modification and resubmission to the plan commission. 
7.3. Final plat. 
7.3-1. Filing of final plat. The subdivider shall file with the city clerk within twelve (12) months of the date of approval of the preliminary plat, unless such twelve-month period is extended by the city council, the final plat and four (4) reproductions thereof which shall conform to the requirements of Article XII of this ordinance. However, the applicant may elect to have final approval of the geographic part or part of the plat that received preliminary approval, and may delay application for final approval of the other parts until a later date or dates beyond one year with the approval and consent of the municipal authorities; provided all required land improvements to serve the part or parts for which final approval is sought have been provided. In such case, only such part or parts of the plat as have received final approval shall be recorded. 
7.3-2. Action of the city council. Upon receipt thereof, the city clerk shall immediately forward the final plat to the plan commission and the city engineer. The plan commission and the city engineer shall examine the final plat and all necessary certificates to determine if there is conformance to the preliminary plat and the requirements established in this ordinance, and shall promptly recommend approval or disapproval of said final plat. The city council shall approve or disapprove said final plat within sixty (60) days from the date of filing of the last required document or other paper or within sixty (60) days from the date of filing application for final approval of the plat, whichever date is later, unless the time is extended by agreement with the subdivider. Failure of the city council to act shall be deemed a denial. After the final plat is approved by the city council, the city clerk shall cause a certified copy of the resolution approving such plat to be attached to the plat and returned to the subdivider. A copy of the resolution and plat shall also be transmitted to the administrative officer, and the city clerk shall promptly record a reproducible copy of the subdivision plat in the office of the recorder of deeds of the applicable county. 
7.4. Subdivision plat lying outside the corporate limits of West Chicago, Illinois, and being within the review jurisdiction of West Chicago. For the subdivision platting of any land lying outside the corporate boundaries of the City of West Chicago, but within one and one-half (1½) miles and not in another municipality thereof, the procedure herein before set forth shall apply except for the following modifications: 
(a)  Approval of preliminary plat. After hearing and recommendation of a subdivision plat by the plan commission, such plat shall be forwarded to the city council for approval or disapproval. 
(b)  Final plat approval. After hearing and recommendation for final plat of subdivision by the plan commission, such plat shall be forwarded to the city council for approval or disapproval. 
(c)  Other required approvals. Any other approval, certificate, review, inspection, bond, or guarantee required herein shall be handled pursuant to DuPage County or Kane County requirements for land subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 3048, §§ 4—9, 12-2-96)  
Article VIII. - General Requirements and Principles 
8.1. Particular attention by the plan commission. In the review of the subdivision plats for recommendation, and in the application of this ordinance, the plan commission shall be alerted to the following considerations: 
8.1-1. Particular attention shall be given to location of streets, lot sizes and locations, as well as the city engineer's report and recommendations. 
8.1-2. Require that all subdivisions conform to the provisions and conditions of the comprehensive plan of the city. Recommended plat approval will be withheld if a subdivision does not conform to the provisions of the comprehensive plan. 
8.1-3. No recommendation for approval shall be forwarded to the city council of any plat of subdivision which does not make adequate provisions for storm water or floodwater runoff channels or basins. 
8-1.4. In all subdivisions, due regard shall be given to the preservation of natural features such as large trees, watercourses, historical and similar features. 
8.1-5. The requirements of section 2-6.1 and section 2-6.2 of this Code, such as parks and playgrounds, schools and recreation sites, and other public uses should be met. 
8.2. Unsuitable land. No land shall be subdivided for residential use which is held, after investigation by the city engineer, to be unsuitable for such use by reason of flooding or bad drainage, adverse earth or rock formation or topography, or any other feature likely to be harmful to the health, safety, or welfare of the future residents in the proposed subdivision or of the community. 
8.3. Dedication of land for public use; general provisions. 
8.3-1. When a final plat of a subdivision has been approved by the City Council of West Chicago, all required approvals are obtained, and the plat is recorded, such approval by the city council shall constitute acceptance for the purpose(s) designated on the plat of all land shown on the plat as dedicated to or reserved for the public use, including street dedications. 
8.3-2. Whenever a preliminary plan includes a proposed dedication of land for public use and the plan commission finds that such land is not required and/or is not suitable for public use, the plan commission may either refuse to approve such dedication in the location shown, or require the rearrangement of lot lines in the proposed subdivision to include such land therein. 
8.3-3. In determining how much land shall be dedicated to public recreation uses as hereinafter set forth, the following land areas shall not be included in such calculations: 
(a)  Any land area zoned for business or industrial development; and 
(b)  Any land area required for development of arterial streets, expressways, freeways, state highways, or any other required public rights-of-way which exceeds eighty (80) feet in width. 
8.4. Dedication and reservation of public areas; specific requirements. 
8.4-1. Specific requirements. Where a proposed park, playground, community center or other recreational site or facility, or police or fire station or library, or any other proposed public use, included in the general development plan of the City of West Chicago, is located in whole or in part in the area being subdivided, the subdivider shall dedicate such land to the city or at its request, to a public agency or agencies as a part of the final subdivision plat. The specific dedication requirements are contained in section 1 and section 2 of Appendix D to these subdivision regulations. 
8.4-2. Cash in lieu of dedication. In subdivisions where no land area requirements for public uses are shown on the comprehensive plan for the City of West Chicago, the subdivider shall dedicate such area as is required and in addition, shall pay to the city treasurer of the City of West Chicago, a sum of money such that, either the dedication or the dedication plus the cash payment in lieu thereof shall meet the requirements of section 1 and section 2 of Appendix D to these subdivision regulations. 
8.4-3. Unsuitable land. Whenever the planning commission finds that land for parks, playgrounds, community centers or other recreational facilities are not required or are not suitable for such recreational facilities, or where the planning commission finds that the area to be subdivided is too small to warrant dedications of land, the planning commission may recommend dedication of land and require cash payments in lieu thereof, in accordance with section 8.4-2, herein. 
8.4-4. Reservation of other public spaces and sites. The following shall apply: 
(1)  Preliminary plan to accommodate planned public spaces. Whenever a tract of land to be subdivided includes a proposed street, highway or parkway, or other public uses as indicated on the comprehensive plan of the City of West Chicago, such space shall be suitably incorporated by the developer into his subdivision plat after proper determination of its necessity by the planning commission and the appropriate city office concerned with the acquisition development and use of each such site. 
(2)  Requirements for adequate open space. 
(a)  School, park and playground sites. Unless appropriate provision for dedication or donation of spaces for public uses has been made by the city council in a previous action, such as in the case of required dedications or of a largescale development involving multiple land uses, any required school, fire station, or other public use sites shall be acquired by the school district or the appropriate city, county or state agency. 
(3)  Acquisition of land for public use. The plan commission shall consider all preliminary plans and adopted or proposed studies related thereto, to determine the need for acquisition for public use of any of the land included in the preliminary plan. Land may be acquired for public school sites, fire station, police stations, parks, playgrounds, municipal public utilities, or other public recreation areas, or other public purposes as provided by law. 
(a)  Referral to public body. The plan commission shall refer the plat to the public body concerned with acquisition for its consideration and report. The plan commission may propose alternate areas for such acquisition and shall allow the public body or agency forty-five (45) days for reply. The agency's recommendation if affirmative, shall include a map showing generally the boundaries and area of the parcel to be acquired and an estimate of the time required to complete the acquisition. 
(b)  Notice to property owner. Upon receipt of an affirmative report from the specific agency, the city administrator shall notify the property owner, and the subdivider shall appropriately indicate on the preliminary plat and final plat the generalized boundary of that area to be acquired by the public body. 
(c)  Duration of land reservation. The acquisition of land reserved by a public agency as shown on the final plat shall be initiated by such agency after approval of the final plat, and after proper notification, in writing, from the property owner that he intends to develop the land. Such letter of intent to develop shall include a general description of the proposed development and the approximate time schedule of construction. Failure on the part of the public agency to initiate acquisition via condemnation proceedings within twelve (12) months shall result in the removal of the "reserved" designation from the property involved and the freeing of the property for immediate development. 
8.5. Vacation of a plat of subdivision. Any plat or any part of a plat may be vacated by the owner of the premises at any time before the sale of any lot therein, by a written instrument, to which a copy of such plat shall be attached, declaring the same to be vacated. Such an instrument shall be approved by the city council in like manner as plats of subdivisions. The city council may reject any such instrument which abridges or destroys any public rights in any of its streets or alleys. Such an instrument shall be executed, acknowledged or approved, and recorded or filed, in the like manner as plats of subdivisions; and being duly recorded, or filed, shall operate to destroy the force and effect of the recording of the plat so vacated, and to divest all public rights in the streets, alleys, and public grounds, and all dedications laid out or described in such plat. When lots have been sold, the plat may be vacated in the manner herein provided by all the owners of lots in such plat joining in the execution of such writing. 
8.6. Subdivisions created by successive divisions. Whenever a parcel of land is subdivided into lots containing one or more acres and there are indications that such lots will eventually be subdivided into smaller building sites, the city council may require that such parcels of land be divided so as to allow for the future opening of streets and the ultimate extensions of adjacent streets. Easements providing for the future opening and extension of such streets may be made a requirement of the plat. 
8.7. Approval of minor subdivision. Notwithstanding the provisions set forth in Sections 8.1 through 8.7 of Article VIII inclusive, a minor subdivision may be permitted upon review and recommendation by the plan commission. 
8.7-1. Procedure. 
(1)  Whenever a subdivision has been approved, in accordance with this ordinance and the owner or owners of any lot or lots contained therein wish to resubdivide said lot or lots the same may be done without complying with Article VII and Article VIII of this ordinance upon the following terms and conditions: The owner or owners of said lot or lots shall submit a petition to the administrative officer substantially in the following form: 
State of Illinois 	) 	
	) 	SS 
City of West Chicago 	) 	
 
Before the Plan Commission of said Municipality 
In the Matter of 	) 
	) 
	)       No. ________ 
	) 
Subdivision 	) 
 
1.  That ___________ is the owner of record of the following described property: 
(Lot or Lots) 
2.  (If there are beneficial owners) That ___________ are the beneficial owners of said property in the following proportion. 
3.  The final plat of said subdivision was recorded in the Recorder of Deeds Office of the County of DuPage on the _____ day of ________ 19___ as Document No. ________. 
4.  That all matters have been performed by your petitioners, or their agents required by this ordinance or by any supplement agreement thereto (including the preannexation agreement). 
5.  That a plat of resubdivision is attached hereto marked "Exhibit A" and has been duly attested by ___________, a registered land surveyor, contains all certifications required by law, is in a condition to record, excepting only for the signatures required by the City. 
6.  That said resubdivision contains no additional public ways, nor are any public ways vacated therein. 
7.  That said resubdivision contains no additional public improvements nor are any public improvements vacated. 
8.  The purpose of said resubdivision is: 
(Verification)       _____________________ 
(Jurat) 
(2)  Upon receiving said petition and all attachments, the said city clerk shall forward the same to the chairman of the plan commission. 
8.7-2. Final disposition. 
(1)  The plan commission shall then find that items 1 through 7 of said petition are true and correct and may hold whatever hearing, subpoena witness or require consultation with persons it deems needed to ascertain this fact. 
(2)  The plan commission shall determine that item 8 is within the purpose, spirit and intention of the original plat of subdivision particularly, both without limitation as to zoning and environmental impact. 
(3)  Upon making a finding of the above, the plan commission shall cause said finding to be made in writing and sign the same. 
(4)  The plan commission shall submit its findings or recommendations to the city council for their review and consideration. 
(Ord. No. 2139, §§ 1, 2, 6-19-89; Ord. No. 3048, § 10, 12-2-96)  
Article IX. - Required Land Improvements. 
9.1.  No subdivision of land shall be approved unless the improvements required herein are complied with and satisfactory assurance of the completion of the improvements is furnished to the City Council of West Chicago by the subdivider. 
9.2.  All sanitary sewers, water mains, storm sewers and their appurtenances shall be built in accordance with the "Standard Specification for Water and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois," (latest edition), published by the Illinois Society of Professional Engineers as amended in addendum A as attached and made a part hereof, and in accordance with chapter 18 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of West Chicago. 
9.3.  The subdivider shall install street and utility improvements, and other improvements indicated on the approved plans as herein provided. The subdivider shall before the recording of his plan, enter into a contract with the City of West Chicago, agreeing to install the required improvements. The subdivider shall meet all requirements of Section 12.6 of the ordinance. Upon completion of the required improvements, guaranteed by the surety, reproducible "as built" engineering drawings of the subdivision shall be submitted prior to acceptance of all work, to the administrative officer, by the developer of the subdivision. The city engineer shall review and approve the "as-built" drawings before the improvements are accepted by the city. "As-built" drawings must conform to the requirements set forth in Chapter 4, Article I, Section 4-1(l)(10)k. 
Governmental units to which these bond and contract provisions apply may file, in lieu of said contract or bond, an intergovernmental agreement signed by officers authorized to act in their behalf, agreeing to comply with the provisions of this article. 
9.3-1. Water supply and distribution. 
(a)  All subdivisions within the corporate limits shall have an interconnected water distribution system supplying all lots with water from the City of West Chicago water system. A subdivision outside corporate limits may be supplied with water from individual wells located on each lot provided that such water supplies are approved by the county health department having jurisdiction over such subdivision. 
(b)  The water distribution system shall be constructed throughout the subdivision in such a manner as to provide each lot with a separate connection. Water mains shall not be less than eight (8) inches in diameter, shall extend to the extremities of streets, alleys or easements which are served by water mains, and shall in each case be looped; that is, arranged to avoid dead ends. The system shall be designed and constructed in conformance with the all applicable rules and regulations of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency. Shut-off valves shall be provided at each branch, at each main connection, at intervals not exceeding six hundred (600) feet on all mains except principal feeders, at intervals not exceeding one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet on all principal feeders, and elsewhere as required to permit adequate sectionization for maintenance purposes. Fire hydrants shall be installed throughout the entire system at intervals not exceeding three hundred (300) feet. A house service connection shall be provided at the center of each lot, extending to the property line, before roadway pavement is constructed. Materials, systems arrangements and details of design shall be subject to the approval of the city council of West Chicago, upon recommendation of city engineer. 
9.3-2. [ Sewer systems. ] 
(a)  All subdivisions within the corporate limits of West Chicago shall have a public system of sanitary sewers serving each lot, connected to the West Chicago wastewater system. A subdivision outside the corporate limits may have sewage disposal facilities on individual lots provided that such sewage disposal facilities are approved by the county health department having jurisdiction over such subdivision. 
(b)  Sewer systems and sewage treatment facilities shall meet the requirements of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency. Sanitary and storm sewers shall not be combined. Sewer mains, with house stubs, shall be installed prior to the construction of the pavement. Service stubs shall be run to the center of each lot and shall extend to the property line. The sewer main shall be extended to the end of the street, alley or easement it is serving. Sanitary sewer mains shall be a minimum of eight (8) inches in diameter. Service stubs for new construction shall be a minimum of six (6) inches in diameter. For maintenance and rehabilitation of existing services and with the approval of the city engineer, provided flow calculations are submitted and approved, service stubs may be sliplined, or repaired by some other equivalent method, with a nominal four (4) inch diameter line. 
(c)  Material system arrangement and details of design shall be subject to approval by the city council, upon recommendation of city engineer. 
9.3-3. Storm water. 
(a)  Storm water management shall be provided for all subdivisions, in accordance with chapter 14, article III of this Code. All street curb and gutter systems shall discharge directly into the storm sewer system, which shall convey the storm water to an approved storm water storage area. 
(b)  Storm sewers shall be designed to carry without surcharge above the crown of the pipe, stormwater runoff deposited by a storm of a ten-year frequency as defined in the Illinois State Water Survey Bulletin 70. Storm sewers shall be designed to carry the ten-year frequency design flow at a minimum velocity of three (3) feet per second and a maximum velocity of ten (10) feet per second. 
(c)  Storm sewers to be maintained by the city shall have not less than three (3) feet of cover over the top of the pipe. Storm sewers to be maintained by private landowners shall not have less than three (3) feet of cover over the top of the pipe, unless this cover is not feasible due to existing conditions. Storm sewers to be maintained by private landowners shall not have less than two (2) feet of cover over the top of the pipe. Inlets shall be placed in the street gutters at all street intersections and elsewhere as required by the terrain, but shall not be spaced more than four hundred (400) feet apart along the gutter. Where curbs and gutters are not required, (Section 9.3-4(a)(6)), adequate culvert pipes shall be provided at all street intersections, driveway approaches and at other locations considered necessary by the city engineer to provide adequate flow of storm water. Materials, sewer and manhole arrangement and details of design of all storm drainage facilities shall be subject to the approval of the City Council of West Chicago, upon recommendation of the city engineer. 
9.3-4. Street improvements. All roadway and sidewalk improvements shall be in accordance with the State of Illinois Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction (latest edition). 
(a)  Roadways. 
(1)  All streets shall be improved with paved roadways to an overall width in accordance with Table No. 1. 
(2)  Roadway design shall comply with Section 7-0000, Structural Pavement Design, of Section 7, Pavement Design, of the design manual published by the Illinois Department of Transportation. The design period of all pavement shall be twenty (20) years. A soil support CBR value of two and one-half (2½) may be assumed. Higher CBR values must be verified by laboratory analysis. Residential traffic volumes may be computed by assuming twelve (12) trips per dwelling unit per day. 
(3)  Rigid pavement design. 
a.  Standard for design. Rigid pavements shall be designed in accordance with the latest revision of Section 7-100, Structural Design of Rigid Pavements, of Section 7, Pavement Design, of the manual published by the Illinois Department of Transportation. 
b.  Typical rigid pavement. 
Class of 
street 	A D T 	Minimum 
thickness 
(in inches) 
IV 	Under 750 	6 
III 	750 to 2,000 	7 
II 	Over 2,000 	
 
All rigid pavements shall be constructed with standard reinforcement and placed on a 4-inch granular base. 
(4)  Flexible pavement design. 
a.  Standard for design: Flexible pavements shall be designed in accordance with the latest revision of the Manual of Instructions for Structural Design of Bituminous Pavements on Project Involving MFT, FAS, FAUS and Topics Funds, as published by the Illinois Department of Transportation with the following exceptions: 
1.  Bituminous surface treatments shall not be allowed. 
2.  Minimum allowable structural numbers (Dt) allowed are: 
i.  Collector and minor streets, residential ..... 3.0 
ii.  Collector and minor streets, commercial and industrial ..... 4.0 
iii.  Collector and minor streets, Class II truck routes ..... 5.0 
b.  Typical flexible pavement. 
1.  Collector and minor streets, residential 3-inch Class I surface on 5-inch BAM, minimum Marshall stability ..... 1,700 
2.  Collector and minor streets, commercial and industrial, 4-inch Class I surface on 9-inch BAM, minimum Marshall stability ..... 1,700 
3.  Collector and minor streets, Class II truck route, 4-inch Class I surface on 12-inch BAM, minimum Marshall stability ..... 1,700 
4.  The pavement cross section shall meet the structural number by use of a stabilized base. Nonstabilized granular base is not allowed. 
(5)  The roadways of all major thoroughfares shall be constructed in accordance with the appropriate authorities' requirements. 
(6)  Curbs and gutters are required on all streets within the corporate limits of West Chicago and shall be constructed of Portland cement concrete of a design equal to State of Illinois Standard #2130-4, B-6-12 and shall be continuously reinforced with two (2) #4 reinforcing bars. On streets not within the corporate limits of West Chicago, the curb and gutter shall be of such material and design as is acceptable to the county officials. 
(7)  All curb corners shall have a radius of not less than twenty-five (25) feet in residential areas and forty (40) feet in commercial and industrial areas. 
(8)  A paved driveway approach between curb and sidewalks, or between curb and lot line, shall be provided at each lot before an occupancy permit is issued. Approaches shall be constructed as specified in section 154 of the City Code. 
(9)  Subgrade. Existing underlying soils upon which a roadway is to be constructed shall be of stable quality and of sufficient bearing capacity to properly support and distribute the loads placed thereon. Unstable material shall be removed and replaced with a crushed stone or gravel, meeting Illinois Department of Transportation requirements for CA-6 or stabilized by another method acceptable to the city engineer. 
(b)  Sidewalks. 
(1)  Sidewalks shall be provided along both sides of all major thoroughfares, collector streets, minor streets and cul-de-sacs in all subdivisions. The city council may, sua sponte or upon application of the subdivider, in its discretion, require or approve alternative path systems, such as bike paths, as a condition to the approval of any subdivision. 
(2)  Sidewalks shall be of Portland cement concrete not less than five (5) inches thick and not less than four (4) feet wide on minor streets and five (5) feet wide on collector streets and built in accordance with the requirements of section 15-4 of this Code. 
9.3-5. Street lighting. In all subdivisions within the corporate limits of West Chicago, street lighting shall be provided throughout the subdivision by the subdivider. Streetlight standards shall be served by underground wiring with connections to a power supply of the Commonwealth Edison Company. All streetlight installations shall be in accordance with the requirements of section 4-70 of this Code. 
9.3-6. Street trees. Trees shall be planted on both sides of all roadways. Trees shall have a trunk diameter, measured twelve (12) inches above the ground, of not less than two and one-half (2½) inches. All street trees shall be in accordance with the requirements of section 15-5 of this Code. 
9.3-7. Street names and signs. Street signs are to be placed at all intersections within or abutting the subdivision. The type and location shall be approved by the city engineer. No street names shall be used which will duplicate or be confused with the names of existing streets. New streets, which are extensions of or obviously in alignment with existing streets, shall bear the name of the existing streets. Street names shall be subject to the approval of the city council. 
9.3-8. Grading. The area subdivided shall have necessary grading completed at the final elevation shown on the grading plan. All land shall be at the proposed grade plus or minus 0.1 foot unless the area in question is specifically designed for that purpose. All grading must comply with requirements for erosion and sedimentation control found in section 14-50 of this Code. 
9.3-9. Monuments. The subdivider shall place permanent reference monuments in the subdivision as required herein. The external boundaries of a subdivision shall be monumented in the field by monuments of stone or concrete, not less than thirty (30) inches in length, not less than four (4) inches square or five (5) inches in diameter, and marked on top with a cross, brass plug, iron rod, or other durable material securely embedded; or by iron rods or pipes at least thirty (30) inches long and two (2) inches in diameter. These monuments shall be placed not more than one thousand four hundred (1,400) feet apart in any straight line, at all subdivision corners, at each end of all curves, at the point where a curve changes its radius, at all angle points to be not less than twenty (20) feet back from the bank of any river or stream, except that when such corners or points fall within a street, or proposed future street, the monuments shall be placed in the sideline of the street so referenced. All internal boundaries and those corners and points not referred to in the preceding paragraph shall be monumented in the field by iron rods or pipes at least thirty (30) inches long and two (2) inches in diameter. These monuments shall be placed at all block corners, at each end of all curves, at a point where a curve changes its radius, and at all angle points in any line. All lot corners shall be monumented in the field by iron pipes at least twenty-four (24) inches long and one inch in diameter, or by round or square iron bars at least twenty-four (24) inches long. The lines or lot that extend to rivers or streams shall be monumented in the field by iron pipes at least thirty (30) inches long and one inch in diameter, or by round or square iron bars at least thirty (30) inches long. These monuments shall be placed at the point of intersection of the river or stream lot line, with a meander line established not less than twenty (20) feet back from the bank of the river or stream. All monuments shall be properly set in the ground by a registered Illinois land surveyor before final plat approval. All monuments shall be set flush with the ground and planted in such a manner that they will not be changed by frost. 
9.3-10. Other improvements. All utilities and service facilities shall be placed underground. All underground work such as sewers, water and gas mains, service connections and any underground conduits for cable television, electric and telephone lines shalt be installed and approved prior to the construction of the street pavement. The surface course on bituminous pavement and concrete pavement shall not be constructed until the backfilling of all trenches dug for the installation of the aforementioned utility services have completely settled, or compacted, to the satisfaction of the city engineer. 
9.3-11. Landscaping. Topsoil shall not be removed from residential lots and used as spoil, but shall be stockpiled and then redistributed so as to provide at least six (6) inches of cover on the lots between sidewalks and curbs, and shall be stabilized by seeding or sodding. All landscaping shall be in accordance with Chapter 14, Article IX, of this Code. 
9.4. Municipal service and emergency access easements. 
(a)  Easements shown on plats for municipal access purposes shall be restricted to use for municipal utility and emergency services, unless such easements are also co-existent with roadways designated on the plat as private roads or drives. No such easement, whether or not also co-existent with private road or drive, shall be, or shall be deemed or regarded as, a public right-of-way for any purpose. For residential subdivisions only, where there is a failure or absence of maintenance of such easement by the developer, homeowners' association, or other person responsible therefor, the city may, but is not obligated to, undertake maintenance of such easement in such a manner as it deems in its sole discretion appropriate for the purposes of assuring access to the subdivision for municipal utility and emergency services. Such maintenance may include plowing, salting, patching and repairing the easement surface; removal of brush and fallen trees or tree limbs obstructing passage; and the cleaning and repairing of any lighting as the city determines necessary and appropriate to allow for the easement's usage by municipal service and emergency vehicles. 
(b)  No vehicle shall be parked or allowed to remain on any portion of a private roadway that is co-extensive with a municipal access easement on which snow has accumulated to a depth of two (2) inches or greater. The city may cause any vehicle parked or allowed to remain on such private roadway in violation of this prohibition to be removed to the nearest garage or other place of safety by means of towing. All expenses and charges incurred by reason of the towing of such vehicle and the storing of it because of towing shall be paid by the owner of the vehicle or other person legally entitled to possession thereof, and no vehicle against which there are any unpaid costs or charges under these provisions shall be released to the owner or other person legally entitled to possession thereof until all such charges and costs have been paid and fully satisfied. Notice and opportunity for hearing shall be given to the owner or other person legally entitled to possession in accordance with the city's administrative hearing procedures. The provisions of this subsection are not to be construed as being in lieu of any penalty or penalties provided for elsewhere in this code or in any other ordinances for violation of the provisions of any ordinance, including this section, but are in addition thereto and are necessary for the maintenance of obstructed access for municipal service and emergency purposes. 
(c)  Regardless of whether the easement is co-existent with a private roadway, neither this section nor the city's undertaking maintenance of a municipal access easement shall create any duty on the part of the city or its agents or contractors with respect to any easement or private roadway user or subdivision property owner or any person claiming through them, and no cause of action shall lie against the city or its agents or contractors on account of any act of maintenance or alleged omission of such act by the city under this section. 
(d)  Where a municipal access easement is co-extensive with a private roadway, nothing in this section shall be deemed to preclude persons responsible for maintaining the roadway, such as a developer, homeowners' association, or property owners with user rights to it, from undertaking maintenance of it, provided such complies with applicable city ordinances and regulations and does not interfere with the municipal access easement. 
(e)  This section shall apply to municipal access easements in existence at the time of its effective date as well as prospectively. 
(Ord. No. 2030, § 1, 7-5-88; Ord. No. 3048, §§ 11—23, 12-2-96; Ord. No. 03-O-0022, § 1, 3-17-2003; Ord. No. 05-O-0013, §§ 1—3, 3-21-2005; Ord. No. 10-O-0039, § 4, 4-19-10; Ord. No. 14-O-0006, § 2, 2-17-2014)  
Article X. - Design Standards. 
10.1.  Conformance to applicable laws, ordinances, codes, rules and regulations. The provisions of this ordinance shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, morals and welfare. Where the standards and/or conditions imposed by any provision of this ordinance are either more restrictive or less restrictive than comparable conditions imposed by any other provisions of this Code or any other law, ordinance, code, rule or regulation of any kind, the conditions which are the most restrictive or impose the higher standards or requirements shall govern. 
10.2.  Streets. 
10.2-1. General considerations. Streets shall be designed and located in relation to existing and planned streets, to topographical conditions and natural terrain features such as streams and existing tree growth, to public convenience and safety, and in appropriate relation to the proposed uses of land to be served by such streets. 
10.2-2. Arrangement. 
(a)  All streets shall be properly integrated with the existing and proposed system of thoroughfares and dedicated rights-of-way as established in the comprehensive plan. 
(b)  All thoroughfares shall be properly related to special traffic generators such as industries, business districts, schools, churches, and shopping centers; to population densities; and to the pattern of existing and proposed land uses. 
(c)  Minor streets shall be laid out to conform as much as possible to the topography, to discourage use by through traffic, to permit efficient drainage and utility systems, and to require the minimum number of streets necessary to provide convenient, safe access to property. 
(d)  The rigid rectangular gridiron street pattern need not necessarily be adhered to, and the use of curvilinear streets, culs-de-sac, or U-shaped streets shall be encouraged where such use will result in more desirable layout. 
(e)  Proposed streets shall be extended to the boundary lines of the tract to be subdivided, unless prevented by topography or other physical conditions, or unless in the opinion of the plan commission such extension is not necessary or desirable for the coordination of the layout of the subdivision with the existing layout or most advantageous future development of adjacent tracts. 
(f)  In business and industrial developments, the streets and other accessways shall be planned in connection with the grouping of buildings, location of rail facilities, and the provision of alleys, truck loading and maneuvering areas so as to minimize conflict of movement between the various types of traffic. 
10.2-3. Railroads and highways. Railroad rights-of-way and limited access highways where so located as to affect the subdivision of adjoining lands shall be as follows: 
(a)  In residential districts a buffer strip at least twenty-five (25) feet in depth, in addition to the normal depth of the lot required in the district, shall be provided adjacent to the railroad right-of-way or limited access highway. This strip shall be part of the platted lots and shall be designated on the plat: "This strip is reserved for the planting of trees and shrubs by the owner. The placement of structures hereon is prohibited." (See Figure 1 of Appendix A). 
(b)  In districts zoned for business, commercial, or industrial uses, the nearest street extending parallel or approximately parallel to the railroad shall, wherever practicable, be at a sufficient distance therefrom to ensure suitable depth for commercial or industrial sites. 
(c)  Streets parallel to the railroad when intersecting a street which crosses the railroad at grade shall, to the extent practicable, be at a distance of at least one hundred fifty (150) feet from the railroad right-of-way. Such distance shall be determined with due consideration of the minimum distance required for future separation of grades by means of appropriate approach gradients. 
10.24. Access to major streets. Where a subdivision borders on or contains an existing or proposed major street, the city council may require that access to such streets be limited by one of the following means: 
(a)  The subdivision of lots so as to back onto the major street and front onto a parallel local street; no access shall be provided from the major street and screen planting shall be provided in a strip of land along the rear property line of such lots. 
(b)  A series of culs-de-sac, U-shaped streets, or short loops entered from and designed generally at right angles to such a parallel street, with the rear lines of their terminal lots backing onto the major street. 
(c)  A marginal access or service street shall be separated from the major street by a planting or grass strip and having access thereto at suitable points. The number of residential streets entering a major street shall be kept to a minimum. 
10.2-5. Minor and collector street standards. The following minimum standards shall apply to the design of minor residential streets, including marginal access streets which shall be in accordance with Table No. 1: 
Table No. 1 
	     Pavement Width      
Type of Street 	Right-of- 
Way 
Width 	Residential 
Lots 	Industrial 
or 
Business 
Subdivisions 	Type of Sidewalk 
Curb       Width 	Horizontal 
Alignment 
(Minimum Sight 
Distance, 
Feet) 	Minimum 
Center 
Line 
Radius 
(Feet) 	Design 
Speed 
(MPH) 
Major thoroughfares 	According to state and county requirements 
Collector street 	80 	40 	40 	Vertical 	5 	250 	350 	35 
Minor street 	66 	30 	36 	Vertical 	4 	200 	250 	30 
Cul-de-sac street 	66 	30 	40 	Vertical 	4 	200 	250 	30 
Frontage road 	40 	26 	36 	Vertical 	4 	200 	250 	30 
 
Notes: 
(1)  Sidewalks shall be located with the outer edge one foot inside of the right-of-way line unless otherwise approved by the city engineer. 
(2)  Cul-de-sac streets' turnaround areas shall have a minimum pavement radius of forty-five (45) feet measured from the center to the back of the curb or outer edge of roadway pavement. 
(3)  Pavement width shall be measured from the back of curb to back of curb. 
10.2-6. Private streets. The city council may, in its discretion, approve the construction, maintenance and use of private streets within subdivisions, and may allow access to lots therein by means of such private streets. The following standards shall apply to the construction, maintenance and use of private streets within the city: 
(a)  All private streets shall conform to all requirements provided under this Code for public streets. 
(b)  No private street, or interconnected system of private streets, shall intersect with more than one (1) public street. 
(c)  All private streets shall feature street signs substantially similar in size, lettering and placement to the street signs for public streets within the city. 
(d)  The subdivider of any subdivision featuring one (1) or more private streets shall provide a performance guarantee to the city for the completion of the private streets and associated improvements, in the same manner as provided under this ordinance for the performance guarantee for the completion of construction of the public improvements for a subdivision. 
(e)  The subdivider shall record a declaration of covenants, conditions and restrictions with respect to the subdivision, in a form acceptable to the city, which includes: 
(1)  The establishment of a subdivision owners' association which shall: 
a.  Hold title to the private streets and be obligated to maintain the private streets. 
b.  Have the right and obligation to impose assessments against the lots within the subdivision for the purpose of maintaining the private streets. 
c.  Have the right and obligation to file a written request with the city pursuant to 625 ILCS 5/11-209.1, for traffic regulation enforcement by the city upon the private streets. 
d.  Have the right to dedicate the private street to the city. 
(2)  The grant of an easement in, under, over and upon the private streets to the city for purposes of ingress and egress, and to repair, replace, maintain and/or install public improvements, and to all providers of public, or quasi-public, services such as cable television, refuse collection and recycling services for the purposes of ingress and egress. 
(3)  The grant to the city of the right, but not the obligation, to enter upon the private streets and repair, replace and/or maintain the private streets, and to place a lien upon each and every lot within the subdivision for the costs and expenses incurred by the city in the performance of such work. 
(4)  The prohibition on any amendment to such declaration which affects the provisions required under this section, without the written consent of the city. 
10.2-7. Street grading. The grade of major thoroughfares shall not exceed three (3) percent. The grade of all other streets shall not exceed five (5) percent unless the city engineer finds a topographical situation that requires a steeper grade. The minimum grade of all streets shall be five-tenths of one (1) percent. The grades of pedestrianways or crosswalks shall not exceed eight (8) percent. 
10.2-8. Vertical curves. All changes in street grades shall be connected by vertical curves of a minimum length in feet equivalent to the algebraic difference in the percent of grade times a K factor; such K factor to be derived as follows: 
	K factor 
Design speed 	Crest curve 	Sag curve 
30 	30 	35 
35 	45 	45 
 
No vertical curves shall be required on minor streets or collector streets where the algebraic difference in percent of grade is less than one (1) percent. 
10.2-9. Tangents. A tangent at least one hundred (100) feet in length shall be introduced between reverse curves on minor streets and cul-de-sacs with a tangent of two hundred (200) feet on collector streets. 
10.2-10. Cul-de-sac. 
(a)  A cul-de-sac street shall not exceed one thousand (1,000) feet in length. 
(b)  The diameter of a cul-de-sac turnaround, measured at the outside right-of-way, shall be not less than one hundred twenty (120) feet. Pavement diameter of a cul-de-sac turnaround shall be not less than ninety (90) feet. 
10.2-11. Street intersections. 
(a)  Streets shall be designed to intersect approximately at right angles. A proposed intersection of two (2) new streets at an angle of less than seventy-five (75) degrees shall not be acceptable. Not more than two (2) streets shall intersect at any one point unless approved by the city council. (See Figure 2 of Appendix A). 
(b)  Proposed new intersections along one side of an existing street shall whenever practicable coincide with any existing intersections on the opposite side of an existing street shall whenever practicable coincide with any existing intersections on the opposite side of such street. Street jogs with center line offsets of less than one hundred fifty (150) feet shall not be permitted. Where streets intersect major streets, their alignment shall be continuous as in Figure 3, page 71, Appendix A. 
(c)  Minimum curb radius at the intersection of any two (2) local streets shall be at least twenty-five (25) feet. Alley intersections and abrupt changes in alignment within a block shall have the corners cut off in accordance with standard engineering practice, to permit safe vehicular movement. 
(d)  Intersections shall be designed with a flat grade wherever practical. In hilly or rolling areas, at the approach to an intersection, a leveling area shall be provided having a grade of not greater than two (2) percent for a distance of sixty (60) feet, measured from the nearest right-of-way line of the intersection street. (See Figure 4 of Appendix A). 
(e)  Where there are earth banks or existing vegetation inside a corner lot that could create a traffic hazard by limiting visibility, the developer shall cut such ground or vegetation including trees in the grading of the public right-of-way to the extent necessary to provide adequate visibility. 
10.3.  Easements. 
10.3-1. Easements across lots or on the rear or side lot-lines shall be provided for utilities private and municipal where required by the city council. Such easements shall be at least twenty (20) feet wide. The public utility easement shall be established by coordination between developer and utility. (See Figure 5 of Appendix A.) 
10.3-2. Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainage swales, channels, or stream, there shall be provided a storm water easement or drainage right-of-way conforming substantially to the boundaries of such watercourse drainage swale, channel or stream. Wherever possible, it is desirable that the drainage shall be maintained by an open channel, with landscaped banks, adequate for maximum potential volume of flow. 
10.4.  Blocks 
10.4-1. Residential blocks. 
(a)  Blocks shall have sufficient width to provide for two (2) tiers of lots of appropriate depths. Exceptions shall be permitted in blocks adjacent to major streets, railroads, or waterways. 
(b)  The lengths, widths, and shapes of blocks shall be such as are appropriate for the locality and the type of development contemplated. Block in residential areas shall not be more than two thousand (2,000) feet nor less than four hundred (400) feet in length. Wherever practicable, blocks along major arterials and collector streets shall not be less than one thousand (1,000) feet in length. 
(c)  Pedestrianways or crosswalks, not less than ten (10) feet wide, may be required by the city council through the center of blocks more than eight hundred (800) feet long where deemed essential to provide circulations or access to schools, playgrounds, shopping centers, transportation or other community facilities. 
10.5.  Lots. 
10.5-1. In general, the size, shape and orientation of lots shall be appropriate for the location of the subdivision and for the tee of development and use contemplated. Lot dimensions shall conform to the requirements of the City of West Chicago Zoning Ordinance. 
10.5-2. Depth and width of properties reserved or laid out for business commercial, or industrial purposes, shall be adequate to provide for off-street parking and loading facilities required for the type of use and development set forth in the City of West Chicago Zoning Ordinance. 
10.5-3. Where residential lots fronting on major streets or highways are permitted by the city council, they should be platted with extra depth to permit generous distances between the buildings and such. Where lots front on major streets, the normal building setback line shall be increased by an additional twenty (20) feet. Business commercial, or industrial buildings in residential blocks shall be provided with setbacks at least equal to the setback of the residential properties in that block and shall comply with all applicable zoning requirements. 
10.5-4. Every lot shall front on or abut a public street unless access by private ways is approved by the city council. 
10.5-5. Lots shall be laid out so as to provide drainage away from all buildings, and individual lot drainage shall be coordinated with the general storm drainage pattern for the area. Drainage shall be designed to avoid concentration of storm drainage water on adjacent lots. On all buildings, the first floor shall be set eighteen (18) inches above the top of the curb or the lowest point of the adjacent roadway. 
10.5-6. Side lot lines shall be approximately at right angles or radial to street lines. 
10.5-7. Corner lots for residential use shall have extra width to permit appropriate building setback from both streets. 
10.5-8. Lot lines shall follow municipal boundary lines whenever practicable, rather than cross them. 
10.5-9. Double frontage lots shall be avoided except where necessary to provide separation of residential development from traffic arteries, or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation. 
10.5-10. Flag (reserve) lots shall be prohibited unless approved by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2030, § 2, 7-5-88; Ord. No. 3048, §§ 24—28, 12-2-96; Ord. No. 05-O-0067, § 17, 9-19-2005)  
Article XI. - Preliminary Plats. 
Every proposed subdivision shall be, submitted to the West Chicago Plan Commission for preliminary plat approval prior to the submission of a final plat. The preliminary plat is not intended to be a final plat and must be prepared in such form as not to be confused with a final plat. Its purpose is to show graphically all facts needed to enable the plan commission and other public bodies to determine whether the proposed layout of the land in question is satisfactory from the standpoint of the public interest. The preliminary plat shall be prepared by a qualified professional, trained and experienced in the layout of subdivisions. The following graphic and descriptive items are normally required to be shown on the preliminary plat and that accompanying application for approval. The lack of information under any item specified herein, or improper information supplied by the applicant, may be cause for disapproval of a preliminary plat. 
11.1. Application for approval. Written application by the owner, or his agent, for approval on forms furnished by the City of West Chicago shall accompany each preliminary plat and contain the following information: 
11.1-1. Name for file identification. 
(a)  Name of subdivision if property is within an existing subdivision. 
(b)  Proposed name if not within a previously platted subdivision. The proposed name shall not duplicate the name of any plat previously recorded in DuPage County or Kane County. 
(c)  Name of property if no subdivision name has been chosen. This is commonly the name by which the property is locally known. 
11.1-2. Location and description of property. Location of property by government lot, section, township, range and county. 
11.1-3. Basic facts and proposals pertaining to the property. 
(a)  Size of tract in acres or of existing lots, if any, in square feet. 
(b)  Existing zoning classification of property and any rezoning proposed to be requested. 
(c)  Number of lots proposed in the subdivision. 
(d)  Area of lots proposed, showing minimum, average, and maximum. 
(e)  Proposed type of water and sewer facilities. 
(f)  Any other proposals, such as parcels of land intended to be dedicated, conveyed, or reserved for public use, and the conditions proposed for such disposal and use. 
11.14. Information as to ownership, preparation of plan, and submission thereof. 
(a)  Name and address, including telephone number, of owner of record and the agent, if any, of the property and a citation of the last instrument conveying title to each parcel of property involved in the proposed subdivision, giving grantor, grantee, date and land records reference. 
(b)  Citation of any existing legal rights-of-way or easements affecting the property. 
(c)  Existing covenants on the property, if any. 
(d)  Name and address, including telephone number, of the professional responsible for the subdivision design shall be shown on the preliminary plat as submitted. The registered professional engineer of Illinois responsible for the design of public improvements, and registered Illinois land surveyor responsible for surveys shall be shown on said plat. 
11.2. The drawing. The preliminary plat shall be drawn with waterproof nonfading black ink or legibly drawn with pencil on tracing cloth or tracing paper of good quality at a scale of not more than one hundred (100) feet to the inch, and shall show correctly on its face the following information: 
(a)  Date, scale, and north point. 
(b)  The proposed subdivision name must be the same as that specified in the application. 
(c)  The name and address of the owner, the subdivider, and the surveyor preparing the plat. 
(d)  Location of the subdivision by government lot, quarter section, section, township, range and county. 
(e)  A vicinity sketch or small scale drawing of the section or area within which the subdivision lies, with the location of the subdivision indicated thereon. 
(f)  The exact length and bearing of the exterior boundaries of the subdivision. Dimensions shall be expressed in feet and decimals of a foot. 
(g)  Location and names of adjacent subdivisions and the owners of adjoining parcels of unsubdivided land. 
(h)  Zoning on and adjacent to the subdivision. 
(i)  Location, width, and names of all existing and platted streets, alleys, and other public ways and easements, railroad and utility rights-of-way, parks, cemeteries, watercourses, drainage ditches, permanent buildings, bridges and other pertinent data. 
(j)  The water elevations of adjoining lakes or streams at the date of the survey and the approximate high and low water elevations of such lakes or streams. All elevations shall be referred to the United States Geological Survey datum plane. 
(k)  If the subdivision borders a lake, river, or stream, the distances and bearings of a meander line established not less than twenty (20) feet back from the ordinary high water mark of such waterways. 
(l)  Layout and width of all new streets and rights-of-way, including alleys, highways, easements for sewers and water mains and other public utilities. 
(m)  Existing sewers, water mains, culverts, and other underground structures within the tract or immediately adjacent thereto. The location and size of the nearest water main and sanitary and storm sewers are to be indicated in a general way upon the preliminary plat. 
(n)  Plans of proposed utility layouts (water, sewers, and storm drains) showing connection to any existing or proposed utility system. 
(o)  Approximate dimensions and areas of lots. 
(p)  Approximate radii of all curves, length of tangents, and central angles on all streets. 
(q)  Approximate location and area of all property proposed to be dedicated or reserved for public use or to be reserved by deed covenant for use of all property owners in the subdivision, with the conditions if any, of such dedication or reservation. 
(r)  Contours at vertical intervals of not more than two (2) feet. More frequent intervals may be required by the city engineer for land with unusual topography. The topography should extend to all users within three hundred (300) feet of the boundary of the subdivision. 
(s)  Building setback lines.  
Article XII. - Final Plats. 
12.1.  Final plat may constitute a portion of the approved preliminary plat. A final plat may constitute only a portion of the area contained in approved preliminary plat provided that the public improvements to be constructed in the area covered by the plat are sufficient by and of themselves to accomplish a proper development and to provide adequately for the health, safety and convenience of the proposed residents therein and for adequate access to contiguous areas. 
12.2.  Application for approval. Written application by the owner or his agent for approval on forms furnished by the City of West Chicago shall accompany each final plat and shall contain the following information: 
(a)  Name of subdivision and description of blocks and lots included plat. 
(b)  Location of subdivision by government lot, section, township, range and county. 
(c)  Name, date of approval, and file number of the preliminary plat upon which the final plat is based. 
(d)  Zoning classification of the property. 
(e)  Total numbers of lots and/or parcels included on the plat. 
(f)  Total area shown on the plat, including streets, and total area dedicated to public use, if any. 
(g)  Existing or proposed covenants, if any. Reference shall be made to any private restrictions, and plats shall contain proper acknowledgements of owners and mortgages accepting said platting and restrictions. 
(h)  Name and address, including telephone number, of the owner, his agent and the surveyor who prepared the plat. 
(i)  Submission to the city engineer and approval by him of final engineering plans and specifications for all water systems, sanitary sewage disposal systems and all storm drainage facilities, showing connection to any existing or proposed utility system, detention basins, streetlights and landscaping plans. 
(j)  Final engineering drawings showing street profile plans for all existing and proposed streets, containing all information required by the city engineer. 
12.3.  The drawing. The final plat shall be drawn with waterproof nonfading black ink, at a scale of not more than one hundred (100) feet to the inch, on muslinbacked white paper of four (4) mil transparent Mylar, twenty-nine (29) inches wide by twenty-nine (29) inches long. When more than one sheet is used for any plat, each sheet shall be numbered consecutively and shall contain a notation giving the total number of sheets in the plat and showing the relation of that sheet to the other sheets, and each sheet shall bear the name of the subdivision. Each plat shall show correctly on its face the following information: 
12.3-1. Map and engineering information. 
(a)  Date, scale and north point. 
(b)  The exterior boundaries of the land surveyed and divided. 
(c)  All monuments erected, corners and other points established in the field in their proper places. The material of which the monuments, corners or other points are made shall be noted at the representation thereof or by legend, except that lot corners need not be shown. The legend for metal monuments shall indicate the kind of metal, the diameter, length, and weight per lineal foot of the monument. 
(d)  The exact length and bearing of the exterior boundaries, the boundary lines of all blocks, public grounds, streets and alleys, and all lot lines, except that when the lines in any tier of lots are parallel, it shall be sufficient to mark the bearings of the outer lines on one tier thereof. Easements shall be shown by center line and width when lines are parallel to a boundary, otherwise boundary bearings and distances shall be shown. Where the exterior boundary lines show bearings or lengths which vary from those recorded in abutting plats or certified surveys, the recording bearing, or length, or both, shall be shown. 
(e)  Blocks, if designated, shall be consecutively numbered. Additions to subdivisions bearing the same name shall be numbered or lettered consecutively through the several additions. 
(f)  All lots in each block consecutively numbered. Outlots shall be lettered in alphabetical order. If blocks are numbered and lettered, outlots shall be lettered in alphabetical order within each block. 
(g)  The exact width of all easements and streets. 
(h)  All lake or stream shore meander lines established by the surveyor in accordance with Section 7.24(f) of this ordinance, the distances and bearings thereof, and the distance between the point of intersection of such meander lines with lot lines and the ordinary high-water mark. 
(i)  The center line of all streets. 
(j)  The number of degrees and minutes in all exterior boundary and block angles. When such angles are between a curve and its tangent, the angle shown shall be that between the tangent and the main chord of the curve; when between curves of different radii, the angle between the main chords. 
(k)  When a street is on a circular curve, there shall be noted their bearings and lengths, the radius of the circle of which a part, the central angle subtended and the tangent bearing at either the point of curve or point of tangency. 
(l)  When strict compliance with a provision of this section will entail undue or unnecessary difficulty or tend to render the plat more difficult to read, and when the information on the plat is sufficient for the exact retracement of the measurement and bearings or other unnecessary dimensions, the City Council of the City of West Chicago, upon the recommendations of the city engineer, may waive such strict compliance. 
12.3-2. Name, location and position. The name of the subdivision shall be printed on the plat in prominent letters, and the following information relating to the position and location of the subdivision shall be shown thereon: 
(a)  The location of the subdivision by township, section, town and range, or other legal description, and the county permanent index number (P.I.N.) for each parcel being subdivided. 
(b)  The exact location of the subdivision, indicated by distances and bearings with reference to a corner or corners established in the U.S. Public Land Survey. 
(c)  A small drawing of the section, or governmental subdivision of the section, in which the subdivision lies, with the location of the subdivision indicated thereon. This drawing shall be oriented on the sheet in the same direction as the main drawing. 
(d)  Where provision is made for access to any lake or stream, the plat shall show the area over which access is provided to the lake or stream together with a small scale drawing clearly indicating the location of the subdivision in relation to the lake or stream and the location of the area over which access is provided. 
(e)  The names of adjoining streets, state highways, and subdivisions shown in their proper location underscored by a dotted line. 
(f)  Abutting street and state highway lines of adjoining plats shown in their proper location by dotted lines. The width of these streets and highways shall be given also. 
12.3-3. Roads and public spaces. 
(a)  The name of each road or street in the plat shall be printed thereon in prominent letters. 
(b)  All lands dedicated to public use except roads and streets shall be clearly marked "Dedicated to the City of West Chicago." 
(c)  Each lot within the plat must abut a public street except where approval has been granted under section 10.5-5 of this ordinance. 
12.3-4. Site conditions and topography. 
(a)  All existing buildings. 
(b)  All watercourses, drainage ditches, and other existing features pertinent to proper subdivision. 
(c)  The water elevations of adjoining lakes, rivers, or streams at the date of the survey and the approximate high and low water elevations of such lakes, rivers, and streams. All elevations shall be referred to the U.S.G.S. datum plane. 
(d)  No plat shall be approved by the city council unless, in addition to any other requirements of the city council, the topographical and profile studies pertaining to the subdivision plat have on their face the certification of a registered professional engineer. The topographical and profile studies required herein shall not be recorded, but shall be retained and filed by the City of West Chicago as permanent public documents. 
12.4.  Recording of final plat. To entitle a final plat to be entered in the proper record books in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of DuPage County or Kane County, the following certificates together with the certificate of approval of the city council shall accompany it. These certificates shall be lettered or printed legibly with black durable ink, or typed. 
12.4-1. Acknowledgement. The following shall be submitted with each plat: 
(a)  A correct description of the land or parcel of land to be subdivided. 
(b)  A notarized statement to the effect that the subdivision as it appears on the plat is with the free consent and in accordance with the desire of the owner and spouse, if applicable, acknowledging the adoption of the plat and the dedication of streets and other public areas, and granting a release of mortgage on such as are dedicated for public use. 
12.4-2. Certificate for surveyor. The final plat shall be accompanied by a certificate from a registered Illinois land surveyor, attesting to the fact that the plat represents a survey made by him and that monuments and markers shown thereon exist as located and that all dimensional and geodetic details are correct, and that he has complied with all the rules contained herein governing plats, and noting exception, if any. Surveyor also must certify that the subdivision is or is not within five hundred (500) feet of a watercourse draining six hundred forty (640) acres or more. 
12.4-3. County clerk's certificate. The final plat shall be accompanied by a certificate from the county clerk, attesting to the fact that all taxes are paid for the current year and all prior years, or that the required statutory security has been deposited in the office of the county clerk, guaranteeing payment thereof. (See Appendix B for sample certificate.) 
12.4-4. Engineer's certificate. To the best of our knowledge and belief the drainage of surface waters will not be changed by the construction of such subdivision or any part thereof, or, that if such surface water drainage will be changed, adequate provision has been made for collection and diversion of such surface waters into public areas, or drains which the subdivider has a right to use, and that such surface waters will not be deposited on the property of adjoining land owners in such concentration as may cause damage to the adjoining property because of the construction of the subdivision. 
Dated this _____ day of ________, 19___. 
_____	_____
Engineer 	Owner or Attorney 
 
12.4-5. Planning commission certificate. The final plat shall contain a statement that the City of West Chicago Plan Commission has recommended approval of the final plat, which statement shall be signed by the chairman and attested to by the secretary. 
12.4-6. Certificate as to special assessments. 
STATE OF ILLINOIS 
COUNTY OF DUPAGE 
I, ___________, Collector of the City of West Chicago, do hereby certify that there are no delinquent or unpaid current or forfeited special assessments or any deferred installments thereof that have been apportioned against the tract of land included in the plat. 
Dated at West Chicago, DuPage County, Illinois, this _____ day of ________ A.D., 19___. 
_____
City Collector 
12.5.  Record of plats. All of such plats of subdivisions, after the same have been submitted and approved, as provided in this ordinance, shall be filed and kept by the city clerk among the records of the City of West Chicago. 
12.6.  Filing requirements of final plat. The final plat shall be accompanied by a statement signed by the owner or subdivider setting forth: 
(1)  The plans and specifications for the required public improvements have been completed and such plans approved by the city engineer. 
(2)  The required public improvements will be installed in accordance with such plans and specifications. 
(3)  Cash, certified checks, or irrevocable letters of credit, in a form acceptable to the corporation counsel, have been deposited with the city, in an amount equal to one hundred twenty-five (125) percent of the cost, as estimated by a registered professional engineer on behalf of the subdivider and approved by the city engineer, of the completion of all required public improvements. 
(4)  Guarantee deposit. In addition to the security to be provided for in paragraph (3) above, a deposit shall be made to the city in cash, irrevocable letters of credit (in a form approved by the city attorney) or maintenance bond equal to ten (10) percent of the cost of public facility installations. This deposit shall be a guarantee of satisfactory performance of the facilities constructed within the development (subdivision) and shall be held by the city for a period of eighteen (18) months after acceptance of such facilities by the city. After such eighteen (18) months, the deposit shall be refunded if no defects have developed, then the balance of such deposit shall be refunded after reimbursement for amounts expended in correcting any defective facilities. 
(Ord. No. 3048, §§ 30—33, 12-2-96)  
Article XIII. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3048, adopted Dec. 2, 1996, in § 30 renumbered § 13.6 as § 12.5; in §§ 31, 32, amended former § 13.9; in § 33 renumbered former § 13.5 as § 12.6; and in § 34 deleted the remainder of Art. XIII, filing fees and other subdivision conditions, being §§ 13.1—13.5. Former §§ 13.7 and 13.8 had previously been reserved.  
Article XIV. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3048, § 35, adopted Dec. 2, 1996, deleted Art. XIV, Planned unit developments; residential, commercial and industrial. For current provisions pertaining to such subject matter, the user's attention is directed to Art. XV of the zoning ordinance, App. A to this Code.  
Article XV. - Appendices. 
APPENDIX A 
Figure 1. Buffers 
 
Figure 2. Intersections 
 
Figure 3. Intersections 
 
Figure 4. Grades 
 
Figure 5. Easements 
 
APPENDIX B 
Suggested Forms of Certificates 
Certificate of City Clerk: 
I, _______ City Clerk of the City of West Chicago, State of Illinois, hereby certify that I have examined the records of the said City and find that all deferred payments or unmatured installments upon special assessments have been paid in full and that there is no special assessment procedure now pending against the land as shown on the annexed plat of subdivision or resubdivisions. As of this _______ day of _______, 19 ___. 
_____
City Clerk 
City of West Chicago Plan Commission Approval, Form No. 1: 
I, _______, Chairman of the Plan Commission of the City of West Chicago, County of DuPage, State of Illinois, hereby certify that the said Commission has duly recommended approval of the PRELIMINARY PLAT of _______ attached hereto on the _______ day of _______, 19 ___. 
_____
Chairman 
ATTEST: 
___________ 
Secretary 
City of West Chicago Plan Commission Approval, Form No. 2: 
I, _______, Chairman of the Plan Commission of the City of West Chicago, County of DuPage, State of Illinois, hereby certify that the said Commission has duly recommended approval of the FINAL PLAT of _______ attached hereto on the _______ day of _______, 19 ___. 
_____
Chairman 
ATTEST: 
___________ 
Secretary 
City of West Chicago Mayor and City Council Approval, Form No. 1: 
MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL of the City of West Chicago, County of DuPage, State of Illinois, hereby certify that the said Council has duly approved the PRELIMINARY PLAT of _______ attached hereto on the _______ day of _______, 19 ___. 
_____
Mayor 
ATTEST: 
___________ 
City Clerk 
City of West Chicago Mayor and City Council Approval, Form No. 2: 
MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL of the City of West Chicago, County of DuPage, State of Illinois, hereby certify that the said Council has duly approved the FINAL PLAT of _______ attached hereto by Ordinance No. _______ duly authenticated as passed this _______ day of _______, 19 ___. 
_____
Mayor 
ATTEST: 
___________ 
City Clerk 
Acceptance of Dedication Form: 
ACCEPTANCE OF DEDICATION BY CITY COUNCIL: Be it resolved by the City Council, the City of West Chicago, that the dedications shown on the attached plat of _______ are hereby accepted. 
Adopted by the City Council, the City of West Chicago, this _______ day of _______, 19 ___. 
Approved by the Mayor, City of West Chicago, Illinois, this _______ day of _______, 19 ___. 
_____
Mayor 
ATTEST: 
___________ 
City Clerk 
Release Certificate: 
RELEASE OF MORTGAGE: In consideration of the platting of the property shown on the annexed map of _______, Addition, and other good and valuable considerations, receipt of which is hereby acknowledged _______ do hereby release, relinquish and forever discharge a certain mortgage made by _______ and dated the _______ day of _______, 19 ___, to _______ which is recorded in Book _____ of Mortgages at Page _____ of the records of DuPage County, State of Illinois, insofar as the same covers all property dedicated for streets, alleys, parks, boulevards, easements or other public uses, as shown on said map. 
Witness _______ hand _______ this _______ day of _______, 19 ___. 
Signature: 
(Acknowledgement) 
Tax Certificate: 
COUNTY CLERK'S CERTIFICATE: 
I, _______ do hereby certify that I am the duly elected qualified and acting County Clerk of DuPage County, State of Illinois. That the tax records of said County show all taxes are paid for the year _______ and prior years on the land shown on the annexed plat of _______ Addition in DuPage County, Illinois, that the required statutory security has been deposited in the office of the County Clerk, guaranteeing payment of the current year's taxes. 
In witness whereof said County Clerk has caused the instrument to be executed at DuPage County, Illinois on this _______ day of _______, 19 ___. 
_____
County Clerk 
APPENDIX C 
	Design Considerations 	Yes 	No 	Remarks 
	Preliminary Plat 			
1. 	Is proper application form submitted? 			
2. 	Name of subdivision. 			
3. 	Legal description showing exact location of subdivision. 			
4. 	Facts Pertaining to Property 			
	a. 
Size of tract in acres. 			
	b. 
Existing zoning classification. 			
	c. 
Number of lot proposed. 			
	d. 
Size of lots (minimum, maximum, average). 			
	e. 
Type of water and sewer facilities proposed. 			
	f. 
Outlots shown. 			
	g. 
Dedication parcels shown, areas. 			
5. 	Ownership information 			
	a. 
Name, address and telephone number of all legal owners and/or agents. 			
	b. 
Citation of any existing legal rights-of-way or easements. 			
	c. 
Existing covenants on property. 			
	d. 
Name, address and telephone number of person preparing plat. 			
6. 	Drawing 			
	a. 
Date, scale and north point. 			
	b. 
Subdivision name, not duplicating any other subdivision name. 			
	c. 
Name, address, and phone number of surveyor. 			
	d. 
Location of the subdivision by government lot, quarter section, section, township and range. 			
	e. 
Vicinity sketch, small scale, showing general area of the subdivision. 			
	f. 
Exact length and bearing of all exterior boundary lines of the subdivision, expressed in feet and decimals of a foot. 			
	g. 
Names of adjacent subdivisions or names of owners of adjacent unplatted land. 			
	h. 
Existing zoning of adjacent lands. 			
	i. 
Location, width and names of all platted streets, alleys or other public ways and easements, railroad and utility rights-of-way, parks, cemeteries, watercourses, drainage ditches, permanent buildings, bridges, etc. 			
	j. 
Water elevations of adjoining lakes or streams at date of survey, high and low water elevations of such lakes or streams. Elevations shall refer to U.S.G.S. datum plane. 			
	k. 
Layout, width, and grades of all new streets and right-of-way, including alleys, highways, easements for sewer and water mains and other public utilities. 			
	l. 
Existing sewer, water lines, culverts and underground structures within tract or immediately adjacent thereto. 			
	m. 
Location and size of nearest water line and sewer line. 			
	n. 
Plans for proposed utility layout (water, sewer, storm sewer)—showing connections to existing system. 			
	o. 
Approximate dimensions, areas of lots. 			
	p. 
Proposed building setback lines. 			
	q. 
Approximate radii of all curves, length of tangents, central angle of all streets. 			
	r. 
Location and approximate area of all properties proposed to be dedicated or reserved for public use, or to be reserved by deed, covenant for use of all property owners in subdivision, including all conditions, if any, of such dedication or reservation. 			
	s. 
Topography (contours) at vertical intervals of not more than five (5) feet, or at more or less frequent intervals, as required by the Planning Commission. 			
	t. 
Street profile plans for all existing and proposed streets, containing information specified by Planning Commission. 			
	u. 
Indication of any lots upon which a use other than single-family residential is proposed by the subdivider. 			
	Final Plat 			
1. 	Final plat is filed within one year of approval of the preliminary plat (including all or part of the original plat). 			
2. 	Written Application Containing 			
	a. 
Name of subdivision, description of blocks and lots included on plat. 			
	b. 
Location of subdivision by government lot, quarter sections, section, township, and range. 			
	c. 
Name, date of approval, and file number of the preliminary plat upon which the final plat is based. 			
	d. 
Zoning classification of property. 			
	e. 
Total number of lots and/or parcels included on the plat. 			
	f. 
Area of parcels to be dedicated for public use. 			
	g. 
Outlots are shown. 			
	h. 
Existing and proposed covenants on property, including acknowledgement of all encumbrancers. 			
	i. 
Name and address, phone number of each owner and/or his agent. 			
3. 	Drawing 			
	The final plat is drawn with waterproof nonfading ink, scale of not more than 100 feet to the inch on transparent Mylar or equivalent at a size (in multiples of 8½ × 11"). An index to sheets to be provided for any subdivision containing more than one sheet. 			
	a. 
Date, scale and north point. 			
	b. 
Subdivision name, not duplicating any other subdivision name. 			
	c. 
Legal description, location by government lot, quarter section, section and township. 			
	d. 
Monuments erected in the field to be referenced (kind of monument, type of materials). 			
	e. 
Exact length and bearing of: 			
	(1) All exterior boundary lines; 			
	(2) All blocks; 			
	(3) Public grounds for dedication; 			
	(4) Streets and alleys; 			
	(5) All lot lines. 			
	f. 
Blocks are numbered consecutively. 			
	g. 
Lots in each block are numbered consecutively. 			
	h. 
All outlots are clearly marked. 			
	i. 
Exact width of easements and streets or alleys are marked. 			
	j. 
All lakes and streams are properly surveyed and marked. 			
	k. 
Center lines of all streets are shown, dimensions. 			
	l. 
All points of curve, points of tangency, length of tangent, length of curve, and central angles of all curves of streets, are shown. 			
	m. 
Vicinity sketch, small scale, showing general area of the subdivision. 			
	n. 
The names of all existing and proposed streets. 			
	o. 
All lands to be dedicated to the public to be clearly marked "Dedicated to Public." 			
	p. 
All roads shown on the plat and not dedicated to be clearly marked "Private Road," "Private Street," or "Private Way." 			
	q. 
All existing buildings are shown. 			
	r. 
All watercourses, drainage ditches and other existing features are properly shown. 			
	s. 
The water elevations of all adjoining lakes, rivers or streams at the date of survey, along with the approximate high and low water elevations of such features, are shown. 			
4. 	The following certificates, acknowledgements, and approval clauses are provided: 			
	a. 
Dedication clause including use of corporate seal. 			
	b. 
Notarization. 			
	c. 
Certificate of survey and platting. 			
	d. 
Certificate of approval of the planning commission. 			
	e. 
Certificate of approval, enforcing officer. 			
	f. 
Certificate of approval, (city, village or county) engineer. 			
	g. 
Certificate of approval, legislative body. 			
	h. 
Certificate of approval or acceptance of all encumbrancers. 			
 
	General Considerations 	Yes 	No 	Remarks 
1. 	Is the proposed subdivision in complete conformity with the comprehensive plan? 			
2. 	Does the subdivision make adequate provisions for storm and floodwater runoff channels or basins? 			
3. 	The subdivision gives consideration to the preservation of natural features such as large trees and watercourses and to historical and similar features. 			
4. 	Is the parcel to be subdivided suitable for residential use? 			
5. 	Streets Generally 			
	a. 
Streets are located in relation to topographical conditions and natural terrain features, i.e., streams and existing tree growth, etc. 			
	b. 
Streets are properly integrated with the existing and proposed system of thoroughfares as established on the comprehensive plan. 			
	c. 
Thoroughfares are properly related to special traffic generators, i.e., industries, business districts, schools, churches, etc. 			
	d. 
Minor and local streets are laid out to conform to topography and to discourage use by through traffic. 			
	e. 
Proposed streets are extended to the boundary lines of the subdivision. 			
6. 	Subdivisions Adjacent to Railroad Rights-of-Way or Limited Access Freeways 			
	a. 
In residential districts, a buffer strip (25 feet wide) is added to the normal depth of each lot. 			
	b. 
In commercial or industrial districts lots are of sufficient depth for uses to back on railroad or highway. 			
	c. 
Streets parallel to a railroad intersecting street crossing the railroad are at least 150 feet distant from railroad. 			
7. 	Access to Major Arterials 			
	When a subdivision borders on or contains an arterial streets, access is limited in one of the following ways: 			
	a. 
Subdivision lots back onto major street fronting on a parallel street with screen planting between the lot and the arterial. 			
	b. 
A series of culs-de-sac, u-shaped or loop streets entered from and designed generally at right angles to a parallel street, with the rear lines of their terminal lots backing onto the arterial street. 			
	c. 
A marginal access or service road is provided (separated from the arterial by a planting strip). 			
	d. 
Total number of residential or local streets entering arterial is kept to a minimum. 			
8. 	Street Design Standards 			
	All streets meet the minimum design standards: 			
	a. 
Local streets: 			
	(1) Right-of-way 40, 50, 60 ft. 			
	(2) Pavement 24, 26, 32 ft. 			
	b. 
Collector streets: 			
	(1) Right-of-way 60, 60, 70 ft. 			
	(2) Pavement 30, 32, 40 ft. 			
	c. 
Street grades for major streets do not exceed 6 percent. 			
9. 	Other Street Requirements 			
	a. 
Culs-de-sac serving less than 25 dwelling units to not exceed 1,000 feet in length. 			
	b. 
Culs-de-sac serving 25 or more dwelling units do not exceed 500 feet in length. 			
	c. 
No half (½) streets are provided. 			
10. 	Street Intersections 			
	All street intersections meet the following criteria: 			
	a. 
Streets intersect at right angles (not less than 75 degrees). 			
	b. 
Center line offsets (jogs) of streets are at least 150 feet. 			
	c. 
Curb radii as follows are provided: 			
	(1) Intersection, two local streets, 20 feet. 			
	(2) Intersection involving collector street, at least 30 feet. 			
	d. 
Intersections are designed with a flat grade. 			
	e. 
Cross slopes of all streets, including intersections are 3 percent or less. 			
11. 	Alleys 			
	a. 
Alleys are provided in all commercial and industrial areas. 			
	b. 
All alleys are 24 feet in width or greater. 			
	c. 
No dead-end alleys are included without adequate turnaround facilities. 			
	d. 
No alleys are provided in residential areas. 			
12. 	Block Standards 			
	a. 
All blocks have two (2) tiers of lots (except blocks adjacent to railroad rights-of-way, etc.). 			
	b. 
Block lengths: 			
	(1) Blocks do not exceed 2,000 feet in length. 			
	(2) Blocks are at least 500 feet long. 			
	(3) Blocks along major arterial and collector streets are not less than 1,000 feet. 			
	c. 
Pedestrianways (10 feet wide) are provided through all blocks exceeding 800 feet in length where essential. 			
13. 	Lot Standards 			
	a. 
Lot sizes conform to the zoning ordinance (resolution). 			
	b. 
Depth and width of properties reserved for commercial-industrial uses are sufficient to provide for off-street parking and loading. 			
	c. 
Lots fronting on arterial streets or commercial-industrial lots provide at least 25 feet additional depth. 			
	d. 
Every lot (notwithstanding planned developments) has principal access on a public street. 			
	e. 
Drainage flows away from the lot to an approved drainage system. 			
	f. 
Generally, lots are not platted at right angles to each other. 			
	g. 
Side lot lines are at approximately right angles to street lines. 			
	h. 
Corner lots have extra width to provide appropriate setbacks. 			
	i. 
No double frontage lots are platted. 			
 
APPENDIX D  
Section 1. - Dedication of park lands, school sites and other public lands, or cash contribution in lieu thereof. 
As a condition of approval of a final plat of subdivision or of a final plan and plat of a planned unit development or any other development of land (hereinafter referred to as a development), each subdivider or developer (hereinafter referred to as a developer) will be required to: dedicate land for park and recreational purposes, land for school sites, and other public lands, to serve the immediate and future needs of the residents or occupants of the development; make a cash contribution in lieu thereof; or some combination of both, at the option of the City, provided, however, that if the park, school and/or fire protection district within which the development is located files with the City a written waiver such dedication and/or contribution with respect to such respective park, school and/or fire protection needs, either in whole or in any specified part, the City shall not require such dedication and/or contribution, either in whole or in any specified part in accordance with such waiver. It shall be a precondition to the enforcement of this Appendix D, with respect to dedications and/or contributions for such respective park, school and/or fire protection needs, that the park, school and/or fire protection district within which the development is located shall have executed and tendered to the city an intergovernmental agreement, in a form acceptable to the city's corporation counsel, including provisions requiring it to hold and use such dedications and/or contributions in accordance with the requirements of this Appendix D, as amended from time to time, and to indemnify, hold harmless and defend the city with respect to: the manner of adoption, amendment or enforcement of this Appendix D, as amended from time to time; the appropriateness, amount or timing of any required dedication and/or contribution or any other aspect of this Appendix D, as amended from time to time; and the park, school and/or fire protection district's holding and use of such dedications and/or contributions. Unless otherwise provided in the resolution or ordinance approving such final plat or final plan and plat or other instrument granting final development approval, such dedication and/or contribution shall be due as a precondition to such approval. Such dedications and/or contributions shall be in accordance with the following criteria: 
1.  Criteria for Requiring Park And Recreation Land Dedication: 
1.1.  Requirements And Population Ratio: The ultimate population of a proposed development shall bear directly upon the amount of land required for dedication. The total land dedication requirement shall be ten (10) acres of land per one thousand (1,000) of ultimate population. The required ten (10) acres may be allocated by the City Council, in its discretion, based upon the following criteria: 
Classification 	Approximate 
Size 	Minimum 
Acres Per 
1,000 People 
(a.) 
Neighborhood Parks 	 4-10 acres 	 4.0 
(b.) 
Community Parks 	10-20 acres 	 6.0 
Total: 		10.0 acres 
of land per 
1,000 people 
 
The ultimate population of a proposed development shall be calculated in accordance with Section 6 hereinbelow. 
1.2.  Location: The Comprehensive Park and Recreation Plan and/or the "Standards by Types of Recreation and Park Area" as adopted by the West Chicago Park District shall be used as a guideline in locating sites. A park site, of not less than five (5) acres, adjoining all elementary school sites shall be considered a requirement. A central location which will serve equally the entire development is most desirable. In large developments these sites can be located throughout the development according to established standards for park area distances. 
1.3.  Credit for Private Open Spaces and Recreation Areas: When developers provide their own open space for recreation areas and facilities, it has the effect of reducing the demand for local public recreational services. Depending on the size of the development, a portion of the park and recreational area in developments may, at the option of the City Council, be provided in the form of "private" open space in-lieu-of dedicated "public" open space. The extent of same shall be determined by the City Council, based upon the needs of the projected residents and in conformance to the total park and recreation land for the general area. 
In general, a substitution of private open space for dedicated parks will imply a substantially higher degree of improvement and the installation of recreational facilities, including equipment by the developer as part of his obligation. Detailed plans of such areas, including specifications of facilities to be installed, must be approved by the City, and before any credit is given for private recreation areas, the developer shall guarantee that these private recreation areas will be permanently maintained for such use by the execution of the appropriate legal documents. Private "swimming clubs" are included in this provision. When an adjustment for private recreation areas is warranted, it will be necessary to compute the total park land dedication that would have been required from the subdivision or planned unit development and then subtract the credit to be given. 
2.  Criteria for Requiring School Site Dedication: 
2.1.  Requirements and Population Ratio: The ultimate number of students to be generated by a proposed development shall bear directly upon the amount of land required to be dedicated for school sites. The land dedication requirement shall be determined by obtaining the ratio of: (a) the estimated number of children to be served in each school classification over (b) the maximum recommended number of students to be served in each such school classification as stated herein, and then applying such ratio to (c) the minimum recommended number of acres for a school site of each such school classification as sated herein. The product thereof shall be the acres of land deemed needed to have sufficient land for school sites to serve the estimated increased children in each such school classification. 
2.2.  School Classifications and Size of School Site: School classifications and size of school sites within the city shall be determined in accordance with the following criteria: 
School Classification 
by Grades 	Maximum Number 
of Students for 
each such School 
Classification 	Minimum Number 
of Acres of Land 
for each school 
Site of such 
Classification 
Elementary Schools 
grades kindergarten 
through 6th 	  600 students 	11 acres 
Junior High Schools 
grades 7th through 8th 	  700 students 	27 acres 
High Schools grades 
9th through 12th 	2,300 students 	53 acres 
 
2.3.  Location: The Comprehensive School Plan and/or the standards adopted by the affected school district shall be used as a guideline in locating sites. 
3.  Criteria for Requiring Other Public Land Dedication, Fire Protection Sites: 
3.1.  Requirements And Fire Protection Burden: The fire protection burden to be generated by a proposed development shall bear directly upon the amount of land required to be dedicated for fire protection sites. In order to provide and/or maintain adequate fire protection, including the ability to dispatch firefighting and emergency medical service equipment and personnel with adequate response times and to provide necessary housing of general and specialized equipment, personnel quarters, training facilities and administrative facilities, a series of individual local fire stations, together with a supporting central and/or regional fire station(s), is necessary. 
Each individual local fire station providing basic, first line units for initial response to fires and emergency medical service needs requires two and four/tenths (2.4) acres of land. Each such local fire station is supported be a central and/or regional fire station providing additional first line units, specialized equipment and training and administrative facilities, requiring an additional six/tenths (0.6) of an acre for each such local fire station which it supports. Each individual local fire station, therefore, requires a total of three (3) acres of land for itself and the additional incremental area for a central and/or regional fire station. 
Each area of residential development of two (2) square miles (i.e. 1,280 acres) generates the need for an individual local fire station. Each area of non-residential (i.e. commercial and/or industrial) development containing six million two hundred fifty thousand (6,250,000) square feet of non-residential buildings generates the need for an individual local fire station. The required land dedication shall be determined for residential developments, or residential portions of developments, by multiplying the total acreage to be developed by 0.00234 (i.e. the ratio of three (3) acres required for fire protection purposes per 1,280 acres of territory). The required land dedication shall be determined for non-residential developments, or non-residential portions of developments, by multiplying the total building square footage to be constructed by 0.00000048 acres per square foot (i.e. the ratio of three (3) acres required for fire protection purposes per 6,250,000 square feet of commercial and/or industrial buildings). 
3.2.  Location: The Comprehensive Fire Protection Plan and/or standards adopted by the affected fire protection district shall be used as a guideline in locating sites. 
4.  Criteria for Requiring Library Land Dedication: 
4.1.  Requirements And Population Ratio: The ultimate population of a proposed development shall bear directly upon the amount of land required for dedication. The total land dedication requirement shall be one-and-one-half (1½) acres of land per ten thousand (10,000) of ultimate population. The ultimate population of a proposed development shall be calculated in accordance with Section 6 hereinbelow 
4.2.  Location: The Comprehensive Library Plan and/or standards adopted by the affected library protection district shall be used as a guideline in locating sites. 
5.  Criteria for Requiring a Cash Contribution In-Lieu-Of Park, School, Fire Protection and/or Library Sites: The City shall require the developer to pay a cash contribution in-lieu-of or in combination with the land dedication required when so determined by the public body which would be the recipient of the land, subject to final City approval. The cash contributions in-lieu-of park and recreation land dedication shall be held in trust by the City, or other public body designated by the City, solely for the acquisition and or improvement of park and recreation land as hereinbefore classified, which will be available to serve the immediate or future needs of the residents of that development. The cash contributions in-lieu-of school sites shall be held in trust by the City, or other public body designated by the City, solely for use in the acquisition and/or improvement of land for school sites to serve the immediate or future needs of children from that development. The cash contributions in-lieu-of fire protection sites shall be held in trust by the City, or other public body designated by the City, solely for use in the acquisition and/or improvement of land for fire station sites to serve the immediate or future needs of the residents or occupants of that development. The cash contributions in-lieu-of library sites shall be held in trust by the City, or other public body designated by the City, solely for use in the acquisition and/or improvement of land for library sites to serve the immediate or future needs of the residents or occupants of that development. 
Improvements under this Section 4 shall be liberally construed and shall include, but shall not be limited to the development of: sidewalks; adjacent streets, including but not limited to pavement, curbs, gutters and street lights; connections with sewers, water, electrical and other utility lines; and, as appropriate, grading, seeding and/or sodding, and/or drainage and erosion controls. 
If any improvement provided for herein shall require voter referendum approval under existing statutory authority before such funds may be lawfully expended, then and in those cases such approval shall be first obtained. 
If any portion of a cash contribution in-lieu-of dedication of land is not expended for the purposes set forth herein within ten (10) years from the date of receipt, it shall be refunded to the owners of record of all lots, except lots dedicated pursuant to the provisions hereof, in the development for which such contribution was made. The refund shall be paid to the person who is the owner of record on the day which is the tenth anniversary of the receipt of such contribution. The amount of the refund due to each lot owner shall be equal to the amount of the original contribution, divided by the total number of lots in the development (excluding only those lots which were dedicated pursuant to the provisions hereof) for which such contribution was made. 
The cash contributions in-lieu-of land shall be based on the fair market value of the acres of land in the area improved as specified in section 8 herein, that otherwise would have been dedicated pursuant to the provisions hereof. If has been determined that the present fair market value of such improved land in and surrounding the City is: (a) one hundred fifty thousand dollars ($150,000.00) per acre with respect to residential use land (or six hundred dollars ($600.00) per acre for library purposes); and (b) two hundred thirty thousand dollars ($230,000.00) per acre with respect to non-residential use land (or eleven cents ($0.11) per square foot of building area for fire protection purposes). The fair market value for non-residential use land shall be used for developments of a mixed-use nature. Said figures shall be used in making any calculation herein unless the developer files a written objection thereto. In the event of any such objection the developer shall submit an appraisal showing the fair market value of such improved land n the area of his development or other evidence thereof and final determination of said fair market value per acre of such improved land shall be made by the City Council based upon such information submitted by the developer and from other sources which may be submitted to the City Council by the park district, school district, fire protection district, library district or others. The City shall be entitled to an administrative fee in connection with the administration hereof, which fee shall total five (5) percent of the contribution required under this section. 
6.  [Formula] For Determining Ultimate Population, Ultimate Numbers of Students and Fire Protection Burden: The following table of population density represents current and short range projected trends in family size for a new residential construction and shall, where applicable, be used in calculating the amount of required dedication of acres of land and/or the cash contribution in-lieu-thereof unless a written objection is filed thereto by the developer: 
TABLE OF ESTIMATED ULTIMATE POPULATION PER DWELLING UNIT CHILDREN PER UNIT 
Type of Unit 	Pre-School 0—4 Years 	Elementary 
Grades K—6 
5—11 Years 	Junior High Grades 7—8 
12-13 Years 	Total Grades K—8 
5—13 Years 	High School Grades 9—12 
14—17 Years 	Adults 18 Years + 	Total Per Dwelling Unit 
Detached Single-Family 							
2 Bedroom 	0.113 	0.143 	0.041 	0.184 	0.020 	1.700 	2.017 
3 Bedroom 	0.292 	0.422 	0.120 	0.542 	0.184 	1.881 	2.899 
4 Bedroom 	0.418 	0.644 	0.184 	0.828 	0.360 	2.158 	3.764 
5 Bedroom 	0.283 	0.461 	0.132 	0.593 	0.300 	2.594 	3.770 
Attached Single-Family 							
1 Bedroom 	0.000 	0.000 	0.000 	0.000 	0.000 	1.193 	1.193 
2 Bedroom 	0.064 	0.106 	0.030 	0.136 	0.038 	1.752 	1.990 
3 Bedroom 	0.212 	0.227 	0.065 	0.292 	0.059 	1.829 	2.392 
4 Bedroom 	0.323 	0.370 	0.106 	0.476 	0.173 	2.173 	3.145 
Apartments 							
Efficiency 	0.000 	0.000 	0.000 	0.000 	0.000 	1.294 	1.294 
1 Bedroom 	0.000 	0.002 	0.001 	0.003 	0.001 	1.754 	1.758 
2 Bedroom 	0.047 	0.100 	0.028 	0.128 	0.046 	1.693 	1.914 
3 Bedroom 	0.052 	0.278 	0.079 	0.357 	0.118 	2.526 	3.053 
 
Note: There are only three significant categories provided in this chart. Because of the similarity of yields of all types of attached single family dwelling units, only one category is provided. The same is true with apartments, thus, only one category. Because of the relatively short history of some newer types of detached and attached single family units, individual evaluations may be necessary. 
Copyright 1996 
Illinois School Consulting Service/ 
Associated Municipal Consultants, Inc. 
Naperville, Illinois 
For all developments in which the population density and/or the square footage of non-residential buildings to be constructed, cannot be precisely determined at the time of approval of the development, the land donation requirement shall be determined as follows. The ultimate population and number of children to be served in each school classification shall be calculated on the basis of a mix of bedrooms by dwelling unit type for each residential zoning district, determined by the City on the basis of the current trends resulting from actual permits issued in similar developments. In planned unit developments, the bedroom mix used for single-family detached dwelling units shall be based upon the bedroom mix for that zoning district which is most representative of the lot sizes approved, as determined by the City on the basis of current trends resulting from actual building permits issued for such representative zoning district; and the bedroom mix used for single-family attached and multiple-family dwelling units shall be based upon the number of units and mix of bedrooms as indicated on the approved final plan and plat of planned unit development. The square footage of non-residential buildings to be constructed shall be determined by the City on the basis of the current trends resulting from actual permits issued in similar developments. 
In the event a developer files a written objection to one or more of the tables, formulae and/or determinations pursuant to this section, he shall submit his own study showing the estimated additional population and/or non-residential building square footage to be generated from the development and in that event final determination of the formula to be used in such calculations shall be made by the City Council based upon such information submitted by the developer and from other sources which may be submitted to the City Council by the park districts, school districts, fire districts or others. It is recognized that population density, age distribution and local conditions change over time, and the specific formula for the dedication of land, or the payment of fees in-lieu-thereof, as stated herein, is subject to periodic review and amendment as necessary. 
7.  Reservation of Additional Land: Where the Comprehensive Plan of the City calls for a larger amount or size of park and recreational land and/or school and/or fire protection sites in a particular proposed development, than the developer is required to dedicate pursuant to the provisions hereof, the land needed beyond the developer's required contribution shall, if so determined by the City Council, be reserved for subsequent purchase by the City or other public body designated by the City, provided that such purchase is made, or proceedings to acquire such land by condemnation are commenced, within one year from the date of approval of the final plat or plan for the development. 
8.  Combining With Adjoining Developments: For all developments of less than fifty (50) acres, public open space, or school or fire protection sites, which are to be dedicated should, where possible, be combined with dedications from adjoining developments in order to produce usable recreation areas or sites without undue hardship to a particular developer. 
9.  Dedicated Sites, Topography, Grading and Improvements: The slope, topography and geology of each dedicated site as well as its surroundings must be suitable for its intended purposes. Grading on dedicated sites shall not differ greatly from surrounding land. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a dedicated site may, with the consent of the public body which would be the recipient of such site, include areas of minimal or limited suitability, such as wetlands and stormwater detention areas. The acreage of such areas of minimal or limited suitability shall not be used to satisfy, or be credited against, the land dedication requirement with respect to such public body, except to the extent that the standards adopted by such public body provide a formula or methodology for crediting or partial crediting of such areas of minimal or limited suitability. 
All sites shall be dedicated as improved sites, i.e. in a graded, seeded and/or sodded condition with appropriate drainage and erosion controls and ready for full service of streets (including but not limited to pavement, curbs, gutters and street lights), sewers, water and electrical and other utilities, or acceptable provision made therefore. Sidewalks and trees shall be included within the definition of improved sites, but may be delayed for school and fire protection sites due to the delay time between dedication of any such sites and construction of facilities thereon. 
10.  Title of Sites: All sites shall be conveyed to the City either by warranty or trustee's deed, provided, however, that the City may permit such conveyance directly to the public body which would be the recipient of such site. The subdivider or developer shall be responsible for conveying good, merchantable title to such sites, and shall be responsible for payment of all real estate taxes to the date of conveyance, including any agricultural roll back taxes which might be extended or levied against such sites, for any tax years or periods prior to the time of conveyance. 
11.  Sale of Dedicated Land: When, in the opinion of the unit of local government holding title to any parcel of land dedicated hereunder, any such parcel has become unnecessary or unsuitable or inconvenient, such parcel may be sold as provided by applicable statutory authority and the proceeds shall be held in trust by said unit of local government, solely for such uses as are provided for herein, and said proceeds shall be subject to the ten (10) year expenditure requirements from and after the date when said land is converted to cash proceeds. 
12.  Property Conveyance. Any property transferred to the City of West Chicago hereunder shall be transferred so as to be unencumbered by any liens, taxes or other clouds upon title of said property. The Grantor of any property hereunder shall remain responsible and liable for any and all real estate taxes accrued but not yet due and payable. Said tax obligation shall not be rolled into or extinguished by a deed to the City of West Chicago. 
As a condition of approval of a final plat of subdivision or of a final plan and plat of a planned unit development or any other development of land, each subdivider, developer or builder shall be required to pay a cash contribution for library purposes in an amount equal to $500.00 per acre. 
(Ord. No. 3060, § 1, 3-17-97; Ord. No. 02-O-0091, § 1, 7-15-2002; Ord. No. 04-O-0012, § 1, 6-21-2004; Ord. No. 08-O-003, § 1, 2-4-2008)  
Article XVI. - Addendum "A" 
CITY OF WEST CHICAGO 
AMENDMENTS TO "STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS FOR WATER AND SEWER MAIN 
CONSTRUCTION IN ILLINOIS" THIRD EDITION, SEPTEMBER, 1978 
Division I. General Requirements and Covenants 
Section 7-2.01A. In the third paragraph, the fifth and sixth lines, delete the phrase "or within ten (10) days after the execution of the contract, whichever date is reached first." In the eleventh and twelfth line strike the phrase "or within ten (10) days after the execution of the contract, whichever date is reached first." 
Section 7-2.02. In the third paragraph strike the phrase "or within ten (10) days after the execution of the contract whichever date is reached first." 
Section 9-11. Delete this entire section. 
Division II. Excavation and Clean-up 
Section 20-2.20A(1)(a). In the first paragraph delete the second sentence and change the first sentence to read as follows: "Granular Cradle, to a depth of six (6) inches below the bottom of each conduit, shall be constructed prior to the placement of all conduit, except when a modification is ordered by the Engineer or shown on the plans." In the second paragraph, delete the following sentences: "Granular Cradle shall be allowed for separate payment only in the locations where the use of these items is specified or ordered by the Engineer. A Change in type of cradle material shall not be made unless a minimum of two (2) cubic yards of material is allowed for payment." 
Section 20-2.20A(1)(b). Delete the second paragraph. Change title of section to read "Water Drain Pipes and Pipe Sewers." 
Section 20-2.20A(1)(c). Delete this section. 
Section 20-2.20A(2). Delete this section as written. Insert the following: "When unsuitable soil conditions are encountered, which require the removal of unsuitable materials lower than six (6) inches below the bottom of the conduit or the depth of bedding shown on the plan, the contractor shall replace the material removed with granular cradle of the grade approved by the Engineer." 
Section 20-2.20A(4)(a). Payment. In the first paragraph, the first line after the word "made" insert "only when used to replace unsuitable soil as specified in Section 20-2.20A(2)." 
Section 20-2.21B(3). Delete the first sentence and insert the following: "This case applies to any conduit located in an area which now has a permanent type street or sidewalk surface, which will have a permanent street or sidewalk surface constructed over the conduit upon completion of the installation, or which is located adjacent to a proposed or existing permanent type street or sidewalk such that the backfill will support the permanent surface." 
Section 21-2.03F. In the second paragraph, the fourth line change the minimum thickness for sidewalks to read "five" (5) inches." 
Division III. Sanitary Sewers and Storm Drains 
Section 31-1.11B. At the end of this section add the following paragraph: "The City Engineer or his authorized representative shall be present when the test is made." 
Section 32-2.07. Modification. At the end of the section add the following sentence: "Frames and covers shall be Neenah catalog number R-1019, non-rocking design w/type B lip, small pickhole, lettered "Sanitary Sewer, Water or Storm Drain as appropriate." 
Section 34-1. Modification. The first paragraph shall be changed to read as follows: "A service sewer is a branch sanitary sewer line or storm drain constructed from the main sanitary sewer line or storm drain to a point described in the special provisions or plans or to a point established by the Engineer." The third paragraph should be changed to read "Unless otherwise specified, service sewers and fittings shall be 4" in diameter. 
Section 34-2.01. Modification. The first sentence should be changed to read "Approved pipe and fitting materials for Sanitary Sewer Service lines shall be cast-iron, ductile iron, vitrified clay or polyvinyl chloride or acrylonitrile-butadiene-styrene. Approved pipe for Storm Drain Service lines shall be 4" concrete pipe or 3" polyvinyl chloride pipe." 
Section 40-2. Delete the sentence and insert the following: "All water mains shall be ductile iron or concrete clay cylinder pipe and all pipe and fittings shall be cement lined." 
Section 40-2.05, Section 40-2.02, Section 40-2.01. Delete these sections. 
Section 40-2.07B. Delete this section. 
Section 40-2.07C. At the end of this section, add the following: "Corporation stops and curb stops shall be as specified in Section 41-2.11." 
Section 41-2.02A. Modification. Change this section to read in the second line "a minimum of (5½) five and one-half feet." 
Section 41-2.11. Add at the end of this section the following paragraph: "The brass corporation stop shall be a minimum of ¾" and shall be Mueller No. H15010 or Ford No. F6125. Both shall be supplied with a 1/8 bend and gasket. The curb stop shall be a minimum of ¾" and shall be Mueller No. H15200 or Ford No. Z22-333. The service box shall be Mueller No. H10350 or Tyler No. 6500 Buffalo type, with footpiece which shall be Mueller No. E2032 or equal." 
Section 41-2.12A. Modification. In the third line remove the phrase "50 per cent more than the operating pressure at the lowest elevation of the pipe section, but not to exceed the pressure rating of the type of pipe specified," and insert the phrase "150 pounds per square inch." In line 6 change it to read "for a period of not less than two (2) hours and not more than six (6) hours." 
Section 41-2.12C. Subsection 1. Eliminate the first phrase "After completion of the pressure test." Subsection 2, second paragraph, change to read "tables of allowable leakage and basis of allowable leakage shall be one-half (½) of that found on Standard Drawing 18, Table 2, Cast Iron Water Main." 
Section 41-2.13C(2) and 41-2.13C(3). Eliminate these subsections. 
Section 41-3. Fire Hydrants. Delete the sentence "where a gate.., for separate payment." 
Section 41-4. Item (8) Change this item to read "Fire Hydrants with auxiliary valves by size and type per each." 
Section 42-1. Second paragraph change first sentence to refer to standards of the latest A.W.W.A. C509. 
Section 41-2.02. In the second paragraph, strike the last sentence. 
Section 44-3.03. Delete this section as written. Insert "Curb boxes shall be as described in Section 41-2.11." 
Section 45-1. Insert the following: "All fire hydrants shall be Mueller Model No. A4-191 or Waterous Pacer Model No. WB67, 3 way with break-away flange, auxiliary valve and valve boxes. All hydrants shall be given a final coat of chrome yellow paint." 
Section 45-2.02. In the fourth paragraph, strike the last sentence. 
Standard Drawing No. 2. The quantities in the column for "Maximum Trench width at top of conduit W + 8" shall be used for payment purposes only when sheeting is actually used in the trench. If sheeting is not used, the quantities will be calculated based on the maximum trench width as shown in Section 20-2.03.  
APPENDIX C - PERSONNEL RULES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Section 2 of Ord. No. 2378, adopted Jan. 7, 1991, deleted former App. C, Personnel directors of the executive department, which was amended by Ord. No. 1764, § 1, adopted Oct. 1, 1984. A new App. C was enacted by § 3 of Ord. No. 2378, effective Jan. 9, 1991, except Art. V, which became effective May 1, 1991. Ord. No. 4181, § 1, adopted May 17, 1999, deleted App. C, Art. IX, safety program. Ord. No. 4192, § 1, adopted June 21, 1999 enacted new Arts. I, II, and V—IX of the personnel manual as set out herein. Ord. No. 4212, § 1, adopted Sept. 7, 1999 deleted Arts. III and IV which pertained to position classification plan and compensation plan, respectively. New Arts. III and IV of the personnel manual attached to Ord. No. 4212 as "Exhibit A" were set out herein. The user's attention is directed to the Code Comparative Table at the back of this volume for derivation of App. C. 
Cross reference— Civil service rules and regulations, App. D. 
 
ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
A. - Authority and administration 
The city administrator shall administer, or cause to be administered, the provisions of this manual. This authority includes the following activities: 
(1)  Hire and promote within budgeted authority; 
(2)  Establish and approve appropriate work rules consistent with the terms of this manual; 
(3)  Discipline, demote, suspend, lay off and recommend dismissal of any employee; 
(4)  Determine when work performed by employees may be more effectively or efficiently contracted; and 
(5)  Interpret the meaning of these rules. 
The department heads will be expected to work with the administration department concerning any personnel matter in their departments. 
(Ord. No. 4192, § 1, 6-21-99; Ord. No. 4415, § 1, 3-19-2001)  
B. - Amendments and revisions 
This manual will be issued to all employees. New full-time employees will receive the manual during their employee orientation. The City of West Chicago, like so many other employers, must be dynamic and changes may occur. 
Amendments to these rules will be made from time to time by ordinance prepared by the city administrator and approved by the city council. All amendments shall be acknowledged by employees through the signing of an "Amendment Acknowledgement Form". As you receive changes, either make a note of them in the manual or place a copy in the manual for future reference. 
Amendments will normally be posted prior to their effective date. The city, however, reserves the right to make changes without notice when it is deemed appropriate. Amendments may have a retroactive effect to reflect a practice adopted prior to a formal revision of the rules. 
In any event, if you have questions, either speak to your supervisor or contact the administration department. They'll be happy to speak to you. City employees are encouraged to submit comments or suggestions to the administration department. 
(Ord. No. 4192, § 1, 6-21-99; Ord. No. 4415, § 1, 3-19-2001)  
C. - External agreements and laws 
In the event of a conflict between the terms of this manual and those of an applicable collective bargaining agreement, the collective bargaining agreement shall control. If any of the policies adopted herein conflict with state or federal laws, or the rules and regulations of the Civil Service Commission, those laws and rules shall take precedence. Some employees may have an employment agreement or contract with the city; in the event of a conflict, that employment agreement shall take precedence. 
(Ord. No. 4192, § 1, 6-21-99; Ord. No. 4415, § 1, 3-19-2001)  
D. - Gender clause 
Whenever the male gender is used in this manual (he, him, his), the term shall be interpreted to mean and apply to both males and females equally. 
(Ord. No. 4192, § 1, 6-21-99; Ord. No. 4415, § 1, 3-19-2001)  
E. - Application 
Unless otherwise provided, the personnel rules shall apply to all officers and employees of the City of West Chicago, except elected officials, board and commission members, and the city attorney. Rules and regulations specifically applicable to employees not covered by the civil service commission are noted throughout the manual. If conflicts arise between the provisions of this manual and either collective bargaining agreements or employment contracts, the latter shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 4192, § 1, 6-21-99; Ord. No. 4415, § 1, 3-19-2001; Ord. No. 06-O-0001, § 2, 2-6-2006)  
F. - Civil service commission 
Additional personnel policies pertaining to sworn personnel in the police department covered under civil service jurisdiction in those positions deemed classified under the Civil Service Act will be found under the civil service rules and regulations published by the civil service commission, and are located in appendix D of the City Code. 
(Ord. No. 4192, § 1, 6-21-99; Ord. No. 4415, § 1, 3-19-2001; Ord. No. 06-O-0001, § 3, 2-6-2006)  
G. - Chain of command 
The city recognizes everyone's right to freedom of expression in matters of public concern. Matters that are merely personal to the employee should be addressed through the hierarchy of command, starting with the immediate supervisor. The management and administration of the city has the responsibility to address issues or decisions that may affect personal aspects of employment, and in many cases they can be resolved. The city maintains a grievance procedure to resolve issues between employees and the city regarding the inappropriate or misapplication of policy contained in the personnel manual. Violating this provision of the manual may lead to disciplinary action. 
(Ord. No. 4192, § 1, 6-21-99; Ord. No. 4415, § 1, 3-19-2001)  
H. - Requests for city personnel 
Department heads shall inform the city administrator of vacancies in their departments. If the city administrator approves the request for a non-appointed employee, he shall forward such request to the chief examiner for the civil service commission to establish an eligible list that will be used to fill the vacancy. 
(Ord. No. 4192, § 1, 6-21-99; Ord. No. 4415, § 1, 3-19-2001)  
I. - Employment categories 
The city classifies positions in three categories: full time, part-time and temporary/seasonal. 
(1)  Full-time: Regular employees scheduled to work a minimum workweek of forty (40) hours. Full-time employees who have successfully completed their probationary period are eligible for the complete benefit program of the city. 
(2)  Part-time: Regular employees scheduled to work less than forty (40) hours a week with no set duration of employment. Part-time employees who have successfully completed their probationary period, are only eligible for vacation time as mentioned later in the manual and legally required mandated benefits, including deductions for the Illinois Municipal Retirement Fund (IMRF). They are also eligible for certain payroll deductions such as deferred compensation plans, direct deposit, medical/dental and dependant care at their own cost, etc. 
(3)  Seasonal or temporary: Employees hired for a specific period of time or for the duration of a specific project or group of assignments of limited duration, not to exceed ninety (90) days in a twelve (12) month period. This category of employees is eligible only for legally mandated benefits. 
(Ord. No. 4192, § 1, 6-21-99; Ord. No. 4415, § 1, 3-19-2001)  
J. - Definitions 
Appointed or exempt position: A position that is filled by the mayor with the consent of the city council. Employment may be governed by a contract signed with the city. 
City: As used in this manual, City means the City of West Chicago. 
City council: As used in this manual, city council refers to the city council of the City of West Chicago. 
City administrator: The city administrator is the chief administrative officer of the city who is appointed by the mayor with the consent of the city council. 
Classified position or protective service: A position that has been appointed by the city administrator from the civil service commission's eligibility list who has successfully completed his probationary period. 
Collective bargaining agreement: As used in these rules, this term will refer to any effective and applicable labor agreement between the City of West Chicago and unions representing employees. 
Continuous service: As used in this manual, this term describes the method by which work time is calculated for the purpose of determining vacation and sick leave benefit accumulation only. Except as otherwise provided by this manual, a unit of continuous service is earned if the employee works at least fifty (50) percent of the days he or she is scheduled in the period appropriate to that unit. Continuous service for all benefits and leave will be calculated from the date of the most recent employment. Past employment will not be calculated and applied toward earnings. 
Discharge/termination: Discharge is the permanent removal from employment with the corresponding permanent loss of all privileges of employment. 
Grievance: The timely expression of dissatisfaction by an employee regarding the application of any of the terms and conditions of employment described in this manual including, but not limited to, the application of disciplinary procedures by a supervisor, rates of pay, hours of work, or application of standard of workload. 
Immediate family: This term refers to an employee's child, spouse or parent. "Parent" means the person who acted as the employee's parent when the employee was a child. Except as otherwise noted, this term does not include a parent-in-law. 
Job evaluation and classification. A technique for analyzing work in which the Activities and requirements of a job are described according to a standardized procedure. Individual jobs are then classified with those sufficiently similar. Jobs are evaluated on a point based system. Points are based on the factors of expertise, decision making, supervisory responsibilities, contact with others required by the job, and working conditions. 
Performance evaluation: This is an objective evaluation of the employee's performance through which an opportunity is provided for the employee to discuss such items as expectations, personal performance, and methods of improvement with a supervisor. 
Regular schedule: Not less than eighty (80) hours per pay period. 
Regular workday: A workday is defined as an eight and one-half (8½) hour day which includes a thirty (30) minute unpaid lunch. 
Reprimand—oral: Oral reprimands consist of a conference between the employee's supervisor or department head issuing the reprimand and the employee for the purpose of expressing disapproval of misconduct or poor work performance, clarifying applicable rules or standards of performance, policies and procedures and warning that repetition of the misconduct or failure to improve work performance may result in more severe discipline. 
Reprimand—written: Written reprimands consist of a conference between the employee's supervisor or department head issuing the reprimand and the employee; and of a letter or memorandum expressing disapproval of misconduct or poor work performance, clarifying applicable rules or standards of performance, policies and procedures and warning that repetition of the misconduct or failure to improve work performance may result in more severe discipline. 
Suspension: A suspension is a temporary removal from employment, which may or may not be accompanied by a concurrent temporary loss of privileges of employment, including, but not limited to, salary and benefits. 
Time worked: A day will be considered worked if the employee is present for their full regular schedule or on a paid holiday, paid vacation or paid leave. 
(Ord. No. 4192, § 1, 6-21-99; Ord. No. 4415, § 1, 3-19-2001)  
K. - Appointment of temporary acting city administrator 
In the event that the city administrator shall be absent from the city or ceases to perform the duties or hold the office of city administrator, the mayor may appoint a temporary acting city administrator to perform the duties of said office until the city administrator returns to the city of a new city administrator is appointed to and qualifies for office. 
(Ord. No. 4415, § 1, 3-19-2001)  
ARTICLE II. - TERMS OF EMPLOYMENT 
 
A. - General provisions 
The city administrator is appointed by the mayor with the consent of the city council. With the exception of those specific positions listed in Article III of the City Code, whose appointments adhere to the same rules, hiring for all other positions falls within the authority of the city administrator or the civil service commission as appropriate. All recruitment and selection processes shall adhere to federal, state and local employment laws. 
(Ord. No. 4192, § 1, 6-21-99; Ord. No. 4415, § 1, 3-19-2001; Ord. No. 06-O-0001, § 5, 2-6-2006)  
B. - Equal employment opportunity 
The City of West Chicago, its officials, agents and employees are legally required to practice policies that are in compliance with federal equal employment opportunity laws and executive orders forbidding any type of discrimination against the employees or applicants. It is the city's policy to offer equal employment opportunity to all persons without regard to race, color, creed, religion, sex, age, national origin or ancestry, marital status, military status (except dishonorable discharge), or qualifying disability or other legally protected category. Any individual's legally protected status shall not be a factor in any phase of employment, including hiring, payment of wages, job assignment, seniority, promotion, transfer, layoff, discipline, discharge, or any other term or condition of employment. No one will be retaliated against by the city for exercising his rights under this policy. 
(Ord. No. 4192, § 1, 6-21-99; Ord. No. 4415, § 1, 3-19-2001)  
C. - Employment application 
In general, applications for employment shall be submitted to the administration department on a prescribed employment application form. The application form shall be completed in its entirety and any evidence of falsification or fraud on the form may be grounds for discharge or disqualification from consideration for employment. 
(Ord. No. 4192, § 1, 6-21-99; Ord. No. 4415, § 1, 3-19-2001)  
D. - Background investigation 
A background investigation may be completed on every new employee prior to employment. Applicants must possess, or qualify to possess, a valid driver's license of the appropriate class depending on the nature of their position or assignment. Driver's license status, along with driving history, must be verified with the secretary of state's office. 
(Ord. No. 4192, § 1, 6-21-99; Ord. No. 4415, § 1, 3-19-2001)  
E. - Post-offer examination: physical and drug/alcohol screen 
Applicants for a full or part-time position who receive a conditional offer of employment may be required to take a post-offer medical examination and/or drug/alcohol screen by a licensed physician designated, and paid for, by the city. Individuals who, with reasonable accommodation, are capable of performing the essential functions of the job will be considered for employment. 
(Ord. No. 4192, § 1, 6-21-99; Ord. No. 4415, § 1, 3-19-2001)  
F. - Citizenship and residence 
All employees of the city hired after November 6, 1986, must be citizens of the United States or be an alien authorized to work in the United States under the provisions of the Federal Immigration Reform and Control Act. All new employees will be required to submit documentation to the city which establishes both the employee's identity and eligibility to work in the United States as required by law. 
Although city employees are encouraged to reside in West Chicago, residency within the city or at any specific distance from the city is not a prerequisite for initial or continued employment unless specifically required in a job description or contract. 
(Ord. No. 4192, § 1, 6-21-99; Ord. No. 4415, § 1, 3-19-2001)  
G. - New employee orientation and training 
It is important for an employee to understand the benefits and conditions of employment from the very outset. An orientation will be conducted by the administration department, on an individual or group basis, on or before you begin work on the first day. During orientation, you will be given enrollment information for the city's benefit plans, required legal documentation will be completed, and you will have the opportunity to ask questions concerning your employment. 
It is the responsibility of the department to orient and train new employees as to the procedures within the department. Such orientation will include an introduction to departmental employees and an explanation of the operations of the department in which the new employee will be working. 
(Ord. No. 4192, § 1, 6-21-99; Ord. No. 4415, § 1, 3-19-2001)  
H. - Probationary period 
All persons employed by the city to fill a position must serve a six (6) month probationary period. 
(1)  The purpose of the probationary period is to evaluate the employee's ability to satisfactorily perform the job and complete the necessary training or education required for the position. An employee's supervisor will monitor the employee's job performance during this period. If the probationary employee fails to attain satisfactory job performance, the employee may be dismissed by the department head upon recommendation to and approval by the city administrator or his designee and, in the case of civil service employees, the civil service commission. 
(2)  Three (3) months after an employee's hire, transfer or promotion, an informal performance evaluation shall be conducted. A formal evaluation of performance by an immediate supervisor shall occur five (5) months after an employee's hire, transfer or promotion. This evaluation will be submitted to the city administrator or his designee and will provide a recommendation for dismissal or retention of the newly hired employee. 
(3)  Upon successful completion of the probationary period, the employee is entitled to all city benefits and privileges prescribed in this manual. If the position is classified, the city administrator or his designee shall notify the civil service commission of a change in an employee's status. 
(4)  During the probationary period, employees are not entitled to use either vacation or personal days. However, under certain circumstances, exceptions may be made with the approval of the department head and city administrator or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 4192, § 1, 6-21-99; Ord. No. 4212, § 2, 9-7-99; Ord. No. 4415, § 1, 3-19-2001)  
I. - Performance appraisals 
Performance appraisals are the formal record of the determinations on which merit pay decisions are made. These tools are also used to: recognize good performance unrelated to pay considerations; document poor performance as a part of the system of correcting such problems; and document progress in correcting performance problems identified in an earlier review or by other means. Employees should use performance appraisals as an opportunity to discuss employee development and training needs; as a record of past performance; and as an opportunity to objectively discuss, with the supervisor, expectations, personal performance and methods of improvement. 
(1)  Formal performance evaluation reports shall be prepared biannually on forms approved by the city administrator. 
(2)  A supervisor should review the employee's personnel file, including prior reviews of goals and success in meeting them and any relevant documentation in advance of the meeting. The departmental performance evaluation should be completed prior to the meeting. 
(3)  Whether an employee is entitled to a pay increase or not, the supervisor will present a written performance appraisal in November (update goals) and April (merit pay review). The employee will be asked to sign this document whether he agrees or disagrees with the contents; the employee may incorporate his own comments in the evaluation. The signature on the completed appraisal means that the employee has had an opportunity to review the document and does not necessarily signify agreement with the supervisor's opinions. 
(4)  Completed appraisals will be forwarded to the department head for review and to add written comments, and then it is submitted to the administration department for final review. The administration department will review each performance evaluation to ensure that there is sufficient supporting evidence of the results of the review. The evaluation will be placed in the employee's official personnel file and each department should keep a copy as well. 
(5)  A performance evaluation expresses the supervisor's opinions and judgments concerning job performance throughout the evaluation period. Because of this, the results of the evaluation are not subject to review or appeal through the grievance procedure or other formal review process. If an employee is in disagreement with the appraisal, he may discuss the issues with the next level of management (within five (5) days of receiving his appraisal) and then to the city administrator or his designee (within five (5) days of receiving the last response). However, their decision is final and must be reported to the applicable supervisor and department head in writing. 
(6)  At any time, a supervisor may elect, and is encouraged, to make a record of specific performance without completing a full evaluation. Such reports should be limited to recognition or problem identification. 
(Ord. No. 4192, § 1, 6-21-99; Ord. No. 4415, § 1, 3-19-2001)  
J. - Change of employment classification 
If department operations permit, as determined by the department head and city administrator, a full-time employee may, upon request, work part-time hours instead of full-time hours in the same position. While on part-time employment status, the following conditions shall apply: 
(1)  The actual length of time on part-time employment status will be determined by the department head and city administrator or his designee. Regardless of the time permitted, part-time employment status will be continuously monitored and may at any time be revoked by the department head and city administrator or his designee. 
(2)  The employee will be treated the same as any other part-time employee. That is, the employee will earn the same benefits as other part-time employees, as outlined in this manual. 
(3)  The employee will not earn any sick leave or vacation credits while working on a part-time basis, but will earn time toward longevity. 
(4)  The employee will be permitted to continue participation in the health and dental programs under the guidelines set forth in article VI, section O of this manual. 
(Ord. No. 4192, § 1, 6-21-99; Ord. No. 4415, § 1, 3-19-2001)  
K. - Transfers 
(1)  Employee's request: Employees who wish to transfer back to a former position shall not be guaranteed the position. 
(2)  Management's request: An employee may be laterally transferred within a department or between departments to a position having the same pay grade and required skill level upon request of the department head of the department to which the employee would be transferring and approval of the city administrator or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 4192, § 1, 6-21-99; Ord. No. 4415, § 1, 3-19-2001; Ord. No. 02-O-0112, § 1, 10-7-2002)  
L. - Time reports 
Each department will provide forms for recording time worked. 
All employees shall be required to: record time accurately and submit a time sheet daily; not sign in or start work before their schedule; take a lunch or dinner break if provided for in their regular shift schedule and record it as time not worked; identify absences which are not considered hours worked for pay purposes; and complete only their own time reports and submit on a timely basis. Supervisors are required to approve each subordinate's time report or pay period time sheet. 
(Ord. No. 4192, § 1, 6-21-99; Ord. No. 4415, § 1, 3-19-2001)  
ARTICLE III. - POSITION CLASSIFICATION PLAN 
 
A. - Purpose 
The purpose of the Classification Plan is to provide a complete and continuous inventory of all positions in the municipal service and accurate descriptions and specifications for each class of employment to allow for the effective and efficient operation of the City. The Plan standardizes titles, each of which is indicative of a definite range of duties and responsibilities, and has the same meaning throughout the municipal service. 
(Ord. No. 4212, § 1, 9-7-99; Ord. No. 4415, § 1, 3-19-2001; Ord. No. 04-O-0024, § 1, 4-5-2004)  
B. - Policy statement 
(1)  On an annual basis in the first quarter of the calendar year, the city administrator will prepare a comprehensive classification pay plan and table of organization to achieve consistent equitable and competitive salary ranges and practices, to the extent possible. 
(2)  Pay practices shall be consistent with the goal of pay for performance for each employee classification. General pay and pay increases will be based primarily on an employee's performance evaluation. 
(3)  In developing the classification and pay plans, the city administrator will rely on appropriate analytical techniques, including the use of salary survey data. 
(4)  The job evaluation shall be used to rank jobs and identify benchmark positions for the compensation comparisons described herein. 
(5)  If no comparative data is available for a particular position, a position's rank when compared to other similar city positions shall be used as a guide to establish the pay range. 
(6)  The city's compensation pay plan is a goal. These personnel rules or pay plan do not create or constitute a promise or contract and shall not be binding upon the city. 
(7)  Nothing in these rules guarantees that any employee is entitled to any particular compensation, except as may be required by law. 
(Ord. No. 4212, § 1, 9-7-99; Ord. No. 4415, § 1, 3-19-2001; Ord. No. 04-O-0024, § 1, 4-5-2004)  
C. - Composition of the classification plan 
The classification pay plan consists of: 
(1)  A grouping into classes of positions which are substantially similar in degree of difficulty, required responsibility, which require the same general qualifications, and which can be equitably compensated within the same range of pay under comparable working conditions. 
(2)  A title which identifies and describes the position of each written classification. 
(3)  Written class specifications for each class of position, containing a description of the nature of the work and of the responsibility of the positions in the class, examples of work which are illustrative of duties of positions assigned to the class, requirements of knowledge, abilities, and skills necessary for performance of the work, a statement of experience and training desirable for recruitment or inclusion into the class and, in certain cases, necessary special qualifications. 
(Ord. No. 4212, § 1, 9-7-99; Ord. No. 4415, § 1, 3-19-2001; Ord. No. 04-O-0024, § 1, 4-5-2004)  
D. - Preparation of job descriptions 
A written job description will usually be developed for all personnel positions of the City of West Chicago. Each job description may include the following items and requirements: 
(1)  Title or position. 
(2)  Definition or description of position. 
(3)  Required, or assigned, supervision. 
(4)  Examples of primary responsibilities and duties divided into essential and non-essential categories. 
(5)  Qualifications including required knowledge and ability statements necessary for the position. 
(6)  Experience and training required for the position. 
(7)  Other special licenses, certifications or requirements for the position. 
All new personnel positions shall have a job description submitted to and approved by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 4212, § 1, 9-7-99; Ord. No. 4415, § 1, 3-19-2001; Ord. No. 04-O-0024, § 1, 4-5-2004)  
E. - Class titles 
Class titles shall be used in all personnel, budget, appropriation, and financial records, wherever possible. 
(Ord. No. 4212, § 1, 9-7-99; Ord. No. 4415, § 1, 3-19-2001; Ord. No. 04-O-0024, § 1, 4-5-2004)  
F. - Class specifications 
Specifications are to be interpreted in their entirety, and in relation to others in the classification plan. Specifications are deemed to be descriptive and explanatory of the kind of work performed and not necessarily inclusive of all duties performed. 
(Ord. No. 4212, § 1, 9-7-99; Ord. No. 4415, § 1, 3-19-2001; Ord. No. 04-O-0024, § 1, 4-5-2004)  
G. - Uses of the classification plan 
The classification plan shall be used: 
(1)  In preparing public announcements of examinations for vacancies or openings. 
(2)  As a guide in preparing examinations that will measure qualifications needed to adequately perform the duties and responsibilities of the class. 
(3)  In determining the lines of promotion according to the civil service rules and regulations. 
(4)  For developing training programs. 
(5)  In preparing personnel expenditures in departmental budgets. 
(6)  In determining salaries or salary ranges for various types of work. 
(7)  In providing uniform job terminology, which is easy to understand by all city officials, employees, and the general public. 
(Ord. No. 4212, § 1, 9-7-99; Ord. No. 4415, § 1, 3-19-2001; Ord. No. 04-O-0024, § 1, 4-5-2004)  
H. - Maintenance of the classification plan 
The city administrator, or his designee, shall make necessary amendments to the classification plan in the form of new classes, revision of existing classes and the elimination of classes no longer required in the plan. Revisions of class specifications and reallocations within the classification plan shall be made as follows: 
(1)  The city administrator, or his designee, shall review the duties and responsibilities of each new position as it is created and positions which duties and responsibilities have changed and designate the appropriate pay range using the principles of internal and external parity. 
(2)  The city administrator, or his designee, shall periodically review the classification of positions and, upon the basis of these investigations, may combine, upgrade, downgrade, eliminate, or, if necessary, establish new classifications. 
(3)  An employee who wishes to have the classification of that position reviewed should refer to the steps in the grievance procedure of these rules. (See Article VII, Employee Conduct and Disciplinary Procedure, Section C, Grievance Procedure). 
(Ord. No. 4212, § 1, 9-7-99; Ord. No. 4415, § 1, 3-19-2001; Ord. No. 04-O-0024, § 1, 4-5-2004)  
ARTICLE IV. - COMPENSATION PLAN 
 
A. - Composition of the compensation plan 
The compensation pay plan shall be administered by the city administrator and shall include the schedules of standard salary ranges consisting of minimum and maximum rates of pay included in the classification plan. 
The objectives of the pay plan are: 
(a)  To provide salary ranges which are reasonably comparable to those paid by other governmental jurisdictions in the immediate area. 
(b)  To maintain internal parity among positions of similar responsibility and skill levels. 
(c)  To provide a plan based on merit. 
(d)  To provide orderly and uniform means of recognizing employees for good performances. 
(e)  To simplify and facilitate payroll administration, budgeting, and other phases of financial and personnel administration. 
(Ord. No. 4212, § 1, 9-7-99; Ord. No. 4415, § 1, 3-19-2001; Ord. No. 04-O-0024, § 1, 4-5-2004)  
B. - Development and maintenance of salary ranges 
(1)  Salary ranges shall be reflective of position classification and shall be determined with due regard to the following factors: 
(a)  The knowledge, skills, and abilities required to satisfactorily perform the work. 
(b)  The nature and degree of supervision received. 
(c)  The nature of supervision exercised. 
(d)  Any special working conditions related to the work. 
(2)  Prior to the preparation of each annual budget, as well as at other times as determined by the city administrator, the city administrator shall make or shall cause to have made such comparative studies as deemed necessary to assess and evaluate the factors affecting the level of salary ranges. On the basis of information derived from such studies and other sources, the city administrator may make changes in the assignment of salary ranges to classes. 
(Ord. No. 4212, § 1, 9-7-99; Ord. No. 4415, § 1, 3-19-2001; Ord. No. 04-O-0024, § 1, 4-5-2004)  
C. - Appointment rate 
(1)  The minimum rate of pay for a class shall be paid upon appointment to the class, except that appointment rates above the minimum rate may be paid if the department head submits a written request outlining reasons for such action, which request is subject to approval by the city administrator. 
(2)  Justification for approval will be limited to recognition of exceptional qualifications of a candidate or lack of available candidates at the minimum rate. If a former employee is re-employed in a class in which he was previously employed, the city administrator may approve an appointment at the same rate of pay which the employee was receiving at the termination or separation of his service, provided it is within the appropriate salary range. 
(Ord. No. 4212, § 1, 9-7-99; Ord. No. 4415, § 1, 3-19-2001; Ord. No. 04-O-0024, § 1, 4-5-2004)  
D. - Rate of pay in transfer, promotion or demotion 
If an employee is transferred, promoted or demoted, the rate of pay for the new position shall be determined as follows: 
(1)  If the rate of pay in the former class is less than the minimum rate established for the class in the new position, the rate of pay shall be increased at least to the minimum for the class, as approved by the city administrator. 
(2)  If the rate of pay in the former class is more than the maximum rate established for the new class, the pay shall be reduced to the maximum rate or an intermediate increment of the new range, as approved by the city administrator. 
(3)  If the rate of pay in the former class falls within the new salary range, the rate of pay shall remain the same in the case of transfer. Rate of pay shall be increased in the case of promotion by an amount or percentage established by the city administrator. At the discretion of the department head, with the approval of the city administrator, rate of pay shall remain the same or shall be adjusted to a lower rate of pay in case of demotion. 
(4)  If a reclassification of a position results in a revised salary range, the employee serving in the position shall have the rate of pay increased if necessary, to the minimum for the class. 
(5)  If a reclassification of a position results in an employee's rate of pay exceeding the maximum rate of pay for the new position, the employee's rate of pay shall not be reduced. Raises for employees in this situation shall only be by incentive. 
(Ord. No. 4212, § 1, 9-7-99; Ord. No. 4415, § 1, 3-19-2001; Ord. No. 04-O-0024, § 1, 4-5-2004)  
E. - Rate of pay 
Rate of pay increases shall be made on the recommendation of the department head and are subject to approval by the city administrator, as indicated by performance evaluations. Reclassification of a position to a lower grade shall not automatically require a reduction in pay rate to anyone earning in excess of the new grade level, but it will preclude general increases. The city shall approve any annual salary adjustments in the budget process for that particular year; pay ranges shall be automatically increased by this adjustment, and shall require no further council action. 
(Ord. No. 4212, § 1, 9-7-99; Ord. No. 4415, § 1, 3-19-2001; Ord. No. 04-O-0024, § 1, 4-5-2004)  
F. - Incentive pay 
(1)  All employees at the top of their salary range shall be eligible for incentive pay. Incentive pay shall be based on the merit raise set by the city administrator and established in the approved budget. 
(2)  The results of the performance evaluation must be above the median category by employees at the top of their salary range before incentive pay can be earned. 
(3)  Incentive pay may be granted by department heads. Payment shall be made four (4) times per year in checks separate from employee's paychecks. The incentive pay shall not be added to the base salary of employees. Incentive pay must be earned in each year before it is paid out. Employees leaving city employment shall receive incentive pay accrued but not paid. 
(Ord. No. 4212, § 1, 9-7-99; Ord. No. 4415, § 1, 3-19-2001; Ord. No. 04-O-0024, § 1, 4-5-2004)  
G. - Overtime/compensatory work 
The city compensates for overtime in conformity with the expressed provisions of the Fair Labor Standards Act, as amended. Generally, the city will compensate employees required to work in excess of forty (40) hours at the rate of one and one-half-hours (1½) for each hour of authorized overtime worked. Paid leave, holidays, personal days, and vacation are counted in determining work which is in excess of the regular work period. Overtime may only be worked upon approval of an employee's supervisor; employees will be disciplined for working overtime which their supervisor has not approved (unauthorized overtime). Employees are expected to work overtime hours if required by departmental needs. 
A regular work period is established for each position by department heads in accordance with payroll schedule. This work period may be changed by the department head depending on the department's needs. Overtime will not be paid for scheduled changes in the work period. Emergency situations are excluded from this prohibition. 
With the department head's approval, and at the employees' option, employees may take compensatory time off in lieu of pay to the rate one and one-half (1½) hours for each hour of authorized overtime. Employee requests for using compensatory time shall follow department procedures and shall not be unreasonably denied. 
Overtime shall be recorded and reported according to the following rules: 
(1)  Overtime shall be reported in units of one-quarter hour. 
(2)  An employee shall be given credit for one-quarter hour only if he has worked half of that period. 
(3)  The City reserves the right to assign overtime based on an employee's performance record as determined by their Department Head. 
(Ord. No. 4212, § 1, 9-7-99; Ord. No. 4415, § 1, 3-19-2001; Ord. No. 04-O-0024, § 1, 4-5-2004)  
H. - Pay review 
1.  Biannual reviews . All regular full-time and part-time employees are considered for merit pay raises based on performance evaluations conducted each April and each October based upon budgetary considerations, merit pay may be given at any point during the fiscal year, of which shall be at the discretion of the city administrator. 
2.  Probationary review 
(a)  Appointed employees. All appointed employees are subject to a probationary period established by these rules. All such employees, who satisfactorily complete their probationary period may be eligible for a pay increase. 
(b)  All classified employees . All classified employees are subject to a probationary period established by these rules. All such employees, who satisfactorily complete their probationary period and are granted civil service status to a regular full-time or part-time position with the city may be eligible for a pay increase. 
(Ord. No. 4212, § 1, 9-7-99; Ord. No. 4415, § 1, 3-19-2001; Ord. No. 04-O-0024, § 1, 4-5-2004)  
I. - Longevity pay 
Longevity pay shall be granted to regular full-time employees and shall be paid annually in addition to the employees' base salary according to the following schedule: 
Years of service as of May 1 of each year 	Annual Payment 
Zero through ten (10) years 	$  0.00 
Ten (10) years and one (1) day through fifteen (15) years 	$100.00 
Fifteen (15) years and one (1) day through twenty (20) years 	$200.00 
Twenty (20) years and one (1) day years 	$300.00 
 
(Ord. No. 4212, § 1, 9-7-99; Ord. No. 4415, § 1, 3-19-2001; Ord. No. 04-O-0024, § 1, 4-5-2004)  
J. - Holiday pay 
Employees shall receive eight (8) hours' pay in addition to their regular pay for all such holidays worked. Employees working on a holiday shall also receive either (1) additional half-time pay for such hours worked; or (2) an equivalent number of compensatory hours off work at the employer's election and in accordance with this policy. Employees shall work all holidays when scheduled as part of the work schedule. To be eligible for holiday pay, an employee must work his regularly scheduled day before and after the holiday, in addition to the holiday, when scheduled as part of his normal departmental work schedule. If an employee is absent from work the day before or after a holiday, the employee will not receive holiday pay until proof of illness or excusable absence is established to the satisfaction of the department head. An employee not scheduled to work on a holiday who does work on the holiday shall receive holiday pay of one and one-half (1½) times the employee's regular straight time hourly rate of pay for the Actual hours worked on the holiday. This section only pertains to full-time employees of the city. 
(Ord. No. 4212, § 1, 9-7-99; Ord. No. 4415, § 1, 3-19-2001; Ord. No. 04-O-0024, § 1, 4-5-2004)  
K. - Call-in or call-back pay 
Employees who are called to duty by their department head, supervisor or city administrator, shall receive a minimum of two (2) hours' pay at the overtime rate in accordance with the previously stated overtime policy. 
(Ord. No. 4212, § 1, 9-7-99; Ord. No. 4415, § 1, 3-19-2001; Ord. No. 04-O-0024, § 1, 4-5-2004)  
L. - Errors 
Adjustments to pay may be made to correct computational errors at any time. Employees will be notified of the error and the date of the correction as soon as possible. It is the employee's responsibility to inform the city if an error occurs in his pay. 
(Ord. No. 4212, § 1, 9-7-99; Ord. No. 4415, § 1, 3-19-2001; Ord. No. 04-O-0024, § 1, 4-5-2004)  
ARTICLE V. - LEAVE BENEFITS 
 
A. - Holidays 
(1)  Except as otherwise authorized, all full-time employees will receive the following days off with pay: 
New Year's Day 
Memorial Day 
Independence Day 
Labor Day 
Thanksgiving Day 
Day after Thanksgiving 
Christmas Day 
One-half (½) day on Christmas Eve* 
One-half (½) day on December 31* 
* City offices, except those providing essential services, shall close at 12:00 p.m. on these days whenever Christmas and New Year's Day fall on a Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday or Friday. When Christmas and New Year's Day fall on a Sunday, Monday or Saturday, employees will be permitted to take an additional floating holiday over the course of the fiscal year, in lieu of the one-half (½) day for Christmas Eve and New Year's Eve. [2] 
(2)  Holidays which occur on a Sunday are normally observed on the following Monday; those which occur on a Saturday are normally observed on the previous Friday. 
(3)  If an employee is absent from work the day before or after a holiday, the employee will not receive holiday pay until proof of illness or excusable absence is established to the satisfaction of the department head. 
(4)  New full-time employees become eligible to take scheduled holidays upon employment. 
(Ord. No. 4192, § 1, 6-21-99; Ord. No. 4415, § 1, 3-19-2001) 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Public Works employees shall work the first four hours of their normally scheduled workday. 
 
B. - Floating holidays 
In consideration of other holidays not included in section A, employees shall receive three (3) floating holidays per fiscal year. 
(1)  Floating holidays do not accumulate from fiscal year to fiscal year; however, as noted below, employees hired in the last six (6) months of a fiscal year may carry over their floating holidays, but must use them within the first six (6) months of the next fiscal year. 
(2)  Newly-hired employees earn floating holidays based on the following: 
Month of Hire 	Number of Floating 
Holidays 	Carry-Over 
May-August 	3 	No 
September-December 	2 	Yes (if hired in Nov. or Dec.) 
January-April 	1 	Yes 
 
(3)  Floating holidays may not be used by full-time employees until the probationary period has been successfully completed. 
(4)  Floating holidays may be taken at any time or for any reason provided seventy-two (72) hours' notice is given to the immediate supervisor. A supervisor may refuse such leave because of departmental needs. A floating holiday may be used with less than seventy-two (72) hours' notice if approved by the department head. 
(5)  The use of floating holidays shall be limited to increments of either four (4) or eight (8) hours. 
(6)  Temporary, part-time and employees on leaves of absence or layoffs are not eligible for floating holidays. 
(Ord. No. 4192, § 1, 6-21-99; Ord. No. 4415, § 1, 3-19-2001)  
C. - Personal days—Sick leave reward 
Full-time employees shall be given eight (8) hours off with straight time pay each fiscal year. In addition, a full-time employee may earn an additional eight (8) hours of straight time pay for every fiscal quarter (i.e., May-July, August-October, November-January, and February-April) that such an employee does not use any sick time. Employees may accumulate up to forty (40) hours for personal days per fiscal year. The following provisions shall govern personal days: 
(1)  Employees on probation shall be eligible to earn personal days, but shall not be able to take them until after successful completion of the probationary period. If a probationary employee takes time off for any reason during his/her probationary period, this time will be counted against earning personal days. An employee who quits or is terminated before the end of the probationary period will not be paid for personal days. 
(2)  Non-probationary employees may carry over earned personal days to the next fiscal year. Forty (40) hours can be carried over to the next fiscal year, but must be used within the first six (6) months of that fiscal year. 
(3)  Personal days may be taken at any time or for any reason, provided at least seventy-two (72) hours' notice is given to the immediate supervisor, provided a supervisor may refuse such leave because of department needs. A personal day may be used with less than seventy-two (72) hours' notice, but only if approved by the department head. 
(4)  The employee shall not have to provide a reason for taking the personal day. 
(5)  The use of personal days shall be limited to increments of either four (4) or eight (8) hours. 
(6)  There shall be no payment in lieu of taking personal days. 
(7)  Personal days may be coupled with other types of paid leave if an employee so chooses, provided such other types of paid leave have been earned and have been scheduled in accordance with the provisions of this agreement. 
(Ord. No. 4192, § 1, 6-21-99; Ord. No. 4415, § 1, 3-19-2001; Ord. No. 07-O-0032, § 1, 4-16-2007)  
D. - Vacation leave 
(1)  Classified employees are eligible for the following paid vacation benefits annually: 
Years of Service 	Days per Month 	Days Per Year 
0—6 years 	0.833 	10 
6 years and 
one day —12 years 	1.250 	15 
12 years and 
one day —18 years 	1.660 	20 
18 years and 
one day or more 	2.080 	25 
 
(2)  Employees beginning employment from the first through the fifteenth day of the month shall be granted 0.833 days for that month of service. Employees beginning the sixteenth day to the end of the month shall receive 0.416 days for that month's service. 
(3)  All appointed employees will follow the same paid vacation schedule as classified employees, with the addition of one (1) week for each earned vacation period. Notwithstanding the foregoing, appointed employees subject to the Fair Labor Standards Act shall not be eligible for the additional one (1) week for each earned vacation period. 
(4)  Vacation time may not be used during an employee's first six (6) months of employment with the city. For classified employees, this period coincides with the probationary period. 
(5)  Eligible employees shall earn vacation on a monthly basis. 
(6)  For the purposes of determining vacation eligibility, the employee's date of employment, and not the calendar year, is controlling. 
(7)  Employees may only carry over up to a maximum of their annual leave rate from one (1) fiscal year to the next. Employees may only carry over more than their annual leave allotment for scheduled medical reasons brought to the attention of and approved by the city prior to the end of the current fiscal year. If an employee has a scheduled medical issue within the first quarter of the upcoming fiscal year and believes that he will exhaust his sick leave bank and need additional time to attend to such, the employee may place a request to carry over vacation time, in writing, and submit it for approval to the employee's department head and the assistant city administrator. Such approval shall not be unreasonably denied, so long as this written request is accompanied by a note from the employee's personal physician indicating: that surgery or some other medical procedure has been scheduled during the first quarter of the upcoming fiscal year and the total amount of time the doctor believes the employee will be away from work to attend to such issue. All vacation leave carried over for this purpose shall be paid at the employee's rate of pay at the time the request was made. The city may request additional written updates from the employee's personal physician during the time of the employee's absence to ensure that the employee returns to work as soon as he is able. Failure to use all carried over leave for this purpose by the end of the first quarter of the fiscal year shall result in its forfeiture. 
(8)  Employees ordinarily earn vacation time before vacation days are used. However, with the prior approval of the department head and assistant city administrator, an employee may receive an advance of up to five (5) vacation days. If the employee uses this advance, and subsequently decides to leave the employ of the city prior to the beginning of the next fiscal year, the city shall deduct such time from the employee's final paycheck. 
(9)  As of March 30 of any fiscal year, employees who earn at least three (3) weeks of vacation leave per year may request pay in lieu of taking all or a portion of this time, the amount subject to the city administrator's approval and budget considerations. Said payment shall be provided in April of the applicable year. 
(10)  No vacation credits shall accrue in any month while an employee is on emergency leave, disability leave not work related, or when the employee is paid for less than half the number of working days in that month. Vacation, personal days, sick leave and disability leave under workers' compensation shall be counted toward time worked. 
(11)  Employees shall be paid for all earned vacation upon separation from employment with the city, regardless of the nature of the separation. 
(12)  Vacation periods shall be taken in minimum one-half (½) day increments at a time. All vacation periods shall be approved by an employee's department head or designee prior to the commencement of the vacation period. 
(13)  All employees classified and appointed with twenty (20) or more years of service with the city shall be entitled to an extra day (eight (8) hours) of vacation for each year of full-time employment, during the year before retirement, to be granted at a time or times approved by the department head, or in the case of department heads, as approved by the city administrator. 
Employees must provide their department head with at least one (1) year written notice of their retirement; with an exact date of retirement to be given no later than four (4) months prior to retirement. The primary purpose of this benefit is to allow the employee additional time to adjust and prepare for retirement. Therefore, employees can not take a cash payment in lieu of all or part of this special vacation allowance and the time off should be taken at different periods throughout the year. Any exceptions to this policy can only be made though the city administrator. If an employee for some reason does not retire by the designated date, the employee shall pay back the city the value of the extra awarded vacation. 
(14)  Each year, the department heads shall, in consultation with their employees, determine the departmental vacation schedule. Where conflicts in vacation selection occur, the employee with seniority shall be given first choice up to April 1. After April 1, vacations will be granted based on the priority of submission of vacation request. 
(Ord. No. 4192, § 1, 6-21-99; Ord. No. 4254, § 1, 12-20-99; Ord. No. 4334, § 1, 8-21-2000; Ord. No. 4415, § 1, 3-19-2001; Ord. No. 06-O-0026, § 1, 3-20-2006; Ord. No. 07-O-0028, § 1, 3-19-2007)  
E. - Family and medical leave 
(1)  Employees who have been employed for at least one (1) year, and for at least twelve hundred fifty (1,250) hours during the preceding twelve-month period are eligible for family and medical leave. For employees not eligible for family and medical leave, the City of West Chicago will review and consider the individual circumstances. 
(2)  There are three (3) types of leave covered by this policy: 
(a)  Birth/adoption of daughter or son: Employees granted FMLA leave for the birth of a son or daughter, the care for the newborn daughter or son, or for placement of a daughter or son for adoption or foster care shall substitute in the following order accrued paid personal leave and all but one (1) week's worth of vacation leave for all of any unpaid FMLA leave. At the employee's discretion, he or she may use the remaining week of vacation leave. 
(b)  Serious health condition of a family member: Eligible employees on FMLA leave shall be required to substitute in the following order paid sick leave (to the extent they are otherwise eligible under section G herein), personal leave and all but one (1) week's worth of vacation leave for all of any unpaid FMLA leave relating to care for a family member with a serious health condition. At the employee's discretion, he or she may use the remaining week of vacation leave. 
(c)  Serious health condition of employee: Eligible employees on FMLA leave shall be required to substitute in the following order paid sick leave, personal leave and all but one (1) week's worth of vacation leave for all of any unpaid FMLA leave relating to employee's own serious health condition. At the employee's discretion, he or she may use the remaining week of vacation leave. 
(3)  An employee may take leave intermittently or arrange a reduced work schedule depending on the circumstances. If the leave is for the birth or placement of a daughter or son for adoption or foster care, the employee may take intermittent leave or have a reduced work schedule only if the city agrees, except that the city's agreement is not necessary if the mother has a serious health condition in connection with the birth or her child or the newborn child has a serious health condition. Leave may also be taken intermittently or on a reduced work schedule when medically necessary for planned and/or unanticipated medical treatment of a related serious health condition by or under the supervision of a health care provider or for recovery from treatment or recovery from a serious health condition. It may also be taken to provide care or psychological comfort to an immediate family member with a serious health condition. 
(4)  All such paid leave that qualifies for FMLA leave shall be counted toward the maximum twelve (12) week FMLA leave. Employees will be notified when such paid leave has been credited as FMLA leave. 
(5)  The City of West Chicago will post the rights of employees under the Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993 in all municipal facilities. 
(6)  Reason for leave: All employees who meet the applicable time-of-service requirements may be granted a total of twelve (12) work weeks of unpaid family and/or medical leave during a twelve-month period for the following reasons: 
(a)  The birth of an employee's daughter or son and in order to care for the daughter or son; 
(b)  The placement of a daughter or son with an employee for adoption or foster care; 
(c)  To care for a spouse, daughter or son, parent or parent in-law who has a serious health condition; or 
(d)  A serious health condition that renders the employee unable to perform the functions of his or her job. 
(7)  Definitions 
EMPLOYMENT BENEFITS: The term "employment benefits: shall include all benefits provided or made available to employees by an employer, including group life insurance, health insurance, disability insurance, sick leave, annual leave, educational benefits and pensions, regardless of whether such benefits are provided by a practice or written policy of employer. 
HEALTH CARE PROVIDER: The term "health care provider" means (A) a doctor of medicine or osteopathy who is authorized to practice medicine or surgery (as appropriate) by the state in which the doctor practices; or (B) any other person determined by the Secretary of Labor to be capable of providing health care services. 
PARENT: The term "parent" means the biological parent of an employee or an individual who stood in loco parentis to an employee when the employee was a son or daughter. 
REDUCED LEAVE SCHEDULE: The term "reduced leave schedule" means a leave schedule that reduces the usual number of hours per workweek, or hours per workday, of an employee. 
SERIOUS HEALTH CONDITION: The term "serious health condition" means an illness, injury, impairment or physical or mental condition that involves (A) inpatient care in a hospital, hospice or residential medical care facility including any period of incapacity or any subsequent treatment in connection with such inpatient care; or (B) continuing treatment by a health care provider. 
SON OR DAUGHTER: The term "son or daughter" means a biological, adopted or foster child, a stepdaughter or son, a legal ward or a daughter or son of a person standing in loco parentis, who is (A) under eighteen (18) years of age; or (B) eighteen (18) years of age or older and incapable of self care because of a mental or physical disability. 
SPOUSE: The term "spouse" means a husband or wife, as the case may be. 
(8)  Application for leave: In all cases, an employee requesting leave must complete a form provided by the city and return it to the administration department. The completed application must state the reason for the leave, the duration of the leave, and the starting and ending dates of the leave. 
(9)  Notice of leave: An employee intending to take family or medical leave, if the leave is foreseeable based on an expected birth or placement, or because of a planned medical treatment for a serious health condition of the employee or a family member, must submit an application for leave at least thirty (30) days before the leave is to begin. If such is not practicable, notice must be given as soon as practicable. 
(10)  Medical certification of leave: Within fifteen (15) days of filing an application for leave based on the serious health condition of the employee or the employee's spouse, daughter or son, or parent, the employee must also file a medical certification on a form provided by the city and completed by the health care provider of the employee or an ill family member. Such certificate shall contain such information as is permitted by the FMLA. 
The city can pay for a second opinion if it doubts the validity of the original certification. If the second opinion conflicts with the original, the employer may pay for a third opinion. The provider of the third opinion must be jointly designated or approved by the city and the employee. The third opinion will be final. Copies of the second and third opinions shall be provided to the employee upon request. The city may also require periodic recertification of certain medical conditions or updates as to the status and intention of the employee's return to work. 
Failure to satisfy the certification requirements may result in delaying or revocation of the taking of leave until such documentation is provided. 
(11)  Benefits' coverage during leave: During a period of family or medical leave, an employee will be retained on the city health plan under the same conditions that applied before leave commenced. To continue health coverage, the employee must continue to make any contributions that he or she made to the plan before taking leave. Failure of the employee to pay his or her share of the health insurance premium may result in loss of coverage. 
If the employee fails to return to work after the expiration of the leave, the employee will be required to reimburse the city for payment of the employee's portion of the health insurance premiums during the family leave, unless the reason the employee fails to return is the presence of a serious health condition which prevents the employee from performing his or her job or to circumstances beyond the employee's control. 
An employee who takes family or medical leave will not lose any seniority or employment benefits that accrued before the date leave began. 
(12)  Restoration to employment: An employee eligible for family and medical leave will be restored to his or her old position or to a position with equivalent pay, benefits, and other terms and conditions of employment. The city cannot guarantee that an employee will be returned to his or her original job. 
(13)  Return from leave: An employee must complete a "Notice of Intention to Return From Family or Medical Leave" before he or she can return to active status. If an employee wishes to return to work prior to the expiration of a family or medical leave of absence, notification must be given to the administration department at least two (2) working days prior to the employee's planned return. After submitting such notice, an employee will await confirmation from the administration department stating that he or she may return to work. 
(14)  Failure to return from leave: The failure of an employee to return to work upon the expiration of a family or medical leave of absence may subject the employee to immediate termination unless an extension is granted in writing. An employee who requests an extension of family leave or medical leave due to the continuation, recurrence or onset of his own serious health condition, or of the serious health condition of the employee's spouse, daughter or son or parent, must submit a request for an extension, in writing, to the employee's immediate supervisor. This written request should be made as soon as the employee realizes that he will not be able to return at the expiration of the leave period. The city will notify the employee failing to return from leave about COBRA and her or his obligations under the program. 
If a leave extension is granted, the city will make its best effort to keep an employee's job open until her or his return. However, if the city feels that it is necessary to fill the position to successfully perform its operations, it will submit a letter to said employee informing her or him of the decision. The employee will then have seven (7) calendar days to inform the city of his desire to return to work. If the employee does not feel that he is capable of returning to work, the city will take the steps necessary to fill that position and subsequently place the employee's name on a rehire list which will make her or him eligible to fill a similar position in the city. 
(15)  Concurrent running of other leave: The leave provisions provided for in other sections of the City Code shall run concurrently with the leave provisions provided for under this section. 
(Ord. No. 4192, § 1, 6-21-99; Ord. No. 4415, § 1, 3-19-2001)  
F. - Funeral leave 
In the event of a death in the immediate family, the employee will be granted up to three (3) days of paid funeral leave with pay to attend the funeral; the department head or designee may approve an employee's request for up to two (2) additional days and if granted, such additional day(s) shall be deducted from the employee's accumulated sick leave or other accrued benefit leave time. For this purpose, "immediate family" shall be defined as the employee's spouse, parent, sibling, child, grandparent, grandchild, or the parent, sibling or child of the employee's spouse. Stepparent, child and sibling shall be included in the definition of "immediate family." In the event of a death of an employee's son-in-law, daughter-in-law, aunt, uncle, niece or nephew, the employee will be granted one (1) day of paid funeral leave with pay to attend the funeral; the department head or designee may approve an employee's request for up to two (2) additional days and, if granted, such additional day(s) shall be deducted from the employee's accumulated sick leave or other accrued benefit leave time. An employee shall provide satisfactory evidence of the death of the affected family member and the employee's attendance at the funeral if so requested by the city. 
(Ord. No. 4192, § 1, 6-21-99; Ord. No. 4334, §§ 2, 3, 8-21-2000; Ord. No. 4415, § 1, 3-19-2001; Ord. No. 07-O-0032, § 2, 4-16-2007)  
G. - Sick leave 
(1)  Full-time employees will have sick leave pay accrued at the rate of one (1) day of sick pay for each full month of employment for a total of twelve (12) days per year. To be eligible for sick leave, a new employee must have completed his six (6) month probationary period. 
(2)  Sick leave shall not be considered a right which may be used at the employee's discretion, but shall be allowed only in the following situations: 
(a)  Actual sickness, injury, hospitalization or disability of the employee. 
(b)  Medical or dental appointments which cannot be scheduled outside of working hours, with the approval of the department head. 
(c)  Up to two (2) days of sick leave per incident may be used to care for an illness or disability of the employee's immediate family, as defined as the employee's parents, spouse, children, step-parent and step-child. If needed and requested documentation is provided, the department head, after consulting the city administrator or designee, may allow additional sick leave to be used for this purpose. 
(3)  The supervisor or department head may require an employee who is on sick leave to submit a doctor's note which indicates the specific nature of the illness or injury, and require the employee to provide a prognosis from the physician as to the earliest date when the employee will be able to return to work and perform the essential job functions of the position or any restricted duty assignment. 
The supervisor or department head may require an employee to have the doctor's note updated should the employee not return to work within the time frame originally established by the physician. Any cost associated with providing a physician's statement is the responsibility of the employee. 
(4)  Sick leave shall not be authorized for illness, injury or disability incurred in employment other than with the City of West Chicago. 
(5)  The department head, with the approval of the city administrator or his designee, may require an employee to submit to a physical or psychological examination, at city expense, to determine whether the employee is still able to perform the essential functions of his job. 
(6)  There is no limit on the number of sick days an employee can earn. An absence attributable to a work-related injury shall not be credited against an employee's earned sick leave, except as provided in section K of this article. 
(7)  According to department rules, the employee shall personally notify the supervisor or department head of a sick leave absence on the day of the absence and, upon return to work, report and explain the absence to the supervisor or department head. 
In the event of elective surgery which may result in the employee being away from work for a period of one (1) week or more, the employee is required to give at least two (2) week's notification to the supervisor or department head. 
In the event the employee is unable to personally notify the supervisor or department head on the day of the absence, it is the responsibility of the employee to cause notification to be made to the supervisor or department head. 
(8)  The supervisor or department head may send an employee home on sick leave if the employee appears ill and threatens the health of other employees. 
(9)  Any abuse of sick leave policy may result in non-payment of sick leave benefits and shall be grounds for disciplinary action. Abuse of sick leave shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
a.  Failure to notify the department head or supervisor of an absence and the condition causing the absence; 
b.  Failure to provide medical documentation required by this policy to the department head or supervisor; 
c.  A continual pattern of absences; 
d.  A high incidence of absences, the number of which, are detrimental to the efficient operation of the employee's department; 
e.  Failure of an employee to abide by an approved reduction in leave absence plan as referenced in subsection (10)d. below. 
(10)  If the sick leave absence continues beyond the number of sick leave days the employee has earned, consideration will be given to the following: 
a.  Placement on an unpaid leave of absence; 
b.  Transfer to disability benefits under the appropriate retirement fund; 
c.  Termination of employment if not eligible for disability compensation under the appropriate retirement fund; 
d.  Employee's preparation and submission of a written proposal within five (5) days of his department head or supervisor's request, proposing a plan for avoiding a high incidence of sick leave absences, which may be approved or modified by the department head, and which after the department head's approval, shall become the employee's obligation to implement. Failure of an employee to submit a proposal within the five (5) days may result in the employee's department head or supervisor formulating a reduction of sick leave absences plan which shall become the employee's obligation to implement. 
(11)  Time taken as sick leave as well as absences beyond an employee's accumulated sick leave, may qualify for treatment under the Family and Medical Leave Act. 
(Ord. No. 4192, § 1, 6-21-99; Ord. No. 4334, §§ 4, 5, 8-21-2000; Ord. No. 4415, § 1, 3-19-2001)  
H. - Military leave 
(1)  Full-time service: Any full-time employee who is ordered to active duty with a component of the U.S. Armed Forces during military conflict, civil disorder or natural disaster shall be granted a military leave of absence. 
(a)  Employees shall sign their military checks over to the city upon receipt of payment, or keep this payment and forfeit their city pay. 
(b)  Health insurance for the employee and dependents will remain in effect for the same period. 
(c)  Upon release from the military, the employee shall notify the department head as soon as is reasonably possible. 
(d)  For ninety (90) days upon release from the military, the employee may be reinstated with the city without loss of seniority and will have accrued other benefits as though city service was uninterrupted. The employee's return to work will be governed by the provisions of federal law. 
(2)  Reserve service: When necessary, an employee will be granted up to two (2) weeks' military leave to serve on annual active duty for training with a reserve component of the U.S. Armed Forces, including the National Guard and Coast Guard, upon presentation of a copy of orders indicating the compensation received during a training period. 
(a)  Employees shall sign their military checks over to the city upon receipt of payment, or keep this payment and forfeit their city pay. 
(b)  Monthly reserve training component meetings shall be the responsibility and obligation of the employee. Department heads may accommodate employees by permitting requests for vacation or requests for accrued time off. 
(Ord. No. 4192, § 1, 6-21-99; Ord. No. 4415, § 1, 3-19-2001)  
I. - Jury duty leave 
Employees will be eligible for jury duty leave, with full straight-time pay, upon receipt of a notice to appear in court for such purpose. Employees are not eligible for travel expenses under the city policy, however, any monies received from the court may be retained to cover these expenses. Upon returning from jury leave, employees must present documentation (e.g. pay stub or identification badge) showing how long they were retained for jury service. This section does not apply to court duty where an employee is testifying either for the city or some other party, which would be in accordance with their job duties. This section also applies to part-time employees, assuming that jury duty falls on a regularly scheduled day of work. 
(Ord. No. 4192, § 1, 6-21-99; Ord. No. 4415, § 1, 3-19-2001)  
J. - Unpaid leave of absence 
(1)  An employee who has exhausted all earned vacation leave, sick leave (if applicable), floating holidays, personal days and compensatory time may request, in writing, an unpaid leave of absence. A request for an unpaid leave of absence requires the approval of the department head and the city administrator. 
(2)  An unpaid leave of absence totaling less than thirty (30) calendar days will have no effect on longevity, sick or vacation leave accrual. An employee may continue in the health and life insurance programs provided arrangements are made by the employee to pay the full premium cost for the period the employee is absent from work. 
(3)  An unpaid leave of absence longer than thirty (30) calendar days may result in the termination of all benefits. If an employee does not return from an unpaid leave of absence as scheduled, the employee may be deemed to have resigned. 
(4)  In addition to the foregoing, unpaid leaves of absence shall also be granted to employees who have been injured either on the job or off the job and who are unable to return to work. Said leave shall be granted for a period of one (1) year from and after the date of the injury, except as otherwise required by law or contract; provided, however, that said leave shall terminate sooner upon the occurrence of any of the following: (a) the employee resigns; (2) the employee takes employment elsewhere; or (c) the employee applies for and receives either a retirement or disability pension. The one year period shall be tolled if the employee temporarily returns to work. 
(5)  An unpaid leave of absence will also be granted under the terms and conditions of the Family and Medical Leave Act (see section E). 
(Ord. No. 4192, § 1, 6-21-99; Ord. No. 4415, § 1, 3-19-2001)  
K. - Disability leave—On duty injury/illness 
If an employee is injured on the job, no matter how slightly, he must promptly report the injury to his immediate supervisor and file a written accident report possibly entitling him to workers' compensation benefits. 
(1)  The workers' compensation benefit will pay for all related and reasonable medical and hospital expenses incurred due to injuries received. 
(2)  In the event an employee is off work in order to recover from an injury caused by the employee's work, the city's workers' compensation program provides payment of sixty-six and two-third (66 2/3 ) percent of gross wages subject to certain conditions. 
(3)  Temporary total disability (TTD) benefits are not paid for the first three (3) work days following the accident unless the disability continues for fourteen (14) calendar days. In cases where the disability does not continue for fourteen (14) calendar days, the employee, if eligible, could use sick, vacation and personal days to cover time off from work. 
(4)  Employees participating in the Illinois Municipal Retirement Fund (IMRF) and on a job related disability leave are encouraged to apply to IMRF in order to continue to receive service credits while on the disability. 
(5)  The city will continue to pay the city portion of the disabled employee's employee and family health, dental and life insurance programs for a period of one (1) year from and after the date of injury, except as otherwise required by law or contract, and except to the extent the employee otherwise has accrued but unused vacation, sick leave and personal days (including holidays) in excess of one year. Said payments shall terminate sooner upon the occurrence of any of the following: (a) the employee resigns; (b) the employee takes employment elsewhere; or (c) the employee applies for and receives either a retirement or disability pension. The leave provisions provided for in other sections of the City Code shall run concurrently with the leave provisions provided for under this section. Upon expiration of this period, the employee may continue under the city plans for health, dental and life insurance programs, but must pay both the employee and city portions. 
(Ord. No. 4192, § 1, 6-21-99; Ord. No. 4415, § 1, 3-19-2001)  
L. - Disability leave—Off duty injury/illness 
Benefits for non-occupational injury or disability that exceed the benefits periods provided under sick leave may be available through the applicable pension fund. Employees should make application directly to these funds for consideration. 
The city will, subject to the limitations noted below, continue to pay the city portion of the disabled employee's and family's health, dental and life insurance programs during the period of disability for a period of time equal to all accrued but unused vacation, sick leave and personal days (including holidays), up to a maximum of one (1) year, except as otherwise required by law or contract. Said payments shall terminate sooner upon the occurrence of any of the following: (a) the employee resigns; (b) the employee takes employment elsewhere; or (c) the employee applies for and receives either a retirement or disability pension. The leave provisions provided for in other sections of the City Code shall run concurrently with the leave provisions provided for under this section. Upon expiration of this period, the employee may continue under the city plans for health, dental and life insurance programs, but must pay both the employee and city portions. 
(Ord. No. 4192, § 1, 6-21-99; Ord. No. 4415, § 1, 3-19-2001)  
M. - Compensatory leave 
Immediate supervisors may grant department heads and other appointed employees who are exempt from the provisions of the Fair Labor Standards Act compensatory time off in consideration of extra time worked. 
(Ord. No. 4415, § 1, 3-19-2001)  
ARTICLE VI. - EMPLOYEE BENEFITS 
In addition to leave benefits outlined in Article V, there are many other fringe benefits available to employees that are described below. Unless otherwise noted, the benefits noted in this manual apply only to full-time employees. For detailed information about any of these benefits, the employee may contact the department head or the administration department. 
 
A. - Health and dental insurance 
Employees and dependents may be eligible for health and dental insurance coverage under a plan (or plans) then in effect. 
(1)  If more than one (1) health plan is in effect and the employee desires to switch plans, this is possible only during the annual open enrollment period. 
(2)  Employees are required to contribute to the cost of the health insurance premium in an amount required by the city. 
(3)  Employees will be covered on the first day of the first month following thirty (30) days of employment. 
(4)  Full-time employees who elect to waive health coverage under any of the city's group health plans are eligible to receive a one-time lump sum payment each plan year they elect to waive health coverage, providing the incentive program is in effect and that they can provide proof of coverage through a spouse or other family member. This incentive program and related payment amounts are subject to change or elimination as deemed appropriate by the city administrator. 
(a)  Eligibility: Full-time employees become eligible to participate in the incentive program on their first day of hire. 
(b)  New employees: New employees who elect to participate in the incentive program receive a prorated a amount of the one-time lump sum payment according to their date of hire, payable only after the completion of their probationary period. 
(c)  Current employees: Program participants receive payment of the one-time lump sum amount during the month of May in the year for which insurance coverage is waived. 
(d)  Re-enrollment: If an employee who has waived the city's group insurance requests re-enrollment prior to the open-enrollment period, the following conditions must be met: 
A written request for re-enrollment must be sent to the finance department and explain the reason for the request; 
The city's insurance providers may require that evidence of insurability be satisfied at the employee's expense; 
The employee will be responsible for reimbursing the city a portion of the incentive payment, prorated according to the length of time the employee was reinsured under the city's insurance plan. 
(5)  Part-time employees may choose to be insured and to insure their dependents for group health and dental insurance at their own cost. 
(Ord. No. 4192, § 1, 6-21-99; Ord. No. 4415, § 1, 3-19-2001)  
B. - Life insurance 
(1)  The city provides life insurance to all full-time employees, at no cost to the employee. The amount of insurance is equivalent to the employee's yearly salary rounded up to the nearest one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), and is adjusted as the employee's yearly salary increases up to the maximum amount provided in the policy. It is the employee's obligation to keep the city informed with respect to beneficiary information. 
(2)  The city is a member of the Illinois Municipal Retirement Fund Volunteer Life Insurance Program. Participation is optional and open to full-time employees. 
(Ord. No. 4192, § 1, 6-21-99; Ord. No. 4415, § 1, 3-19-2001)  
C. - Health insurance for retirees 
The city makes available health insurance for retired city employees under the State of Illinois Municipal Insurance Continuation Act (215 ILCS 5/3/367j). Employees who leave employment due to a disability or retirement as defined by the Illinois Pension Code will be eligible to participate in the city's heath insurance at their own cost, so long as the current group insurance carrier(s) for the city allows this participation and that the employee is a current participant in the insurance program at the time of disability or retirement. 
(Ord. No. 4192, § 1, 6-21-99; Ord. No. 4415, § 1, 3-19-2001; Ord. No. 07-O-0032, § 3, 4-16-2007; Ord. No. 11-O-0067, § 5, 12-19-2011)  
D. - Workers' compensation insurance 
(1)  If an employee is injured in the course of work, he is eligible for benefits under the Workers' Compensation Act. 
(2)  In the event an employee dies as a result of an accident sustained during the course of employment, the employee's survivors must claim with the Illinois Industrial Commission. Any amount of recovery will vary as dictated by law. 
(3)  When an employee has sustained a work-related injury/illness, workers' compensation will pay for all costs associated with such injury/illness as required by law. 
(4)  In the event an employee suffers permanent disability from a work-related injury, the employee must file a claim with the Illinois Industrial Commission. This claim will be reviewed by the commission in an effort to determine its validity and the city's responsibility for such claim. 
(5)  If the employee is injured during the course of employment by a third party, a claim may be filed with the Illinois Industrial Commission and the employee may sue the [responsible] party. Although the commission will decide the matter without reference to the third party, the employee must, if successful in the suit against the third party, indemnify the city for all expenses and claims it paid up to the extent of its loss or to the employee's recovery, whichever amount is smaller. In the event the city recovers under such circumstances, the city must give the employee all monies in excess of the Actual loss it sustained in expenses, claims and court costs. 
(6)  It is to be especially noted that neither the employee nor his survivors have any further recourse against the city beyond the provisions of the Illinois Workers' Compensation Act. 
(Ord. No. 4192, § 1, 6-21-99; Ord. No. 4415, § 1, 3-19-2001)  
E. - Retirement programs 
(1)  Depending on the employee's affiliation with a particular department and job responsibility, the city participates in and pays a varying share towards the employee's retirement and disability program. 
(a)  Sworn police officers participate in and the city contributes a share to the West Chicago Police Pension Fund. The city also contributes a share to social security. 
(b)  All other full-time employees participate in the Illinois Municipal Retirement Fund and Social Security. 
(c)  All other city employees participate in social security. The city contributes a share to social security for these employees. 
(2)  All employees are eligible to participate in the deferred compensation plan, as offered by the international city/county management association's retirement corporation or other plan approved by the city. 
(Ord. No. 4192, § 1, 6-21-99; Ord. No. 4415, § 1, 3-19-2001)  
F. - Disability programs 
For nonwork related injuries and illnesses, the employees should refer to the Illinois Municipal Retirement Fund (IMRF) and West Chicago Police Pension Fund respectively and contact those funds' representatives for further information. 
(Ord. No. 4192, § 1, 6-21-99; Ord. No. 4415, § 1, 3-19-2001)  
G. - Death benefits 
Upon the death of a regular full-time employee, the city shall give one (1) month's pay in addition to vacation pay. 
(Ord. No. 4192, § 1, 6-21-99; Ord. No. 4415, § 1, 3-19-2001)  
H. - Tuition reimbursement program 
The city recognizes the mutual benefit in the employee pursuing continued education. Therefore, the city has established a tuition reimbursement policy to encourage continued education. This policy is contingent upon funds being included in the budget. 
(1)  Eligibility 
(a)  Employees must have completed their probationary period. 
(b)  Employees should seek to exhaust all other sources of assistance (veteran's benefits, scholarships and grants), with the exception of student loans. The city's share shall not exceed the difference between a tuition bill and the amount of coverage from all other sources. 
(2)  Employees may be required to furnish information about the accreditation of the particular educational institution. 
(3)  Eligible courses 
(a)  The program is available for high school, college, vocational or degree programs that are job-related (either current or a foreseeable future position within the organization). 
(b)  Courses are to be taken on the employee's own time, unless otherwise approved by the department head and the city administrator or his designee. 
(c)  The number of courses in which an employee can enroll in a given semester or quarter shall be reviewed during the approval process and shall in no way interfere with the employee's job duties and responsibilities. 
(4)  Reimbursement 
(a)  The city will reimburse the employee for the appropriate tuition cost upon submission of an approved reimbursement request with proof of payment and satisfactory completion of each course. 
(b)  The city will reimburse on a sliding scale of one hundred (100) percent for an "A" or "B" and seventy-five (75) percent for a "C". Employees who receive a grade lower than a "C" shall not be reimbursed any amount. 
(c)  Reimbursement for tuition to attend a private school will be limited to the tuition cost at a comparable state school. 
(5)  At the time a request for reimbursement is made, the employee must sign an agreement for repayment of all reimbursed tuition to the city if, for any reason, their employment with the city is terminated within one (1) year after the completion of their course of study. 
(Ord. No. 4192, § 1, 6-21-99; Ord. No. 4415, § 1, 3-19-2001)  
I. - Uniform 
If a uniform is required of an employee as a condition of employment, it shall be provided at the city's expense. Issuance, use and maintenance of the uniform shall be subject to department rules. 
(Ord. No. 4192, § 1, 6-21-99; Ord. No. 4415, § 1, 3-19-2001)  
J. - Vehicle use 
(1)  Vehicles may be assigned as approved by the city administrator to individual employees or departments. 
(2)  Employees who wish to use their city vehicle for personal reasons while commuting to and from work, must sign a waiver indemnifying the city. 
(3)  Employees driving city vehicles are responsible for any fines resulting from parking or driving violations. 
(4)  No employee shall operate a vehicle while physically or mentally impaired. 
(5)  City vehicles are to be used for city purposes only, except as specifically approved by the city administrator. 
(6)  Employees using their own vehicle on city business will be reimbursed at the current Internal Revenue Service rate. 
(7)  Employees using their own vehicle for city business are covered only for amount above one's personal individual primary coverage auto liability policy which meets the minimum limits set the city's self insurance pool. 
(8)  Employees using city vehicles are responsible for reporting any malfunction or maintenance requirement as soon as such condition is known. 
(9)  Employees must report any accident, regardless of how small, as soon as possible. Employees involved in accidents must cooperate fully with all lawful authorities and anyone investigating the matter on behalf of the city. 
(Ord. No. 4192, § 1, 6-21-99; Ord. No. 4415, § 1, 3-19-2001)  
K. - DuPage Credit Union 
All city employees are eligible to use the DuPage Credit Union. Information on the credit union is available from the administration department. 
(Ord. No. 4192, § 1, 6-21-99; Ord. No. 4334, § 7, 8-21-2000; Ord. No. 4415, § 1, 3-19-2001)  
L. - Direct deposit of pay checks 
All employees may elect to participate in the payroll direct deposit program. To do so, the employee designates their full net bi-weekly paycheck for direct deposit. The direct deposit may be made into any savings or checking account at financial institutions that are members of the ACH system. The city has no liability in this transaction other than the transmittal of the net amount of the paycheck to the designated financial institution. The employee should consult their financial institution regarding participating in the ACH system and their rules for direct deposit. Forms for participation in the city's payroll direct deposit program are available from the finance department. 
(Ord. No. 4192, § 1, 6-21-99; Ord. No. 4415, § 1, 3-19-2001)  
M. - Employee assistance program (EAP) 
The city offers an assistance program for all employees. The program offers a confidential means for seeking help for personal problems (e.g. family, financial, or substance abuse). This program is a free voluntary way for employees to get confidential professional help for personal problems. Assistance may be requested by either contacting the administration department or by directly calling an EAP counselor. This program is available twenty-four (24) hours a day, seven (7) days a week. 
(Ord. No. 4192, § 1, 6-21-99; Ord. No. 4415, § 1, 3-19-2001)  
N. - COBRA extended insurance coverage 
The Consolidated Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act (COBRA) provides that participation in group medical or dental plans may continue beyond a plan's eligibility limits as follows: 
(1)  If an employee dies, becomes eligible for medicare or becomes legally separated or divorced, the employee's spouse and dependent children, if they are then also receiving coverage under the plan, can elect to purchase continued health coverage under the plan for up to thirty-six (36) months. 
(2)  If an employee's employment is terminated (for any reason other than gross misconduct) or is reduced to part-time status, the employee or the employee's spouse and dependent children, if they are then covered under the plan, can elect to purchase continued health coverage under the plan for up to eighteen (18) months. 
(3)  If the employee has a covered dependent child who ceases to be eligible for dependent coverage under the plan, the employee's child can elect to purchase continued health coverage for up to thirty-six (36) months. 
(4)  Continued coverage may cease prior to the times set forth above under certain circumstances as permitted under COBRA. 
(5)  The eligible individual electing continued participation in a group medical plan is responsible for the prepayment of one hundred two (102) percent of the applicable monthly insurance premium. 
(Ord. No. 4192, § 1, 6-21-99; Ord. No. 4415, § 1, 3-19-2001)  
ARTICLE VII. - EMPLOYEE CONDUCT AND DISCIPLINARY PROCEDURE 
 
A. - Disciplinary action 
The steps listed below will serve to guide disciplinary actions. The steps are progressive in nature, increasing the penalty each time an employee is disciplined. The steps emphasize continual interaction between the employee and the supervisor and/or department head and should provide sufficient opportunity for correction of the inappropriate conduct while making the employee aware of the consequences of the violations. 
In general, any action or attitude which adversely affects job performance or the reputation of the city may result in disciplinary action. This procedure neither precludes a department head from by-passing a step when disciplining an employee nor does it prohibit a department head from dismissing an employee after consultation with the city administrator. The nature, extent and seriousness of the offense will determine the appropriate disciplinary action, in addition to the general work record and disciplinary record of the employee. 
(1)  Employee counseling: When a less formal means of handling a disciplinary incident is warranted, the supervisor may consider an employee counseling session. This session will take the form of a meeting between the supervisor and employee, and is intended to make the employee aware of a situation or trend in performance or conduct which is unacceptable and which could result in further disciplinary action if continued or repeated. The supervisor shall make a record of the counseling session. 
(2)  Counseling and written reprimand: When an increasing level of discipline is warranted, a written reprimand shall be issued. The reprimand should specifically state the nature of the problem and what it takes to correct it, with a comment stating that failure to correct the situation will result in more severe discipline. Copies of the written reprimand (which should have a date for review) and supervisor's note from step one should go the department head and the city administrator or his designee. Both copies shall be placed in the employee's personnel file. 
(3)  Suspension: Violations which are serious in nature, but not serious enough to warrant dismissal, will be disciplined by suspension. An employee's refusal to adequately correct previously disciplined action may also result in suspension. Civil service employees are subject to the provisions listed in Appendix D of the City Code. 
(a)  The department head has the authority to suspend an employee upon consultation with the city administrator or his designee. If a situation arises that, in the opinion of the supervisor, necessitates immediate disciplinary action and the department head is not available, the supervisor should notify the city administrator or his designee. 
(b)  The department head will present a memorandum to the employee documenting the rationale for the suspension and its duration. A copy of the letter will be placed in the employee's personnel file. 
(4)  Dismissal: The department head, after consultation with the city administrator or his designee, may dismiss any employee with or without notice. The department head shall prepare a written dismissal notice enumerating the reasons for the dismissal action. The notice will be discussed with the employee during a dismissal conference with the department head. In the event dismissal is for continued unsatisfactory performance, a written report stating the details of the unsatisfactory performance must be filed by the department head with the city administrator or his designee prior to the issuance of a dismissal notice. Evidence of the following, though not all inclusive, may be cause for dismissal: 
(a)  Unsatisfactory work performance as determined by the employee's supervisor through formal and informal evaluations. 
(b)  Incompetence, negligence or inefficiency in the performance of assigned duties. 
(c)  Abusive attitude and language to another employee or the public, or abusive conduct resulting in harm or injury to another employee or the public, including, but not limited to, sexual harassment. 
(d)  Violation of any lawful or official regulation, order or rule, or failure to obey any lawful and reasonable direction given by an employee's superior, provided that such violation or failure to obey amounts to insubordination or a serious breach of discipline which may reasonably be expected to result in lower morale in the organization or to result in loss, inconvenience or injury to the city or public. 
(e)  Taking for personal use a fee, gift or other valuable item during the course of the employee's work or in connection with it, without reporting its receipt to the supervisor or department head and complying with Article XIII, section B. 
(f)  Illegal, immoral or indecent conduct. 
(g)  Gross negligence or willful or wanton misconduct causing damage to public or private property or waste of public supplies. 
(h)  Absence without an authorized leave or failure to report after an authorized leave of absence has expired or has been disapproved, revoked or canceled by the employee's superior. 
(i)  Feigning illness or injury. 
(j)  Direct or indirect solicitation and/or receipt during working hours of any assessment, subscription or contribution for the purpose of electing any candidate to any public office. 
(k)  Engaging in any act which endangered the safety, health or well being of another person, or which is of sufficient magnitude that the consequences cause or act to cause disruption of work or gross discredit to the city. 
(l)  Violation of any rule, procedure or regulation pertaining to conduct of a city employee. 
(m)  Theft or unauthorized possession of City of West Chicago property, or property of a city employee or resident. 
(n)  Falsification of personnel records. 
(o)  Possession (unless possession is otherwise authorized by virtue of the responsibilities of the employee's position), use or being under the influence of alcohol, controlled substance or narcotics of any kind while performing duties for the City of West Chicago. 
(p)  Possession (unless possession is otherwise authorized by virtue of the responsibilities of the employee's position), use or being under the influence of alcohol, controlled substance or narcotics of any kind while driving a city vehicle or operating city equipment. 
(q)  Disclosure of a positive result from any required drug or alcohol test. 
(r)  Excessive absenteeism or tardiness. 
(s)  Display of other misconduct comparable in seriousness to the offenses enumerated above. 
(t)  False statements, either verbal or written; false statements in an employment application will result in immediate discharge. 
(Ord. No. 4192, § 1, 6-21-99; Ord. No. 4415, § 1, 3-19-2001)  
B. - Appeal of disciplinary action 
Any nonprobationary employee may appeal a disciplinary action taken by a supervisor or department head. The review of an appeal resulting from disciplinary action shall be limited to the facts used in determining whether an incident occurred requiring disciplinary action; and the process used in disciplining the employee once the Act occurred. 
(1)  The employee, within five (5) business days after being notified of the disciplinary action, shall request a meeting with the department head or designee and shall submit at such meeting a written statement of appeal outlining the reasons for appealing the Action. The department head or designee shall then discuss the statement of appeal with the employee. 
(2)  The department head or designee, within five (5) business days of receipt of the appeal, shall meet with the employee and supervisor (if applicable) and resolve the issue, if possible. If no resolution can be reached, the department head shall forward all related documentation together with a written recommendation to the city administrator or his designee during the next working day following the meeting. 
(3)  The city administrator or his designee shall review all related documents and make a decision within ten (10) business days of receipt of the appeal. Written notice of the final decision shall be given to the employee and the city administrator's or his designee's decision shall be final. 
(4)  The above disciplinary policy is illustrative of guidelines to encourage proper employee behavior and job performance. It is neither all inclusive nor is it meant as an absolute procedure, and it does not grant any absolute contractual or procedural rights to an employee. 
(5)  Civil service employees are subject to the provisions detailed in Appendix D of the City Code. 
(Ord. No. 4192, § 1, 6-21-99; Ord. No. 4415, § 1, 3-19-2001)  
C. - Grievance procedure 
A grievance is defined as a complaint arising out of an alleged violation or misinterpretation of the provisions contained in this personnel manual, except that any action relating to discipline shall be covered under section (B) of this article. 
(1)  Any nonprobationary employees wishing to file a grievance must adhere to the following procedures, using the grievance form, provided by the city, which must accompany each step: 
Step one: Within five (5) business days from the date the employee has knowledge of the condition that gives rise to the grievance, he must ask, in writing, for a meeting with his immediate supervisor. The purpose of the meeting is to attempt to resolve the problem without further review. The supervisor will arrange a grievance meeting as soon as possible after receiving notice of the employee's concern. The supervisor shall respond, in writing, within five (5) business days of the meeting. 
Step two: If the employee is dissatisfied with the results of the meeting with his immediate supervisor, he must submit the grievance in writing to the department head within five (5) business days from the decision of the immediate supervisor. The department head will schedule a meeting with the employee within a reasonable time period, and review the initial written appeal and the step one response. The department head shall respond, in writing, within five (5) business days of the meeting. 
Step three: The employee may, within ten (10) working days of receipt of the written response from the department head, appeal the decision of the department head, in writing, to the city administrator or his designee. The city administrator or his designee will schedule a meeting with the employee within a reasonable time period, and review the initial written appeal and the step one and step two responses. The city administrator or his designee shall respond, in writing, within ten (10) business days of the meeting. 
(2)  The decision of the city administrator or his designee is final. 
(3)  An employee should be aware that circumstances which give rise to a grievance shall not exempt the employee from the responsibility of completing the assigned order, task or project, or other assigned work. 
(Ord. No. 4192, § 1, 6-21-99; Ord. No. 4415, § 1, 3-19-2001)  
ARTICLE VIII. - ADMINISTRATIVE POLICIES 
 
A. - Absence from work 
(1)  Absence of an employee from duty, including the absence for a day or portion thereof that is not authorized or approved shall be deemed to be absence without leave. 
(2)  Any absence without leave shall be without pay and may be subject to disciplinary action. 
(3)  Any employee who absents herself/himself for three (3) consecutive days without leave shall automatically be considered to have resigned. 
(Ord. No. 4192, § 1, 6-21-99; Ord. No. 4415, § 1, 3-19-2001)  
B. - Acceptance of gifts 
(1)  City employees are prohibited from accepting any gratuities, gifts or other remuneration of more than a nominal amount (established at twenty-five dollars ($25.00)) due to their position with the city from: 
(a)  Persons or firms which transact, or may transact, business with the city or; 
(b)  Persons or organizations that the city is associated with in any professional or service manner. 
(2)  The offering of any gratuity, gift or other remuneration of more than a nominal amount (including any gift of liquor) must be returned to the sender with a courteous note expressing appreciation for the gesture. 
(3)  Perishable gifts, such as food, fruit, etc. may be set out for general consumption by department employees or donated to a charitable organization. 
(Ord. No. 4192, § 1, 6-21-99; Ord. No. 4415, § 1, 3-19-2001)  
C. - Bulletin boards 
Only materials approved by the city administrator or the department head responsible for the city facility or department may be posted on city bulletin boards. The police department will have one (1) bulletin board specifically designated for union information. 
(Ord. No. 4192, § 1, 6-21-99; Ord. No. 4415, § 1, 3-19-2001)  
D. - Catastrophic illness 
(1)  Employees diagnosed with a catastrophic illness such as, but not limited to, cancer, heart disease, acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS) and/or human immunodeficiency virus positive (HIV) are subject to the city's personnel policies and the benefit plans in effect at that time. 
(2)  An employee who is diagnosed as having a catastrophic illness and who desires to continue to work is requested to inform the department head, assistant city administrator, or city administrator of the diagnosis. 
All medical information pertaining to an employee's health will be regarded as privileged, private and confidential. In most cases, no one outside of the positions noted above shall know of the diagnosis and it will only be shared with the positions listed above after consultation with the employee and as permitted by law. 
(3)  It is the city's intent to permit an employee with a catastrophic illness to continue to work as long as is reasonable. All employment decisions will be based on the merits of the situation in accordance with defined criteria. The city will make reasonable accommodations to the employee. 
(4)  The city's management staff will be available for private consultation in the event any employee has a concern regarding a contagious catastrophic illness. 
(5)  If it becomes generally known that an employee of the city has become infected with a contagious catastrophic illness, the city's management staff and a professional consultant, if appropriate, will provide immediate intervention, as necessary through work-site counseling, sharing current information and informal meetings with coworkers to encourage questions and provide a means to discuss concerns. 
(6)  The city administrator or designated representative will handle all external inquiries concerning a contagious catastrophic illness. 
(Ord. No. 4192, § 1, 6-21-99; Ord. No. 4415, § 1, 3-19-2001)  
E. - Drug and alcohol testing 
(1)  Employees shall undergo an alcohol and/or drug analysis when requested by the employee's supervisor, department head, assistant city administrator or city administrator. Such requests may be made if one (1) of the following is present: 
(a)  Employee is involved in an incident involving personal injury or property damage in excess of five hundred dollars ($500.00). An exception would be in a situation where the employee is obviously not a factor in the incident, such as the vehicle the employee was driving is struck while not in motion. 
(b)  Employee appears, based on objective and reasonable criteria, to be impaired from the performance of his duties due to the use of alcohol and/or drugs. Two (2) management employees will complete a condition of employee report in order to determine if the employee displays any characteristics of being impaired. If a second management employee cannot be found, another individual, such as a police officer, may be used. 
(2)  Employees working in city departments who are subject to drug and alcohol testing policies under a collective bargaining agreement, will be covered by the agreement. 
(3)  Some city departments may develop their own approved separate drug and alcohol testing policies that impose more rigorous standards than the policy stated herein. In the event this occurs and there exist two (2) apparent conflicting policies, the more stringent of the policies will control. 
(4)  Employees holding a CDL are subject to provisions of the Omnibus Transportation Employee Testing Act of 1991. 
(5)  Refusal to submit to testing will result in disciplinary action up to and including termination of employment. 
(6)  Applicants who refuse to cooperate in or fail to pass a post-offer, pre-employment drug test will not be hired. 
(7)  Employees who refuse to cooperate in a required test, who test positive more than once, or who use, possess, distribute, purchase, sell, manufacture or dispense illegal drugs on city premises or work sites will be disciplined up to, and including, termination. 
(8)  Employees who possess or consume illegal drug paraphernalia or alcoholic beverages on city premises or work sites will be disciplined up to, and including, termination. 
(9)  Employees who have been convicted of, sentenced for, or pled no contest to, a drug crime committed on city premises or work sites will be disciplined up to, and including, termination. 
(10)  For the purpose of determining whether the employee is under the influence of alcohol in violation of this policy, test results showing an alcohol concentration of .01 or more based upon the grams of alcohol per one hundred (100) millimeters of blood will be considered positive, and results showing an alcohol concentration of .0099 or less shall be considered negative. 
(Ord. No. 4192, § 1, 6-21-99; Ord. No. 4415, § 1, 3-19-2001)  
F. - Drug/alcohol free workplace 
(1)  The manufacture, distribution, possession or use of any drug while on duty is strictly prohibited. For purposes of this policy, drugs shall be defined as: 
(a)  Any alcohol product; 
(b)  Any drug which is not legally obtainable; 
(c)  Any drug which is legally obtainable, such as a prescription drug, but which is not legally obtained, is not being used for prescribed purposes, and/or is not being taken according to prescribed dosages. 
(2)  It shall be the responsibility of each employee to inform the supervisor, department head, assistant city administrator, or city administrator in the event the employee sees, or has reason to believe, another employee is in violation of this section. 
(3)  This policy does not apply to the lawful use of prescription drugs under the supervision of a licensed health care professional and within the limits of a valid prescription. An employee who has been prescribed drugs is required, however, to consult with his doctor or pharmacist about the prescribed medication's effect on the employee's ability to perform his job safely, and to immediately disclose any medication related work restrictions. While employees are required to disclose any medication related work restrictions, employees are not required to disclose the type of drugs they have been prescribed or the underlying medical conditions or disabilities unless directed to do so by their doctors or pharmacist or asked to do so by the city. 
(4)  Compliance with this policy is a condition of employment. As a condition of initial or continued employment, employees shall abide by the terms of this policy and shall notify the administration department of the City of West Chicago of any criminal drug statute conviction, guilty or nolo contendere plea for a violation occurring in the workplace no later than five (5) days after such conviction or plea. 
(Ord. No. 4192, § 1, 6-21-99; Ord. No. 4415, § 1, 3-19-2001)  
G. - Employee conduct harassment prohibited 
(1)  Employees have an obligation to maintain a consistently high standard of conduct in relationships with fellow employees. It is city policy that the workplace be free of all forms of harassment. 
(a)  Harassment shall mean physical or verbal conduct that denigrates or shows hostility towards an individual because of race, color, religion, gender, national origin, age or disability. 
(b)  Harassment conduct includes, but is not limited to, the following: epithets, slurs, negative stereotyping, or threatening intimidating or hostile acts, that relate to race, color, religion, gender, national origin, age or disability. 
(2)  In the event that an employee is confronted by or witnesses an act of harassing conduct, the employee in question should immediately report the incident to the employee's supervisor. The employee may, if desired, bypass the supervisor and report the incident directly to the department head, assistant city administrator, or city administrator. 
(3)  Violations of this policy will not be permitted and may result in discipline up to and including discharge. 
(Ord. No. 4192, § 1, 6-21-99; Ord. No. 4415, § 1, 3-19-2001)  
H. - Employee identification cards 
All employees will be issued an identification card and shall display the card, if requested, to provide identification to a citizen or company in connection with the employee's job duties. The administration department is responsible for collecting and destroying identification cards upon an employee's separation from city employment. 
(Ord. No. 4192, § 1, 6-21-99; Ord. No. 4415, § 1, 3-19-2001)  
I. - Financial separation 
No employee of the city shall have a financial interest in any contract with the city, or be financially interested in the sale to or by the city of land, materials, supplies or services. Personal stock interest and other indirect interests must be reported to the administration department upon employment with the city. 
(Ord. No. 4192, § 1, 6-21-99; Ord. No. 4415, § 1, 3-19-2001)  
J. - Fitness and appearance for work 
Employees shall arrive at work free from the influence of drugs or intoxicants and free from the influence and odor of alcohol. Any employee who is found under the influence of drugs or is intoxicated shall be subject to disciplinary action, including the possibility of termination. 
Employees are expected to be well groomed and dressed in a manner that is suitable to their responsibilities and position. An employee's appearance must be businesslike and reflect good taste. When uniforms are furnished or required, they must be kept clean and neat, and must be worn while performing the duties for the city. When safety equipment is issued to employees, it is mandatory that it be worn when performing tasks for which such equipment is provided. 
(Ord. No. 4192, § 1, 6-21-99; Ord. No. 4415, § 1, 3-19-2001)  
K. - Honorarium 
The city is honored to have employees recognized professionally by being asked to present at a workshop, seminar, conference or any other type of presentation. Employees may be allowed on regular time to make the presentation with prior approval from the department head, however, any honorarium must be donated to a charitable cause. Employees will be allowed to pick the charitable organization and donate the honorarium in their name. 
(Ord. No. 4192, § 1, 6-21-99; Ord. No. 4415, § 1, 3-19-2001)  
L. - Loss of driving privileges 
(1)  An employee who, as an essential function of the employee's job duties, operates a motorized vehicle and whose driving privileges have been suspended by the state is required to notify the supervisor or department head immediately. The employee may be required to take time off work without pay during the time driving privileges are suspended. 
(2)  If the suspended driving privileges exceed ninety (90) days in length, the employee may be discharged. In the event the suspended driving privileges exceed thirty (30) days, but do not exceed ninety (90) days, the employee may still be discharged. This determination will be made by the department head upon consultation with the city administrator or his designee. 
(3)  If the loss of driving privileges becomes permanent resulting in revocation of the employee's driver's license, this will be cause for immediate discharge. 
(Ord. No. 4192, § 1, 6-21-99; Ord. No. 4415, § 1, 3-19-2001)  
M. - Notification of major life changes 
In order to ensure continuation of health insurance and other benefits, employees are required to notify their supervisor and the finance department of major life changes within ten (10) business days. Examples of major life changes are marriage, divorce or legal separation, change in dependent status, birth or adoption of a child and change of address. 
(Ord. No. 4192, § 1, 6-21-99; Ord. No. 4415, § 1, 3-19-2001)  
N. - Payroll withholding 
Unless ordered by the courts as a wage garnishment, the withholding of salary and payment to employees' debtors shall not be provided by the city. 
(Ord. No. 4192, § 1, 6-21-99; Ord. No. 4415, § 1, 3-19-2001)  
O. - Personal and city property 
(1)  The city accepts no responsibility for loss or theft of personal belongings. Employees are advised to limit their exposure. 
(2)  The city reserves the right to have access to lockers provided for the use of employees at any time. Generally, the employee who has use of the locker should be present, if possible, during any such inspection. 
(3)  The use of any city property for personal use, without permission from the department head, is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 4192, § 1, 6-21-99; Ord. No. 4415, § 1, 3-19-2001)  
P. - Personal mail 
(1)  Employees shall not use the address of a city facility for the receipt of personal mail, without prior approval from the department head. 
(2)  Employees may use the city mail system to mail items not associated with their official duties when the employee provides the required postage. Use of city letterhead and envelopes for personal use is prohibited. 
(3)  If requesting a personal order be shipped to the city hall for convenience, for example, if it is too difficult to receive orders at home when an employee is working, the proper and only acceptable method is the following: 
Ship to: John/Jane Doe 
C/O City of West Chicago 
All billing for personal orders must be sent directly to the employee's home address. 
(Ord. No. 4192, § 1, 6-21-99; Ord. No. 4415, § 1, 3-19-2001)  
Q. - Personnel file 
(1)  The employee's main personnel file is located in the administration department and is maintained by the assistant city administrator. The employee's medical file is located in the finance department. 
(2)  Employees can inspect their main personnel file or medical file upon request to the assistant city administrator. 
(a)  The assistant city administrator will determine an acceptable place and time when access to the employee's personnel file will take place, subject to applicable law. 
(b)  In the event the employee does not agree with the contents of a document in his personnel file, the employee may attach a letter to the document which will then be placed in the personnel file. 
(3)  Except as otherwise required by law, the city will only release the following information from the employee's personnel file: position title, salary confirmation, and dates of employment, except under the following circumstances: 
(a)  When the employee has specifically authorized the written release of information; or 
(b)  When the city is legally obligated to provide the information; or 
(c)  When information is needed to provide information to agencies which are or may be providing health benefits to employees. 
(Ord. No. 4192, § 1, 6-21-99; Ord. No. 4415, § 1, 3-19-2001)  
R. - Physical fitness 
(1)  Each employee must maintain the standards of physical fitness required for performing the job. Whenever a department head suspects the physical condition of an employee is endangering the employee's own health or the safety of other workers, the city may require the employee to submit to a medical examination by a physician, without expense to the employee, to determine the employee's continued ability to perform the job. 
(2)  When recommendations shall be made by such examining physician, the employee must follow all directives and recommendations concerning the employee's physical condition, or be subject to disciplinary action, including termination. 
(Ord. No. 4192, § 1, 6-21-99; Ord. No. 4415, § 1, 3-19-2001)  
S. - Political activity 
Employees of the city shall be entitled to exercise their political rights; provided, however, no employee may (a) use her or his official position of employment to coerce or inhibit others in the free exercise of their political rights; or (b) engage in political activities while at work or on duty. For purposes of this section, the term "political rights" includes without limitation the following rights to: petition to make public speeches, to campaign for or against political candidates, to speak out on questions of public policy, to distribute political literature, to make campaign contributions and to seek public office. 
(Ord. No. 4192, § 1, 6-21-99; Ord. No. 4415, § 1, 3-19-2001)  
T. - Representation 
Employees are prohibited from representing a private person, other than themselves or members of their immediate household, before the city council or any city board or commission. 
(Ord. No. 4192, § 1, 6-21-99; Ord. No. 4415, § 1, 3-19-2001)  
U. - Restricted duty 
Employees who have suffered an illness or injury on or off duty and cannot perform all the required and normal tasks of their position may be placed on restricted duty. The city may require an employee who is on sick leave or workers' compensation leave to return to work in an available restricted duty assignment. 
(1)  Determination shall be made by the department head upon consultation with the assistant city administrator. In the event the restricted duty assignment is for ten (10) working days or more, written approval of the city administrator is required. 
(2)  Under no circumstances will an employee perform restricted duty without a written medical opinion from a physician stating that the employee is able to return to work and perform restricted duty without significant risk that such return to work will aggravate the employee's condition. 
(3)  Under no circumstances will an employee perform restricted duty longer than a sixty (60) day period. 
(4)  Nothing in this policy shall be construed to require the city to create restricted duty assignments for an employee. Employees will only be assigned to restricted duty assignments when the city determines that operations may permit it. 
(5)  If an injured employee is offered restricted duty during the initial twelve (12) weeks of disability, he may reject the temporary assignment as provided by the Family and Medical Leave Act without loss of benefits. Refusals to accept restricted duty assignments that comply with the treating physician's work restrictions after twelve (12) weeks will result in a loss of workers' compensation benefits, if the injury was sustained on the job, as permitted under that law. 
(Ord. No. 4192, § 1, 6-21-99; Ord. No. 4415, § 1, 3-19-2001)  
V. - Secondary employment 
(1)  Full-time employees are not permitted to engage in any outside work without the written approval of the department head and city administrator or his designee. The city may prohibit any secondary employment request if it is determined that such employment may be detrimental to the best interests of the city. 
(2)  A secondary employment request may not be approved: 
(a)  Where employment would extend beyond twenty (20) hours per week. 
(b)  Where the nature of the work or place of employment might result or encourage a reasonable belief of conflict of interest on the part of the general public. 
(c)  Where secondary employment would involve the employee's appearance in city uniform, or use of city equipment, or would foreseeably create liability exposure for the city. 
(d)  Where the secondary employment may have an adverse effect on the employee's sick leave record or subject them to an unreasonable risk of an injury. 
(e)  Where employment involves the use of official information not available to the public. 
(f)  Where employment would tend to influence the exercise of impartial judgment on any matter coming before the employee in the course of the performance of the employee's duties. 
(g)  Where employment involves management of a business closely related to the official work of the employee (in these cases the department head and city administrator or his designee may apply restrictions). 
(h)  Where it appears that secondary employment impairs the ability to discharge the duties and responsibilities of his city job. 
(i)  Where employment is such that the employee would be expected to perform the tasks as part of the employee's regular job duties. 
(3)  Employees who desire secondary employment must complete a secondary employment request form. 
(4)  Employees who are granted approval for secondary employment do so with the understanding and acceptance that their primary duty, obligation and responsibility is to the city. Employees who are granted approval realize they are subject to call at any time for emergencies, special assignment, or overtime duty. A secondary employment request may be rescinded if, in the judgment of the department head and city administrator or his designee, the secondary employment is adversely affecting the employee's job performance. Upon termination of the secondary employment, the employee shall notify the department head. 
(Ord. No. 4192, § 1, 6-21-99; Ord. No. 4415, § 1, 3-19-2001)  
W. - Sexual harassment 
We are proud of the working environment that has developed at the City of West Chicago and it is the purpose of this policy to stress the City of West Chicago's strong opposition to sexual harassment and identify the complaint procedures available to employees, as well as the disciplinary penalties that could be imposed for sexually harassing conduct or behavior. Sexual harassment is strictly prohibited by title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, as amended in 1991, and the Illinois Human Rights Act. 
(1)  This policy applies to each and every employee, officer, appointed official, agent, volunteer, vendor and contractor of the city as well as anyone using the city's facilities. 
(2)  Each supervisor/manager is responsible for maintaining the workplace free from sexual harassment. This is accomplished by promoting a professional working environment and by dealing with sexual harassment as well as with all other forms of employee misconduct. 
(3)  Sexual harassment can take several forms. Sexual harassment is defined as any unwelcome sexual advance or request for sexual favors or any conduct of a sexual nature when: 
(a)  Submission to such conduct is made, either explicitly or implicitly, a term or condition of an individual's employment; 
(b)  Submission to or rejection of such conduct by an individual is used as the basis for employment decisions affecting such individual; or 
(c)  Such conduct has the purpose or effect of substantially interfering with an individual's work performance or creating an intimidating, hostile or offensive working environment. 
(4)  The courts have determined that sexual harassment is a form of discrimination under title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, as amended. One (1) example of sexual harassment is where a qualified individual is denied employment opportunities and benefits that are, instead, awarded to an individual who submits (voluntarily or under coercion) to sexual advances or sexual favors. Another example is when an individual must submit to unwelcome sexual conduct in order to receive an employment opportunity. 
Conduct commonly considered to be sexual harassment includes, but is not limited to, the following: 
(a)  Verbal—Sexual innuendos, suggestive comments, sexual propositions, or statements about other employees, even outside their presence, of a sexual nature, suggesting or demanding sexual involvement of another employee whether or not such suggestions or demand is accompanied by implicit or explicit threats concerning one's employment status. 
(b)  Nonverbal—Suggestive or insulting sounds (e.g. whistling), leering, obscene gestures, sexually suggestive bodily gestures, "catcalls", "smacking" or "kissing" noises. 
(c)  Visual—Displaying sexually explicit posters, signs, pin-ups, or slogans of a sexual nature. 
(d)  Physical—Unwelcome touching, hugging, or kissing, pinching, brushing the body in a sexual manner, coerced sexual activity, or actual sexual assault. 
(5)  Sexual harassment may involve: (a) a man harassing a woman; (b) a woman harassing a man; and (c) harassment between members of the same gender. 
The most severe and overt forms of sexual harassment are easier to determine. On the other end of the spectrum, some sexual harassment is more subtle and depends to some extent on individual perception and interpretation. 
An example of the most subtle form of sexual harassment is the use of endearments. The use of terms such as "honey", "darling", and "sweetheart" is objectionable to many women who believe that these terms undermine their authority and their ability to deal with men on an equal and professional level. 
(6)  Each individual employee has the responsibility to refrain from sexual harassment in the workplace. It is important that employees be sensitive to other employees' feelings. What may seem like innocent behavior or a joke may not be perceived the same way by another employee. It must be understood, employees are to conduct themselves in appropriate fashion. Any employee who sexually harasses a fellow worker can be liable for their actions. All employees are expected to become familiar with the contents of this policy and to abide by the requirements it establishes. 
(7)  Complaint procedure: If an employee feels he or she is a victim of sexual harassment, it is in the employee's best interest to tell the offending person that the behavior is not welcome and must be stopped. All incidents of sexual harassment must be reported. 
(a)  Report the incident: An employee should contact any of the following individuals to report incidents of sexual harassment: their department head or the assistant city administrator. The report may be made initially either orally or in writing, but reports made orally must be placed in writing before an investigation can be initiated. 
(b)  Investigation of complaint: All complaints of sexual harassment will be handled confidentially and will be thoroughly investigated. When a complaint has been submitted in writing, the assistant city administrator will initiate an investigation of the suspected sexual harassment within five (5) working days of notification. The assistant city administrator may request that another supervisory or management employee of the opposite sex assist in the investigation. The investigation will include an interview with the employee(s) who made the initial report, the person(s) towards whom the suspected harassment was directed, and the individual(s) accused of the harassment. Any other person(s) who may have information regarding the alleged sexual harassment may also be interviewed. 
(c)  Report: The assistant city administrator, and if applicable the supervisory or management employee of the opposite sex who assisted in the investigation, shall prepare a written report within fifteen (15) working days from written notification of the suspected harassment, unless extenuating circumstances prevent him/them from doing so. The report shall include a finding that sexual harassment occurred, sexual harassment has not occurred, or there is inconclusive evidence as to whether sexual harassment occurred at the time of the issuance of this report. A copy of the report will be given to the employee(s) who made the initial report, the employee(s) to whom the suspected harassment was directed, and the employee(s) suspected of the harassment. 
(8)  Any employee who retaliates (e.g. verbal threats, intimidation, etc.) against any complaining employee or other person who cooperates with an investigation under this policy, shall be subject to discipline, up to and including discharge. 
(9)  Disciplinary and corrective action will be taken against any employee found to have engaged in sexual harassment of any other employee. The extent of sanctions may depend in part upon the length and conditions of employment of the particular employee and the nature of the offense. The city reserves the right to impose any sanction or combination of sanctions to deal with unreasonable conduct or discrimination. 
(10)  Corrective action will be taken against any officer, official (appointed and elected), agent, volunteer, vendor and contractor of the city found to have engaged in sexual harassment of any other employee. The city reserves the right to impose any sanction or combination of sanctions to deal with unreasonable conduct or discrimination, up to and including termination of any and all working relationships. 
(11)  Legal rights under the law: The city hopes that any incident of sexual harassment can be resolved through the internal process as outlined above. However, any employee who believes he has been subjected to sexual harassment has the right to file a complaint with the Illinois Department of Human Rights, 100 West Randolph Street, Chicago, Illinois 60601 (312-814-6245) and/or the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, 500 West Madison, Suite 2800, Chicago, Illinois 60661 (312-353-2713). The Illinois Human Rights Act provides that complaints of harassment must be filed within one hundred eighty (180) days of the alleged incident. A complaint with the EEOC must be filed within three hundred (300) days of the alleged incident. It is also a violation of section 6-101 of the Illinois Human Rights Act to retaliate against an employee for opposing or complaining about conduct believed to be in violation of the Act. 
(Ord. No. 4192, § 1, 6-21-99; Ord. No. 4415, § 1, 3-19-2001)  
X. - Smoke free workplace 
Employees are prohibited from smoking inside any city facility. Each applicable department shall have at least one vehicle that is designated as smoke free. 
(Ord. No. 4192, § 1, 6-21-99; Ord. No. 4415, § 1, 3-19-2001)  
Y. - Solicitation by employees and distribution of printed materials 
(1)  Unless otherwise authorized by the city administrator, all activities such as solicitations, distribution of materials, requests for contributions or selling of merchandise of any kind by employees shall not be permitted during work time or in work areas. The following exception shall apply: 
Requests for contributions for gifts or receptions to recognize employees on their retirement, resignation from the city, or other events of personal significance 
The City's United Way Campaign 
(2)  The following restrictions shall apply to the solicitation by city employees after work hours: 
(a)  Any solicitation or fund raising program which involves employees seeking to solicit at city facilities must be reviewed and approved by the city administrator before it is initiated. 
(b)  The use of the "City of West Chicago" name, either directly or by inference, is prohibited. 
(c)  Any representation, either directly or by inference, that the city is encouraging or supporting the Activity is prohibited. 
(3)  The solicitation or the distribution of materials to employees by non-employees is prohibited on city property, including areas open to the general public, unless approved by the city administrator. 
(Ord. No. 4192, § 1, 6-21-99; Ord. No. 4415, § 1, 3-19-2001)  
Z. - Suggestion program 
Employees who have suggestions for the improvement of safety or training, or other related plans or programs, are encouraged to submit in writing their suggestions to their immediate supervisor who, in all cases, shall submit it to the department head and the city administrator. It shall be the responsibility of the department head to consider and, when warranted, implement the suggestion. The city will make a reasonable attempt to notify the employee in writing of the disposition of the suggestion and a copy sent to the administration department for the individual's personnel file. Particularly meritorious suggestions shall be recognized by special awards to be recommended to the city administrator for final consideration. 
(Ord. No. 4192, § 1, 6-21-99; Ord. No. 4415, § 1, 3-19-2001)  
AA. - Travel and training 
Employees authorized to attend required training sessions, conferences, seminars, technical meetings or luncheons will have associated expenses covered. This coverage is in the form of a prepayment (if there is sufficient advance time for processing), an advancement (where there is only an estimate of costs) or a reimbursement. Any sessions involving either a plane flight, an overnight stay or the total cost exceeds two hundred dollars ($200.00) must receive prior authorization from the department head. A city "travel and training approval" form is to be submitted and approved before incurring any expenses. A final accounting of expenses occurs upon the completion of the authorized session. Any excess of advanced monies is to be returned to the city. Authorized expenses are those for the employee only and cannot cover the expenses of a spouse or other person accompanying the employee. 
(1)  Registration fees—Are paid in full with the employee making every reasonable effort to qualify for early registration discounts. 
(2)  Transportation—Is by the most direct coach airfare and includes the employee's cost for baggage handling and airport/hotel transportation. Mileage reimbursement for use of a private vehicle will be at the current mileage rate (contact the finance department). Multiple participants driving to a meeting shall car pool. 
(3)  Lodging—Is for the cost of the single room, including tax, that is not a deluxe accommodation. 
(4)  Meal allowance—The meal allowance is based on the current per diem schedule (contact finance department), excluding those meals provided as part of the program. 
(5)  Incidental expenses—Items such as official telephone calls, faxes, parking fees, conference materials, etc. are eligible for reimbursement. 
(6)  Nonreimbursable expenses—Such expenses as, but not limited to, first-class travel, alcoholic beverages, tobacco, entertainment, personal phone calls, valet service, magazines, newspapers and other personal items are ineligible for reimbursement by the city. 
(Ord. No. 4192, § 1, 6-21-99; Ord. No. 4415, § 1, 3-19-2001)  
BB. - Use of city telephones 
Employees shall limit their use of city telephones for personal reasons to within reasonable limits, as determined by the department head. 
(1)  This privilege may be withdrawn by the department head if abused through excessive use or if it causes interference with work duties. 
(2)  Long distance personal telephone calls or facsimile transmissions, defined as calls outside the Chicago metropolitan area in area codes other than 847, 773, 815, 312, 630 and 708, may be made only with prior approval of the department head. Employees making a long distance personal telephone call must inform the finance department and pay for the call, unless the employee uses a telephone calling card. 
(Ord. No. 4192, § 1, 6-21-99; Ord. No. 4415, § 1, 3-19-2001)  
CC. - Use of city vehicles, equipment, supplies or tools 
(1)  Unless otherwise approved, city vehicles, equipment, supplies and tools shall not be used for an employee's personal use. 
(2)  Employees are responsible for the care and conservation of city vehicles, equipment, supplies and tools. 
(3)  City vehicles may be taken home by employees when approved by the department head and the city administrator. Employees shall be free from the odor and influence of alcohol, and the influence of drugs, when driving a city vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 4192, § 1, 6-21-99; Ord. No. 4415, § 1, 3-19-2001)  
DD. - Workplace violence 
It is the objective of the city to ensure the safety and well being of its workforce and the persons with whom the city does business. Therefore, the city has established a zero tolerance policy for any violent acts or threats by or towards any city employee. 
(1)  Violence in the workplace includes, but is not limited to: 
(a)  Any physical behavior that involves aggressive physical contact with any other person, including pushing, hitting, fighting, throwing objects or otherwise intentionally injuring another person or attempting to injure another person; 
(b)  Any physical behavior that would place a reasonable person in fear of receiving imminent physical injury or other aggressive physical contact of the sort described above; 
(c)  Verbal behavior which involves threatening physical harm, either directly or implicitly, against any person; and 
(d)  Any act of vandalism or other intentional damage or destruction of city or private property. 
Workplace violence also includes instances where such acts or threats are made against an employee by a nonemployee. 
Workplace violence does not include activities covered by police department regulations concerning the use of force by members in the performance of their law enforcement duties, which are treated separately under the department's policies and procedures. 
(2)  Employees who become aware of any threat of workplace violence, whether by an employee or nonemployee, are obligated to immediately report such action to the employee's supervisor (e.g. court order against spouse, relative or acquaintance). The employee may bypass the supervisor and make a complaint directly to the department head, assistant city administrator, or city administrator. Employees should not confront the person against whom their complaint is lodged. 
(a)  If the supervisor or department head receives a complaint, it shall be their responsibility to notify their supervisor and/or the administration department as soon as reasonably possible. 
(b)  All complaints will be given high priority. The city administrator may request an investigation of the incident. 
(3)  Violations of this policy may result in discipline up to and including immediate discharge. Employees should also understand that such behavior may be criminal and could result in criminal prosecution. 
(4)  Where an employee reasonably and in good faith opposes or reports any workplace violence, or testifies, assists or participates in an investigation of or hearing concerning allegations of threats of violence, no person or group of persons may retaliate against the employee. Retaliation includes any act of harassment, verbal abuse, verbal threats, or any other or additional act of workplace violence. Retaliation will also be considered a violation of this policy, and may result in discipline up to and including immediate discharge. 
(Ord. No. 4192, § 1, 6-21-99; Ord. No. 4415, § 1, 3-19-2001)  
EE. - Possession of firearms by employees 
(1)  Purpose. These regulations are applicable to the possession of concealed firearms by licensed employees whenever they are on duty with the city. The regulations apply the general restrictions "Firearms Concealed Carry Act," 430 ILCS 66/1, et seq. ("act"), to specific requirements and conditions related to a licensed employee's performance of his or her city duties. As set forth in the findings below, a licensed employee's possession of a concealed firearm in the performance of certain aspects of his or her duties would violate the Act or certain private property rights, and, accordingly, these regulations are intended to prevent such violations and liability to the city therefrom. The regulations are not intended to restrict or deny the rights of a licensed employee under the Act or under the Second Amendment of the United States Constitution, or Article I, Section 22, of the Illinois Constitution and law pursuant thereto. 
(2)  Findings. The City Council of the City of the West Chicago hereby finds and determines that: 
(a)  In the event of an emergency or claimed violation of the Act involving possession by a licensed employee, it is important that the city be able to readily ascertain that the licensed employee is duly licensed under the Act. Accordingly, it is proper that the Licensed employee provide and the city maintain information on the licensed employee's issuance of a license under the Act and the renewal, suspension, and revocation thereof. 
(b)  Employees' use of city vehicles in carrying out their duties includes driving them onto private property. Section 65(a-10) of the Act, 430 ILCS 66/65(a-10), expressly authorizes an owner of private real property of any kind to prohibit the possession of concealed firearms on property under his or her control and does not require owners of private residential property to post a sign or otherwise provide notice of such. While Section 65 (b) of the Act, 430 ILCS 66/65(b), allows a concealed firearm to be stored in a locked vehicle or in a locked container out of plain view in a vehicle in the parking area of most "prohibited areas", a private property owner has a constitutionally protected common law right to prohibit firearms anywhere on his or her property, and this right is not overridden or limited by the Second Amendment's right to bear arms. GeorgiaCarry.Org., Inc., v. Georgia , 687 F2d. 1244, 1265-1266 (11th Cir. 2012). Also, some city vehicles, such as motorized carts and construction equipment, are not lockable and do not have compartments or other areas where a concealed firearm can be stowed as required by Section 65 (b) of the Act. Additionally, a licensed employee in many cases has to share a vehicle with a person in the course of his or her duties. If the licensed employee has a concealed firearm in the vehicle shared with a person who does not have a concealed carry license, and the licensed employee must leave the vehicle and leave the firearm in it, a concealed firearm would be left in the possession of a non-licensed person, in violation of the Act. Accordingly, it is proper that concealed firearms be prohibited in all city vehicles at all times. 
(3)  Definitions. The following terms in these regulations shall have the meanings stated below: 
Act : The "Firearms Concealed Carry Act", 430 ILCS 66/1, et seq., and all amendments thereto enacted and effective after the adoption of these regulations. 
Concealed firearm : A concealed firearm as defined in Section 5 of the Act, 430 ILCS 66/5. 
Employee : 1) Any person employed full-time or part-time or on a temporary basis by the city; 2) any volunteer or person volunteering services or labor to the city full-time or part-time or on a temporary basis; and 3) any independent contractor of the city or representative of such contractor when performing contractual duties for the city whether on city property or in the field. An "employee" shall not include a police or other peace officer of the city or of another governmental entity when performing duties on behalf of the city. 
Licensed employee : An employee having a current, valid license under the Act. 
City property : Any real estate owned, leased, or licensed to the city or under possession and control of the city except public rights-of-way. 
City vehicle : A vehicle of any kind owned, leased, or in the possession and control of the city, or a personal or other vehicle used by a licensed employee for his or her city duties for which use the employee receives, or is entitled to receive, mileage, or other compensation. 
On duty : The time each day that an employee reports for or otherwise begins the performance his or her city duties until the time he or she permanently concludes those duties for the day, regardless of whether such duties are begun or concluded on city property. However, an employee shall not be deemed on duty when on a meal at the times and for the duration provided for in these personnel rules, a collective bargaining agreement, or other applicable city regulations. 
(4)  Restrictions on concealed firearms. 
(a)  Licensed employee's possession of concealed firearms. 
No licensed employee shall possess a concealed firearm when on duty or on city property except in compliance with the Act and these regulations. 
Further, no licensed employee shall possess a concealed firearm while on duty or on city property where allowed by the Act, unless the licensed employee shall have first notified the city in writing on a form provided by the city that he or she is duly licensed under the Act and shall have furnished the city with a photocopy of his or her concealed firearm license. Such a licensed employee shall also notify the city in writing on a form provided by the city each time his or her concealed firearm license is renewed and shall furnish the city with a photocopy of the renewed license. 
A licensed employee who has notified the city of a concealed firearms license under this subsection shall also notify the city in writing if his or her concealed firearm license is suspended or revoked. A licensed employee shall be prohibited from possessing a concealed firearm on duty or on city property until such license is reinstated and the licensed employee shall have provided the city with written notice of such on a form provided by the city and evidence establishing reinstatement which the city may require. 
(b)  City buildings. Concealed firearms are prohibited in all city buildings in accordance with Section 65 of the Act, 430 ILCS 66/65. 
(c)  City vehicles. Concealed Firearms are prohibited in all City Vehicles at all times. 
(5)  Noncompliance. Violations of these regulations shall subject a Licensed Employee to disciplinary proceedings under Article VII, Employee Conduct and Disciplinary Procedure, of these personnel rules, which may result in the suspension or termination of the licensed employee. Violations of these regulations which are also violations of the Act shall be reported to the appropriate law enforcement agency. 
(6)  Police and other peace officers. No part of these regulations shall apply to a police or other peace officer of the city or of another governmental entity. 
(7)  Interpretation of regulations. The regulations in this Section EE shall be interpreted to be consistent with the Act and a licensed employee's right thereunder and under the Second Amendment of the United States Constitution, and Article I, Section 22, of the Illinois Constitution and law pursuant thereto. If any provision of these regulations is determined to violate the Act, other law, or the constitutional rights of a licensed employee, it shall not affect the validity of other regulations not determined to violate such. 
(Ord. No. 14-O-0010, § 2, 4-7-2014)  
ARTICLE IX. - SEPARATION FROM CITY EMPLOYMENT 
 
A. - Exit interview 
(1)  Any time an employee terminates employment with the city, whether by resignation, retirement or otherwise, the employee's department head must schedule an exit interview between the employee and the administration department. 
(2)  Exit interviews are entirely voluntary on the part of the employee and in no way affects monies or benefits due to the employee by virtue of separation. 
(3)  The exit interview is designed to solicit information from the employee concerning matters directly associated with city employment, such as: job classification, working conditions, supervision, training, compensation, work safety procedures, and general suggestions as to how to improve the overall delivery of service. 
(Ord. No. 4192, § 1, 6-21-99; Ord. No. 4415, § 1, 3-19-2001)  
B. - Retirement 
(1)  An employee wishing to retire shall give written notice at least ninety (90) days prior to the effective retirement date, unless said employee wishes to take advantage of the incentive detailed in subsection (4) below. 
(2)  Any regular full-time city employee (unless specifically excluded) is entitled to a plan that provides for a pension upon retirement. Specific details concerning pension eligibility should be obtained from the finance department or the specific pension board. 
(3)  Any unused earned vacation time may be converted into a cash payment or used as vacation prior to retirement. 
(4)  When an employee retires, the employee is to be paid one (1) day for each four (4) days' sick leave earned and not taken. Retirement is defined as any regular full-time employee having fulfilled the following: 
(a)  Completes twenty (20) years of city employment. 
(b)  Has a vested pension with the Illinois Municipal Retirement Fund or West Chicago Police Pension Fund. 
(c)  Requests retirement from their department head. 
(d)  Employees must provide their department head with at least one year written notice of their retirement date. 
(5)  An employee must return any municipal property in their possession upon leaving the city's employment. 
(Ord. No. 4192, § 1, 6-21-99; Ord. No. 4415, § 1, 3-19-2001)  
C. - Resignation 
(1)  Any classified employee wishing to leave city service in good standing should file with the department head a written resignation stating the reason(s) for leaving and giving at least ten (10) working days' notice. The department head may consent to the employee leaving sooner. 
(2)  A copy of the letter of resignation must be forwarded to the administration department within one working day of receipt. 
(3)  Any appointed employee wishing to leave the city service in good standing shall file with the city administrator a written resignation stating the reason(s) for leaving and giving at least fifteen (15) working days' notice. The city administrator may consent to the employee leaving sooner. 
(4)  Any unused earned vacation time and floating holidays may be converted into a cash payment or used for time off prior to resignation. 
(5)  Under federal law, former employees and their dependents may be eligible to continue as participants in the city's group health plan at their own expense. A notice of potential benefits will be sent to the employee and any dependent covered by the plan by a representative of the administration department. 
(6)  An employee must return any municipal property in their possession upon leaving the city's employment. 
(Ord. No. 4192, § 1, 6-21-99; Ord. No. 4415, § 1, 3-19-2001)  
D. - Reduction in force 
(1)  Whenever it becomes necessary, through change in duties, reorganization, lack of work or lack of funds, to reduce the number of employees in any given class, the department head concerned shall provide the city administrator with a list of those employees to be laid off. The required number of employees shall be laid off based upon an evaluation of their relative skill levels, ability and work performance. 
(2)  Employees laid off due to reduction in force shall be considered furloughed from the position and will be given preference in filling positions which subsequently open within one (1) year of the date of layoff, and for which the employee is qualified. Affected employees will, when reasonably feasible as determined by the city, be given at least thirty (30) days' notice of an impending reduction in force. 
(3)  Under federal law, laid-off employees and their dependents may be eligible to continue as participants in the city's group health plan at their own expense. A notice of potential benefits will be sent to the employee and any dependent covered by the plan by a representative of the administration department. 
(4)  An employee must return any municipal property in their possession upon leaving the city's employment. 
(Ord. No. 4192, § 1, 6-21-99; Ord. No. 4415, § 1, 3-19-2001)  
E. - Termination 
(1)  Classified employees are subject to the civil service rules governing termination. 
(2)  Appointed employees shall not be terminated without just cause and said termination notice shall be in writing. For purposes hereof, "just cause" shall mean some substantial shortcoming which renders the employee's continuance in employment in some way detrimental to the discipline or efficiency of the service." 
(Ord. No. 4192, § 1, 6-21-99; Ord. No. 4415, § 1, 3-19-2001)  
F. - Re-employment 
(1)  Any employee terminated for performance reasons or misconduct or any employee who resigns without giving ten (10) working days' notice shall not be eligible for re-employment. 
(2)  Any employee who is re-employed by the city shall not be entitled to any previously earned benefits or seniority. 
(Ord. No. 4192, § 1, 6-21-99; Ord. No. 4415, § 1, 3-19-2001)  
APPENDIX E - CABLE AND VIDEO SERVICE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 11-O-0007, § 10, adopted May 16, 2011, repealed the former Appendices E—H, and renumber App. I as App. E. The former App. E pertained to contract and bylaws, intergovernmental risk management agency; former App. F pertained to the City of West Chicago Special Service Area No. 1; former App. G pertained to intergovernmental police service assistance agreement; former App. H pertained to the Westcom Intergovernmental Agreement. See Code Comparative Table for the ordinance history of these appendices. 
Editor's note— It should be noted that the franchise granted to Centel Cable Television Company of Illinois by Ord. No. 1591 was transferred to Jones Growth Partners L.P. pursuant to Ord. No. 2201. Ord. No. 4025 amended Appendix E to extend the term of franchise to November 30, 2000, and to amend various provisions thereof (see the history notes following specific sections). Such ordinance provided for the deletion of Arts. II—V, allocation of franchise fees, Ord. No. 1602; requests for use of franchise fees, Res. No. 607; transfer of franchise, Ord. No. 2201; and relocation of business office, Ord. No. 2414. See also the editor's footnote to § 37. Subsequently, Ord. No. 07-O-0096, § 2, adopted November 5, 2007, effective January 1, 2008 as to incumbent cable operators, amended App. E, in its entirety, to read as herein set out. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
 
ARTICLE I. - CABLE AND VIDEO CUSTOMER PROTECTION LAW 
 
Sec. 1. - Customer service and privacy protection law. 
(a)  Adoption. The regulations of 220 ILCS 5/70-501 are hereby adopted by reference and made applicable to the cable or video providers offering services within the City's boundaries. 
(b)  Amendments. Any amendment to the Cable and Video Customer Protection Law that becomes effective after the effective date of this Article shall be incorporated into this Section by reference and shall be applicable to cable or video providers offering services within the municipality's boundaries. However, any amendment that makes its provisions optional for adoption by municipalities shall not be incorporated into this Article by reference without formal action by the corporate authorities of the City. 
(Ord. No. 07-O-0096, § 2, 11-5-2007)  
Sec. 2. - Enforcement. 
The City does hereby pursuant to law declare its intent to enforce all of the customer service and privacy protection standards of the Cable and Video Protection Law with respect to complaints received from residents within the City. 
(Ord. No. 07-O-0096, § 2, 11-5-2007)  
Sec. 3. - Penalties. 
The City, pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/70-501(r)(1), does hereby provide for a schedule of penalties for any material breach of the Cable and Video Protection Law by cable or video providers in addition to the penalties provided in the law. The monetary penalties shall apply on a competitively neutral basis and shall not exceed $750.00 for each day of the material breach, and shall not exceed $25,000.00 for each occurrence of a material breach per customer. 
(a)  Material breach means any substantial failure of a cable or video provider to comply with service quality and other standards specified in any provision of the law. 
(b)  The City shall give the cable or video provider written notice of any alleged material breaches of the law and allow such provider at least thirty (30) days from the receipt of the notice to remedy the specified material breach. 
(c)  A material breach, for the purposes of assessing penalties, shall be deemed to occur for each day that a material breach has not been remedied by the cable or video service provider after the notice in (b). 
This Article shall apply to all cable or video system providers, and shall supercede any other similar provision of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 07-O-0096, § 2, 11-5-2007)  
Sec. 4. - Customer credits. 
The City hereby adopts the schedule of customer credits for violations. Those credits shall be as provided for in the provisions of 220 ILCS 5/70-501(s) and applied on the statement issued to the customer for the next billing cycle following the violation or following the discovery of the violation. The cable or video provider is responsible for providing the credits and the customer is under no obligation to request the credit. 
(Ord. No. 07-O-0096, § 2, 11-5-2007)  
ARTICLE II. - CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE AND PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEE 
 
Sec. 1. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
(a)  "Cable service" means that term as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 522(6). 
(b)  "Commission" means the Illinois Commerce Commission. 
(c)  "Gross revenues" means all consideration of any kind or nature, including, without limitation, cash, credits, property, and in-kind contributions received by the holder for the operation of a cable or video system to provide cable service or video service within the holder's cable service or video service area within the city. 
(1)  Gross revenues shall include the following: 
(i)  Recurring charges for cable or video service. 
(ii)  Event-based charges for cable service or video service, including, but not limited to, pay-per-view and video-on-demand charges. 
(iii)  Rental of set top boxes and other cable service or video service equipment. 
(iv)  Service charges related to the provision of cable service or video service, including but not limited to activation, installation, and repair charges. 
(v)  Administrative charges related to the provision of cable service or video service, including but not limited to service order and service termination charges. 
(vi)  Late payment fees or charges, insufficient funds check charges, and other charges assessed to recover the costs of collecting delinquent payments. 
(vii)  A pro rata portion of all revenue derived by the holder or its affiliates pursuant to compensation arrangements for advertising or for promotion or exhibition of any products or services derived from the operation of the holder's network to provide cable service or video service within the city. The allocation shall be based on the number of subscribers in the city divided by the total number of subscribers in relation to the relevant regional or national compensation arrangement. 
(viii)  Compensation received by the holder that is derived from the operation of the holder's network to provide cable service or video service with respect to commissions that are received by the holder as compensation for promotion or exhibition of any products or services on the holder's network, such as a "home shopping" or similar channel, subject to subsection (ix). 
(ix)  In the case of a cable service or video service that is bundled or integrated functionally with other services, capabilities, or applications, the portion of the holder's revenue attributable to the other services, capabilities, or applications shall be included in the gross revenue unless the holder can reasonably identify the division or exclusion of the revenue from its books and records that are kept in the regular course of business. 
(x)  The service provider fee permitted by 220 ILCS 5/21-801(b). 
(2)  Gross revenues do not include any of the following: 
(i)  Revenues not actually received, even if billed, such as bad debt, subject to 220 ILCS 5/21-801(c)(1)(vi). 
(ii)  Refunds, discounts, or other price adjustments that reduce the amount of gross revenues received by the holder of the state-issued authorization to the extent the refund, rebate, credit, or discount is attributable to cable service or video service. 
(iii)  Regardless of whether the services are bundled, packaged, or functionally integrated with cable service or video service, any revenues received from services not classified as cable service or video service, including, without limitation, revenue received from telecommunication services, information services, or the provision of directory or Internet advertising, including yellow pages, white pages, banner advertisement, and electronic publishing or any other revenues attributed by the holder to noncable service or nonvideo service in accordance with the holder's books and records and records kept in the regular course of business and any applicable laws, rules, regulations, standards, or orders. 
(iv)  The sale of cable services or video services for resale in which the purchaser is required to collect the service provider fee from the purchaser's subscribers to the extent the purchaser certifies in writing that it will resell the service within the city and pay the fee permitted by 220 ILCS 5/21-801(b) with respect to the service. 
(v)  Any tax or fee of general applicability imposed upon the subscribers or the transaction by a city, state, federal, or any other governmental entity and collected by the holder of the state-issued authorization and required to be remitted to the taxing entity, including sales and use taxes. 
(vi)  Security deposits collected from subscribers. 
(vii)  Amounts paid by subscribers to "home shopping" or similar vendors for merchandise sold through any home shopping channel offered as part of the cable service or video service. 
(3)  Revenue of an affiliate of a holder shall be included in the calculation of gross revenues to the extent the treatment of the revenue as revenue of the affiliate rather than the holder has the effect of evading the payment of the fee permitted by 220 ILCS 5/21-801(b) which would otherwise be paid by the cable service or video service. 
(d)  "Holder" means a person or entity that has received authorization to offer or provide cable or video service from the commission pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-401. 
(e)  "PEG" means public, education and governmental. 
(f)  "PEG access support fee" means the amount paid under this Article and 220 ILCS 5/21-801(d) by the holder to the city for the service areas within its territorial jurisdiction. 
(g)  "Service" means the provision of "cable service" or "video service" to subscribers and the interaction of subscribers with the person or entity that has received authorization to offer or provide cable or video service from the commission pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-401. 
(h)  "Service provider fee" means the amount paid under this Article and 220 ILCS 5/21-801 by the holder to a city for the service areas within its territorial jurisdiction. 
(i)  "Video service" means video programming and subscriber interaction, if any, that is required for the selection or use of such video programming services, and which is provided through wireline facilities located at least in part in the public right-of-way without regard to delivery technology, including Internet protocol technology. This definition does not include any video programming provided by a commercial mobile service provider defined in 47 U.S.C. § 332(d) or any video programming provided solely as part of, and via, service that enables users to access content, information, electronic mail, or other services offered over the public Internet. 
(Ord. No. 07-O-0096, § 2, 11-5-2007)  
Sec. 2. - Cable/video service provider fee imposed. 
(a)  Fee Imposed. A fee is hereby imposed on any holder providing cable service or video service in the city. 
(b)  Amount of Fee. The amount of the fee imposed hereby shall be five (5) percent of the holder's gross revenues, or equal to the fee paid to the city by an incumbent cable operator providing cable service, whichever is less. 
(c)  Notice to the City. The holder shall notify the City at least ten (10) days prior to the date on which the holder begins to offer cable service or video service in the city. 
(d)  Holder's Liability. The holder shall be liable for and pay the service provider fee to the city. The holder's liability for the fee shall commence on the first day of the calendar month following thirty (30) days after receipt of the ordinance adopting this article by the holder. The ordinance adopting this article shall be sent by mail, postage prepaid, to the address listed on the holder's application notice sent pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-401(b)(6) to the city. 
(e)  Payment Date. The payment of the service provider fee shall be due on a quarterly basis, forty-five (45) days after the close of the calendar quarter. If mailed, the fee is considered paid on the date it is postmarked. Each payment shall include a statement explaining the basis for the calculation of the fee. 
(f)  Exemption. The fee hereby imposed does not apply to existing cable service or video service providers that have an existing franchise agreement with the City in which a fee is paid. 
(g)  Credit for Other Payments. An incumbent cable operator that elects to terminate an existing agreement pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-301(c) with credit for prepaid franchise fees under that agreement may deduct the amount of such credit from the fees that operator owes under Section 2(b). 
(Ord. No. 07-O-0096, § 2, 11-5-2007)  
Sec. 3. - PEG access support fee imposed. 
(a)  PEG fee imposed. A PEG access support fee is hereby imposed on any holder providing cable service or video service in the city in addition to the fee imposed pursuant to Section 2(b). 
(b)  Amount of Fee. The amount of the PEG access support fee imposed hereby shall be one (1) percent of the holder's gross revenues or, if greater, the percentage of gross revenues that incumbent cable operators pay to the city or its designee for PEG access support in the city. 
(c)  Payment. The holder shall pay the PEG access support fee to the City or to the entity designated by the city to manage PEG access. The holder's liability for the PEG access support fee shall commence on the date set forth in Section 2(d). 
(d)  Payment Due. The payment of the PEG access support fee shall be due on a quarterly basis, forty-five (45) days after the close of the calendar quarter. If mailed, the fee is considered paid on the date it is postmarked. Each payment shall include a statement explaining the basis for the calculation of the fee. 
(e)  Credit for Other Payments. An incumbent cable operator that elects to terminate an existing agreement pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-301(c) shall pay, at the time they would have been due, all monetary payments for PEG access that would have been due during the remaining term of the agreement had it not been terminated pursuant to that section. All payments made by an incumbent cable operator pursuant to the previous sentence may be credited against the fees that that operator owes under Section 3(b). 
(Ord. No. 07-O-0096, § 2, 11-5-2007)  
Sec. 4. - Applicable principles. 
All determinations and calculations under this article shall be made pursuant to generally accepted accounting principles. 
(Ord. No. 07-O-0096, § 2, 11-5-2007)  
Sec. 5. - No impact on other taxes due from holder. 
Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to exempt a holder from any tax that is or may later be imposed by the city, including any tax that is or may later be required to be paid by or through the holder with respect to cable service or video service. A state-issued authorization shall not affect any requirement of the holder with respect to payment of the city's simplified municipal telecommunications tax or any other tax as it applies to any telephone service provided by the holder. A state-issued authorization shall not affect any requirement of the holder with respect to payment of the local unit of government's 911 or E911 fees, taxes or charges. 
(Ord. No. 07-O-0096, § 2, 11-5-2007)  
Sec. 6. - Audits of cable/video service provider. 
(a)  Audit Requirement. The city will notify the holder of the requirements it imposes on other cable service or video service providers to submit to an audit of its books and records. The holder shall comply with the same requirements the city imposes on other cable service or video service providers in its jurisdiction to audit the holder's books and records and to recompute any amounts determined to be payable under the requirements of the city. If all local franchises between the city and cable operator terminate, the audit requirements shall be those adopted by the city pursuant to the Local Government Taxpayers' Bill of Rights Act, 50 ILCS 45/1 et seq. No acceptance of amounts remitted should be construed as an accord that the amounts are correct. 
(b)  Additional Payments. Any additional amount due after an audit shall be paid within thirty (30) days after the city's submission of an invoice for the sum. 
(Ord. No. 07-O-0096, § 2, 11-5-2007)  
Sec. 7. - Late fees/payments. 
All fees due and payments which are past due shall be governed by ordinances adopted by this city pursuant to the Local Government Taxpayers' Bill of Rights Act, 50 ILCS 45/1 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 07-O-0096, § 2, 11-5-2007)  
ARTICLE III. - CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE[2] 
ORDINANCE NUMBER 1591 
CABLE TV FRANCHISE ORDINANCE 
AN ORDINANCE GRANTING A FRANCHISE CONCERNING THE ESTABLISHMENT, CONSTRUCTION, OPERATION, AND MAINTENANCE OF A CABLE TELEVISION SYSTEM IN THE CITY OF WEST CHICAGO 
WHEREAS, it is desirable and in the best interests of the city to franchise one or more cable television systems within its corporate limits, and 
WHEREAS, Section 11-42-11 of the Illinois Municipal Code provides that municipalities "may license, franchise, and tax the business of operating a community antenna television system," and 
WHEREAS, Division 80 of Article 11 of the Illinois Municipal Code grants to municipalities general powers over streets and public ways with respect to improvements in connection with a cable television franchise. 
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the Mayor and City Council of the City of West Chicago, Illinois, as follows: 
That the Cable Television Franchise Ordinance of the City of West Chicago, shall be as follows: 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— It should be noted that Ord. No. 07-O-0096, adopted November 5, 2007, provides, "The current Appendix means Cable Television Franchise Ordinance shall be restated in its entirety as Article III of this new Appendix E. It shall remain in full force and effect except to the extent superceded by Articles I and II of this Appendix. As to any conflict, the more stringent provisions of any of the Articles stated herein applied." 
 
Section 1. - Title and purpose. 
[Title.] This ordinance shall be known as and may be cited as the "City of West Chicago Cable Television Franchise Ordinance." 
Purpose. The purpose of this ordinance is to: 
(a)  Provide for the franchising and regulation of community antenna television systems and other similar cable communication systems within the City of West Chicago; and 
(b)  Provide for the payment of a fee and other valuable consideration to the City of West Chicago for the use by a franchisee of city streets and other public ways in the construction and operation of a community antenna television system or other similar cable communication system, and to compensate the City of West Chicago for costs associated therewith; and 
(c)  [Reserved.] 
(d)  Provide for the development of a community antenna television system or other cable communication system as a means to improve communication between and among the citizens and public institutions of the West Chicago community; and 
(e)  [Reserved.] 
(f)  Provide remedies and prescribe penalties for violation of this ordinance of the City of West Chicago and the franchise granted hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 1591, § 1, 7-6-1982; Ord. No. 4025, § 2(A), 9-2-1997)  
Section 2. - Definitions. 
The words and phrases defined in this ordinance shall have the meanings ascribed to them as follows: 
(a)  Basic cable means any service tier which includes the retransmission of local television broadcast signals and the public, educational and governmental access channels. 
(b)  Channel means a frequency in the electromagnetic spectrum and capable of clearly and effectively carrying on audio-data or an audio-visual television signal, and as defined by the FCC Rules and Regulations. 
(c)  City means the City of West Chicago, Illinois. 
(d)  Company means Jones Growth Partners, L.P., a Colorado limited partnership d/b/a Jones Spacelink, with its principal place of business at 9697 East Mineral Avenue, Englewood, Colorado, 80112 and its local business office at 1101 E. Roosevelt Road, Wheaton, Illinois, 60187. 
(e)  Converter means a wireless electronic device which converts signals to a frequency not susceptible to interference within a fully functional television receiver of a subscriber and which permits a subscriber by an appropriate channel selector to receive all signals referred to under this ordinance. 
(f)  Corporate authorities means the mayor and the city council. 
(g)  Educational access channel means any channel designated for use by local educational authorities. 
(h)  Eligible residential unit means all residential units within the boundaries of the city (whether at present or in the future) except those in areas in which the density of residential units is less than thirty (30) per lineal mile or where adverse terrain or other unusual factors render extension of the cable television system impractical or technically or economically infeasible as determined, on the company's petition, under Section 5 of this franchise ordinance. 
(i)  FCC means the Federal Communications Commission, established by the Communications Act of 1934, as amended, and shall include any successor agency or other agency with respect to the federal regulations and licensing in connection with the subject matter of this ordinance. 
(j)  FM services means broadcast of audio signals only on a broad band standard FM frequency. 
(k)  Grant means the right, privilege and franchise provided in Section 4 of this ordinance. 
(l)  Gross revenue means all revenue derived directly or indirectly by a franchise from the operation or use of all or part of a community antenna system or cable communications system franchise pursuant to this ordinance, whether that revenue is derived by the franchise, its affiliates, subsidiaries, parents, or any person or firm of which the franchisee has a financial interest including, but not limited to the followed: 
(1)  Revenue from regular subscriber service fees, whether that fee is paid monthly or otherwise; 
(2)  That portion of receipts from programs from which a per channel or per program charge is made; 
(3)  Any and all revenue derived from any service fee charged for the use of the system to transmit electronic or microwave impulses; 
(4)  Revenue derived as advertising income; 
(5)  Revenue from the leasing of cable channels; 
(6)  Revenue received for equipment rentals, including the rental of converters, studio equipment, studio facilities, fixed or mobile production equipment; 
(7)  Revenue received for furnishing other communications and nonbroadcast services either directly or as a carrier for another party, provided that revenues derived from the delivery of communication and nonbroadcast services shall be deemed to be equal to the system cost of providing such services; 
(8)  Revenue derived from the sale of personal property, including catalogue sales conducted via cable communications system, data transmission, alarm or signal transmission; 
(9)  Receipts derived from installation, reconnection, inspection, repairs or modifications of any cable installation; 
(10)  [Reserved;] 
(11)  Revenue from any unrefunded deposits from subscribers. 
(m)  Initial construction shall be the period of time between the date on which the company receives the final permits from the utility companies and the date on which the system first becomes available to all eligible residential units. 
(n)  Installation includes the wiring of the system to a building and the connection of the system to the television set(s) within the building. 
(o)  Leased access channel means any channel available for lease, at fair and nondiscriminatory rates, on a first come, first serve nondiscriminatory basis. 
(p)  Municipal access channel means any channel where local government agencies are the only designated programmers. 
(q)  Person means any individual, firm, partnership, limited partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind. 
(r)  Potential subscribers means those eligible residential units in the city at the date this ordinance becomes effective. The number of such potential subscribers will be agreed to by the city and company upon passage of this ordinance. 
(s)  Premium programming means any commercial-free programming, including but not limited to, movies, concerts, variety acts, sporting events and the like for which an additional charge is made. 
(t)  Public access channel means any channel available to the general public for programming on a first come, first serve nondiscriminatory, noncommercial basis. 
(u)  Public right-of-way means all sidewalks, streets, and alleys in the city which are dedicated to the city for street, highway, sidewalk, lighting, drainage, utility, or cable television purposes and all public ways and places contiguous thereto. 
(v)  Schools means all public, private, elementary and secondary schools, junior colleges and universities which have been granted a certificate of recognition by the Illinois State Board of Education, pursuant to Section 2-3.25 of the Illinois School Code (1979). 
(w)  Subscriber means any person receiving service from or using the system under the grant pursuant to this ordinance. 
(x)  System means "community antenna television system" as defined in Section 11-42-11 of the Illinois Municipal Code, and as amended from time to time. 
(y)  System facilities means a system composed of, without limitations, antenna, cables, wires, lines, towers, amplifiers, conductors, converters, equipment or facilities designed, constructed or wired for the purpose of producing, receiving, amplifying and distributing by coaxial cable, fiber optics, microwave or other means, audio and/or visual radio, television, electronic or electrical signals to and from subscribers. 
(Ord. No. 1591, § 2, 7-6-1982; Ord. No. 4025, § 2(B—D)  
Section 3. - Principals of construction. 
Principles concerning the construction and interpretation of this ordinance shall be as follows: 
(a)  All ordinances or parts thereof in conflict with the provisions of this ordinance are to that extent hereby repealed. 
(b)  If any provision of this ordinance or the application thereof is for any reason held invalid, illegal, unconstitutional, or unenforceable, such holding shall not affect the remainder of this ordinance to any extent, each provision of this ordinance being a separate, distinct and independent part. 
(c)  In connection with all actions and decisions to be taken or make under this ordinance by the city or the company, due consideration shall be given the respective interests of the city, the company, subscribers and potential subscribers. Actions and decisions shall include, but not be limited to, increasing rates or otherwise amending this ordinance. The interests of potential subscribers, except for potential subscribers who have not refused system service, shall be secondary to the interest of the city, the company and subscribers. 
(d)  Words in the present tense include the future. 
(e)  Words importing the singular number may extend to and include plural, words importing the plural number may extend to and include the singular, the words in masculine gender shall include female gender. 
(f)  The company shall not be excused from complying with any of the terms, conditions, and provisions of this ordinance by any failure of the city upon any one or more occasions to insist upon or to seek compliance with any such terms, conditions or provisions. 
(g)  The specification in this section of principles to apply in the construction and interpretation of this ordinance shall not be a limitation as to others. 
(h)  Wherever this ordinance shall set forth any time for any act to be performed by or on behalf of the company, such time shall be deemed of the essence and any failure of the company to perform within time allotted shall always be sufficient grounds for the city to terminate, cancel and revoke the grant or use other remedies, provided the delay is not due to circumstances beyond the control of the company. 
(Ord. No. 1591, § 3, 7-6-1982)  
Section 4. - Grant and term of franchise. 
(a)  The city, to the full extent that it may do so, hereby grants to the company, in accordance with the terms, conditions and provisions of this ordinance, the nonexclusive right, privilege and franchise to establish, construct, operate and maintain the system and system facilities in, upon, over and under the public right-of-way and within easements or other rights to use property which are effective for the purposes of the grant; to extend the system to and offer the services of the system to all potential subscribers within the city; to acquire by lease, license, purchase or other right to use equipment, facilities and improvements, and land constituting all or part of the system facilities; to connect subscribers to the system; and to repair, replace, enlarge and extend the system and system facilities. 
(b)  The grant and/or any extension or renewal thereof shall be in full force and effect from and after acceptance by the company as provided in section 37 of this article, and the same shall continue in full force and effect to and including November 30, 2000, at which time the grant shall become null and void unless extended or renewed. 
(c)  The right to use and occupy public right-of-way for the purposes set forth shall not be exclusive. The city reserves the right to permit a similar use of said public right-of-way to any person, company, corporation, or any other entity, at any time before, during or after the period of this franchise, upon terms and conditions which are not more favorable or less burdensome than this grant and subject to all applicable federal and state laws relating to the grant of additional cable television franchises. 
(Ord. No. 1591, § 4, 7-6-1982; Ord. No. 4025, § 2(E, F), 9-2-1997)  
Section 5. - Jurisdiction of grant of franchise. 
(a)  The grant shall apply within the corporate limits of the city including all territory hereafter annexed to the city. 
(b)  The company shall be required to extend the system to and offer the services of the system to all eligible residential units within the city. 
(c)  Notwithstanding the grant, the company shall obtain all necessary federal, state and local government permits, licenses, and other required authorizations in connection with the establishments, construction, operation and maintenance of the system and system facilities. 
(d)  In the event and to the extent that the City of West Chicago of the County of DuPage, Illinois, authorizes in a manner not inconsistent with the grant, or that an intergovernmental agreement or contract is made by and between the city and the county in connection with the extension of the system and the offer of the services of the system to potential subscribers in areas outside the city's corporate limits, the company may so extend the system and offer services to potential subscribers within such areas. 
(e)  In locations in which the density of residential dwelling units is less than thirty (30) per lineal mile, or where adverse terrain, or other factors render extension of the system and offer of services impractical or technically infeasible or creates an economic hardship, the corporate authorities, may, upon written petition of the company to the mayor and city council, either waive the extension of the system into such areas, or allow the extension and offer of services on such special terms, conditions and provisions as are reasonable and fair to the city, the company, and potential subscribers in such areas. 
(f)  Any developed property that is hereafter annexed shall be served within one year of its annexation. Vacant land need not be served immediately, but at the time the power and telephone utilities construct their system plant, the company may also place its system feeder line in the easement. 
(Ord. No. 1591, § 5, 7-6-1982)  
Section 6. - Unauthorized activities. 
Upon the enactment of this ordinance, the following actions by any person, corporation or unincorporated association shall be unlawful and subject to the penalty as described in subsection (c) below: 
(a)  The unauthorized connection, whether physical, electronically, acoustically, inductively, or otherwise with any part of a system facility within the city for the purpose of taking or receiving television or radio signals, pictures, programs or sound, or for the purpose of enabling others to receive such signals, pictures, programs or sounds. 
(b)  The willful tampering with, removal of, or injury to any cables, wires or equipment used for distribution of television or radio signals, pictures, programs or sounds without consent of the system owner. 
(c)  Each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this section is committed, continued, or permitted shall be deemed a separate offense and upon conviction of any such violation such violator shall be punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). Any equipment or structure erected or maintained and any work commenced or continued in violation of this ordinance shall be and is hereby declared unlawful. 
(Ord. No. 1591, § 6, 7-6-1982)  
Section 7. - Franchise requirement. 
No community antenna television system shall be erected, maintained or operated in the City of West Chicago without the passage of a franchise ordinance granting the same. 
(Ord. No. 1591, § 7, 7-6-1982)  
Section 8. - Rates. 
(a)  The company shall establish rates for its services in accordance with all applicable federal, state and/or local statutes, codes, rules, regulations and/or ordinances. Such rates shall be nondiscriminatory and shall be applied fairly and uniformly to all subscribers, provided, however, that nothing contained herein shall be deemed to prohibit reasonable promotional rates which may, from time to time, be less than the standard rates established by the company. 
(b)  The company shall maintain, and file with the city, a complete schedule of subscriber rates including all fees and charges for services. Such rates may be changed only in accordance with the limitations and procedures provided under applicable federal, state and/or local statutes, codes, rules, regulations and/or ordinances, and in any event, the company shall notify the city not less than sixty (60) days prior to any change in rates. 
(c)  The company shall furnish, without installation charge or monthly service fee, one line connection and outlet, and all services in the basic service tier and cable programming service tiers offered by the company, to the city hall and to each public works building, other municipal building, fire station, library building, park district building, township building and school building within the city. The company shall provide additional line connections and/or outlets to such buildings at the request of the unit of local government, and may charge the requesting unit of local government for the actual material and labor costs of such additional line connections and/or outlets. 
(d)  Charges shall abate pro rata in the event that service to a subscriber is interrupted for more than twenty-four (24) hours for any reason whatsoever. 
(Ord. No. 1591, § 8, 7-6-1982; Ord. No. 4025, § 2(G), 9-2-1997)  
Section 9. - Rate payment. 
(a)  Unless the company provides a longer time, subscribers shall pay installation charges to the company at the time of installation. 
(b)  Unless the company provides a longer time, subscribers shall pay on a monthly basis for the system services provided by the company. Payment is to be made on or before the due date noted on the billing notice (approximately the middle of the month of the current service). As an inducement for this change in billing procedure, the Jones Inter-cable will provide one (1) month of free basic service, the month being April, 1990. 
(c)  Upon request for termination of service by a subscriber, the company shall, without charge, terminate such service and remove all indoor facilities and equipment up to the wall outlet from subscriber's premises within fifteen (15) days following such request. 
(Ord. No. 1591, § 9, 7-6-1982; Ord. No. 2263, § 1, 3-19-1990)  
Section 10. - Franchise fee. 
(a)  The company shall pay to the city for the right, privilege and franchise in connection with the grant, an amount equal to five (5) percent of the gross revenues per annum. Payment shall be quarterly within thirty (30) days following the 31st of December, 31st of March, the 30th of June and 30th of September. Each payment shall be accompanied by a statement under oath from an official or representative of the company having the requisite knowledge to make such statement certifying the gross revenues upon which the payment is based. The city reserves the right at any time to increase or decrease the franchise fee not to exceed the maximum allowable percentage or amount under applicable law. 
(b)  Delinquent payments by the company to the city shall bear interest at the rate of two (2) percent per month over the prime interest rate established by Continental Bank of Illinois. 
(c)  The franchise fee due to the city is in addition to any bond, permit, property tax or other charges which may be payable to the city by the company. 
(d)  Except for the initial prepayment by the company, no acceptance of any payment by the city shall be construed as a release or as an accord and satisfaction of any claim the city may have for further additional sums payable as a franchise fee under this ordinance or for the performance of any other obligation of the company. 
(e)  Within ninety (90) days of the end of the each fiscal year of the company, the company shall file with the corporate authorities its annual report prepared, certified and audited by the company's auditors, showing the financial status of the company. In addition, with each quarter-yearly payment of the franchise fee, the company shall file with the city a financial statement showing the total gross revenues generated by the system facilities for the reporting period, which shall be certified by the company's certified public accountant. The city reserves the right to make its own independent audit of the gross revenues generated by the system facilities for any reporting period. If such audit reveals the underpayment of the franchise fee by more than five (5) percent of the amount due to the city, the company shall reimburse the city for the costs of such audit. 
(f)  Upon termination of the grant at the expiration of the term provided in Section 3(b) or otherwise, the company shall continue to make quarter-annual statements and certificates and the annual report as provided in this section until such time as all payments to the city under this ordinance have been paid and accounted for to the reasonable satisfaction of the city. 
(g)  The company shall annually file with the city a full schedule of all subscriber rates for services and charges in connection with the system. 
(Ord. No. 1591, § 10, 7-6-1982; Ord. No. 4025, § 2(H—J), 9-2-1997)  
Section 11. - Reserved.  
Section 12. - Records, notices and information from company. 
(a)  The company shall file the following information with the city prior to passage of this ordinance: 
(1)  The legal structure of the company (individually owned, partnership, corporation, subsidiary of or affiliate of a corporation). 
(2)  If the company is a subsidiary or an affiliate of another company, it shall provide a corporate "family tree" showing the corporate structure and list the names and business activities of all subsidiaries, affiliate and/or parent companies. 
(3)  The company shall list the names, addresses and principal business activities of partners, officers, members of the board of directors and major stockholders (i.e., individuals holding five (5) percent or more of the voting stock or holding options that would enable them to acquire five (5) percent or more of the voting stock). 
(4)  The company shall indicate if any of its officers, directors and individuals have [having] a legal or equitable interest in five (5) percent or more of the voting stock is presently or has ever been a party to a civil proceeding involving any of the following: 
a.  Unfair or anticompetitive business practices 
b.  Violations of securities law (state and federal) 
c.  False/misleading advertising 
d.  Violations of FCC regulations 
e.  Any actions in which a municipality served by applicant is a party 
f.  Bankruptcy 
g.  Crime involving moral turpitude (including criminal fraud) 
(5)  The company shall list the names and functions of key individuals with whom the city will be dealing regarding the construction and operation of the West Chicago Cable TV System in the following areas: 
a.  Marketing/sales management 
b.  General management 
c.  System construction 
d.  System maintenance 
e.  Local service office 
f.  Others 
(6)  The company shall furnish the names and addresses of its legal counsel. 
(7)  The company shall list any individuals or firms with whom it has any consulting agreements or contracts. 
(8)  The company shall list any West Chicago residents or businessmen with whom it has verbal or written commitments concerning its cable TV system. 
(b)  The financial records of the company in connection with its activities within the boundaries of the city shall be maintained in a manner which permits distinguishing revenues earned within the city from revenues earned by the company in other municipalities. 
(c)  The city or its designated auditors shall have the right, upon reasonable notice to the company and at reasonable times, hours, dates and frequencies, to inspect all or any part of the company's records and documents, planning records and documents, and engineering records and documents of every kind in connection with the grant, the system, the system facilities, and the company's undertakings with respect to the ordinance. 
(d)  Unless otherwise directed by the city, the company shall simultaneously file with the city a copy of all petitions, applications, reports and communications filed or submitted by the company with the Securities and Exchange Commission, the FCC and any other federal, state or county entity or agency having jurisdiction with respect to any matter affecting the system, system facilities, or the company's undertakings with respect to this franchise. 
(e)  During the initial construction of the system, the company shall file with the city bimonthly reports on the first day of each second month until initial construction is completed at which time a final report shall be submitted to the city. Thereafter, the company shall file with the city a semiannual report for the period preceding January 1st and July 1st of each year until the second year after the system is available to all potential subscribers. From then on, the report shall be filed annually at the same time the company files required annual reports under Section 12(g) of this ordinance. Such reports shall include information concerning the number of subscribers, the areas of the city in which construction is completed, the areas of the city in which construction is under contract but not completed, together with a projected completion date for construction in such areas, and such other information as may from time to time be requested by the city. 
(f)  A full and complete set of plans, records, and maps showing the exact location of all system equipment installed or in use within the city limits shall be provided by the company at least ten (10) days prior to construction of any part of the system or system facilities. "As built" maps and drawings shall be given to the city and the company fifteen (15) days after construction. 
(g)  The company shall file with its annual franchise report copies of all current rules, regulations, terms and conditions established or imposed by the company in connection with the establishment, construction, operation and maintenance of the system. 
(h)  The company shall file the following reports with the city within ninety (90) days after the end of each fiscal year of the company: 
(1)  A copy of the company's annual report to the FCC relating to the system. 
(2)  A report detailing any changes during said fiscal year with respect to persons who at any time during the preceding year controlled or benefitted from an interest in the company of five (5) percent or more, creditors secured by pledges or other forms of security interest in the system, and/or unsecured creditors whose claims in respect to the operation of the system in the city exceed fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00). 
(3)  A summary list of all complaints received by the system "down time" experienced during the year. 
(4)  Copies of the most current surety bonds for the company and certificates of insurance regarding the system. 
(i)  Within seven (7) days after receipt thereof, the company shall file with the city a copy of all communications, orders, directives or other documents received by the company from any regulatory entity or agency (other than the city) with respect to any matter affecting the system or the company's undertakings in the city. 
(j)  The company shall ensure privacy of all subscriber records and names; addresses are not to be sold or given to subscriber list companies. 
(Ord. No. 1591, § 12, 7-6-1982; Ord. No. 4025, § 2 (L, M), 9-2-1997)  
Section 13. - Franchise performance evaluation. 
The city and company shall hold scheduled performance evaluation sessions on or before November 15 of each year. All such evaluation sessions shall be open to the public. The company shall be solely responsible for notifying the city in writing, at least sixty (60) days in advance, of each of the specified performance evaluation sessions. Special evaluation sessions may be held at any time during the term of the franchise at the request of the city. All evaluation sessions will be open to the public and announced in a newspaper of general circulation within the city, at least fifteen (15) days but no more than thirty (30) days before the session. Subscribers shall be notified by announcement on at least one channel on the system between the hours of 12:00 p.m. and 9:00 p.m. for five (5) consecutive days preceding each session. During the review by the city, the company shall cooperate and provide such information and documents as the city may need to reasonably perform its review. 
(Ord. No. 1591, § 13, 7-6-1982; Ord. No. 4025, § 2(N), 9-2-1997)  
Section 14. - Franchise renewal. 
The term of a franchise may be renewed in accordance with the following procedures, except as otherwise provided by applicable federal or state law, in which case renewal shall be governed by such applicable federal or state law: 
(a)  The company shall be responsible for requesting the city council, in writing, to hold a special meeting for the purpose of reviewing the company's performance during the term of the franchise and to consider renewal of the franchise. Such special renewal review session shall consider the adequacy of the franchise from the standpoint of the city, the company and the Federal Communication Commission's rules for cable communications or community antenna television systems and shall determine the advisability of renewing the grant of franchise. Unless the city council shall consent to some lesser notice, said request shall be made not less than eighteen (18) months prior to the franchise expiration date. Upon receipt of said request, the city council shall adopt a resolution setting forth the time and place of the special renewal review session. If no request for renewal is made, the franchise shall expire according to its terms, provided, however, that the corporate authorities may extend the term of the franchise in six-month increments during the franchise renewal process provided for in this section, but in no event longer than one year after its original term. 
(b)  The city council or the cable TV committee, if one exits, shall hear any interested persons during said special renewal review session and shall make findings of fact as to whether or not the company reasonably complied with the terms and conditions imposed by this ordinance and any Federal Communications Commission's rules for community antenna television systems or cable communications system. 
(c)  Public announcement of such renewal review session shall be made in accordance with section 13 of this ordinance. 
(d)  At least thirty (30) days prior to the scheduled rate of any review session, the company shall submit a written description of the cable communications system it proposes to furnish to the city during the renewal term of the franchise. That description shall be the same description required by the city council for a new applicant for a franchise, and may include information on the following topics: 
(1)  System design and technical specifications; 
(2)  Channel allocations and programming; 
(3)  Fee schedules; 
(4)  System construction programs; 
(5)  Community communications provisions, including local programming; 
(6)  Subscriber service provisions; and 
(7)  Any other information the city deems necessary or appropriate. 
(e)  After considering the renewal proposal of the company, and after receiving all evidence, the cable TV committee, if one exists, shall submit a report to the city council concerning its findings of fact as to reasonable compliance with the terms of the ordinance granting the franchise and FCC rules and regulations. Further, the cable TV committee shall report its recommendation as to whether or not renewal of the franchise would provide the best cable communications system for the City of West Chicago. 
(f)  Following the submission of the cable TV committee's report on renewal, the city council may request the company to provide any further evidence, information, tests or proposals it deems necessary or appropriate. 
(g)  Notwithstanding any findings of fact of the cable TV committee or recommendations of the committee, the council may determine that the company has been in reasonable compliance with the terms and conditions imposed by this ordinance and the FCC rules and regulations. Notwithstanding the fact that the council determines that the company has been in said reasonable compliance, the council shall have the right not to renew the franchise. If the council does not renew the franchise the council shall, to the extent then permitted by existing law, have the option to: 
(1)  Acquire at fair market value all of the assets of the company's operations within the city; or 
(2)  Require the sale at fair market value of all such assets to a succeeding company; or 
(3)  Require the removal of all such assets from the city; or 
(4)  Take such other action as it deems appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 1591, § 14, 7-6-1982; Ord. No. 4025, § 2, (O, P), 9-2-1997)  
Section 15. - Franchise revocation procedures. 
(a)  In addition to all other rights, powers, or remedies, pertaining to the city in connection with this ordinance or otherwise, the city reserves the right to terminate, cancel and revoke the franchise and all rights and privileges of the company under this ordinance in the event the company: 
(1)  Does not pay the quarterly franchise fee as per Section 10 of this ordinance; 
(2)  Sells or otherwise transfers the system facilities without receiving the required permission to do so; 
(3)  Violates any material provisions of this ordinance or any rule, order or determination of the city made pursuant to this ordinance, except where such violation, other than of subsection (b) and (c) below, is without fault of the company or through excusable neglect; or 
(4)  Because insolvent, [is] unable or unwilling to pay its debts or is adjudged bankrupt; or 
(5)  Fails for a substantial time to provide effective transmission and receiving services and capabilities to subscribers, except for strikes, war, civil commotion, acts of God, or other causes beyond the control of the company; or 
(6)  Attempts to evade any of the provisions of this ordinance or practices any fraud or deceit upon the city or subscribers; or 
(7)  Fails to establish, construct and operate the system substantially in compliance with the schedule in Section 25 of this ordinance, due consideration having been given to the nature and cause of any delays. 
(b)  Such termination, cancellation and revocation shall be by ordinance after a hearing before the corporate authorities. The city shall give the company at least sixty (60) days' notice of the hearing. The company shall have an opportunity before the corporate authorities to be fully heard and to be given a reasonable period of time, not to exceed ninety (90) days, to cure any and all defects, omissions, breaches, or causes for such termination, cancellation or revocation. The corporate authorities shall make findings of fact in connection with any termination, cancellation and revocation. 
(c)  Upon such termination, cancellation and revocation, the city shall have the option, to be exercised within thirty (30) days thereof, of purchasing the cable television system for fair market value or of ordering the company to remove all system facilities from the city. This shall not be a limit upon any other remedies the city may have in connection with the company's performance under this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1591, § 15, 7-6-1982)  
Section 16. - Liability, insurance and indemnification. 
(a)  The company hereby agrees to indemnify, defend and save whole and harmless the city and its officers and employees from liabilities and related expenses (including administrative costs and reasonable attorney's fees) of any kind which may arise out of or from the establishment, construction, operation and maintenance of the system or system facilities of the preparation, execution and implementation of this ordinance. The city shall notify the company in the event any person shall in any way notify the city of any claim or demand in connection with the system, the system facilities or this ordinance for which the company may be subject to liability under this section or otherwise. The undertaking in connection with subsection (a) includes liabilities or claims of liability with respect to property damage, personal injury, invasions of the right of privacy, defamation of any person, the violation of infringement of any copyright, trademark, trade name, service mark or patent, or of any other right of any person, and failure of the company to comply with the provisions of any federal, state or local statute, ordinance, rule or regulation applicable to the company in connection with this ordinance. 
(b)  The company shall keep the system and system facilities continuously insured against such risks as are customarily insured against by businesses of like size and type, including but not limited to: 
(1)  Insurance to the extent of three million dollars ($3,000,000.00) per occurrence against liability for bodily injury including death and to the extent of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence against liability for damage to property including loss of use, occurring on, arising out of, or in any way related to, the system and system facilities. 
(2)  During any period of construction, adequate coverage to meet liability under the Illinois Structural Work Act, at least three million dollars ($3,000,000.00) per occurrence and one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per person. 
(3)  Workmen's compensation insurance with statutory limits and employer's liability insurance of not less than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00). 
(4)  Comprehensive automobile liability insurance to the extent of three million dollars ($3,000,000.00) per occurrence and one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per person against liability for bodily injury including death and to the extent of two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) per occurrence against liability for damage to property including loss of use occurring on, arising out of, or in any way related to the system. 
(5)  Insurance against all risk of physical damage or loss, including fire or lightning in an amount and upon such terms as will allow the full replacement cost of the system and facilities covered by said insurance. 
This subsection (b) shall not be a limit on the company's undertaking provided in subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  The company shall have the city and all of its officers and employees included as additional insureds on all insurance policies referred to in this section. The company shall file with the city certificates of all such policies. All such certificates shall provide that the issuing insurance company will not cancel them without thirty (30) days' prior notice to the company and the city by registered mail. Notices of renewal and proof of payment of the premium of any expiring policy shall be filed with the city clerk prior to the date of such expiration. All such policies shall be taken out and maintained with generally recognized responsible insurance companies qualified to do business in the State of Illinois and carrying a rating of "A" and Class 15 financial size category in the most recent publication of "Best's Insurance Guide." No insurance policy which provides for a deductible in excess of five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) shall be accepted to meet the requirements of this section. 
(Ord. No. 1591, § 16, 7-6-1982; Ord. No. 4025, § 2 (Q), 9-2-1997)  
Section 17. - Municipality expenses. 
The company shall reimburse the city for all direct and reasonable expenses incurred by the city in the negotiation and awarding of the franchise. Said reimbursement shall be due at the time of the acceptance by the company of this franchise grant, under Section 37 of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1591, § 17, 7-6-1982)  
Section 18. - Restraint on assignment or transfer of franchise. 
(a)  The right, privilege and franchise under this ordinance and the system facilities shall not be assigned or transferred either in whole or in part or leased, sublet in any manner, nor shall title hereto either legal or equitable, or any right, interest, or property, therein, pass to or vest in any person either by the act of the company or by the operation of the law without the prior express approval of the city. The granting, giving or waiving of any one or more of such approvals shall not render unnecessary any subsequent approvals. The city shall not reasonably withhold such approval and may require reasonable conditions in connection with such assignment or transfer. 
(b)  The consent or approval of the city to any such assignment, lease, transfer, sublease, shall not constitute a waiver or release of the rights of the city in and to the public right-of-way. 
(c)  Nothing in this section shall prohibit a mortgage or pledge of system facilities or any part thereof or a leasing by the company of system facilities or part thereof for financing purposes in connection with construction of the system upon notice given to the city. Any such mortgage, pledge, or lease shall be subject and subordinate to the rights of the city and subscribers under this ordinance. 
(d)  The company shall promptly notify the city of any sale, transfer, or change of more than ten (10) percent of company ownership. 
(e)  Notwithstanding any other terms or provisions of this ordinance, the company shall have the right to assign, transfer, sell or dispose of, in whole or in part, by voluntary sale, merger, consolidation or otherwise, the franchise, ordinance or the cable television system to a wholly-owned subsidiary or an affiliated interest without the prior consent of the city provided that the parent company remains fully liable for the terms and conditions herein contained. 
(f)  No consent or approval of the city required pursuant to this section shall be effective unless and until the company, or its successor or assign, has reimbursed the city for the costs and expenses incurred by the city in connection with the city's review and grant thereof, including but not limited to consultant and attorney fees, as follows: 
(1)  For the full amount of such costs and expenses up to five thousand dollars ($5,000.00); and 
(2)  For one half of the amount of such costs and expenses in excess of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). 
(Ord. No. 1591, § 18, 7-6-1982; Ord. No. 4025, § 2(R), 9-2-1997)  
Section 19. - General system standards. 
(a)  The company shall establish, construct, operate and maintain the system in accordance with the highest standards of the art of cable communications and in accordance with the highest standards of the code of conduct with respect to businesses of size and type like that of the company. 
(b)  The company through the system shall provide effective and efficient service in accordance with the rules and regulations of all governmental units and agencies having regulatory and licensing authority in connection with the system. 
(c)  The company shall cause to be delivered to the subscribers home signals that meet FCC technical standards. 
(d)  The company shall not interrupt all or part of the service of the system except under emergency circumstances or circumstances beyond the company's control. Interruption of services on the system for routine maintenance shall be confined to the hours of 2:00 a.m. to 7:00 a.m., excluding Saturdays, Sundays and holidays, following publication of notice in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. 
(e)  The company shall establish, construct, operate and maintain the system, including system facilities, so as to meet FCC technical standards at all times, including without limitation, specifications for frequency boundaries, visual carriers, frequency level aural carrier, frequency levels, channel frequency response, terminal isolation and radiation. 
(f)  Reserved. 
(g)  When mutually agreed to by the city and the company, the company shall provide future services such as polling, meter reading and energy management, etc., as the system's capability and computer allow. 
(h)  [Reserved.] 
(i)  The company shall establish, construct, operate and maintain the system in accordance with all applicable national, state, and local building and safety codes. In the absence of any otherwise applicable building and safety code, the company shall establish, construct, operate and maintain the system in accordance with the most recent edition of the National Electrical Safety Code and National Electrical Code. 
(j)  [Reserved.] 
(k)  The system shall be designed, established, constructed, operated and maintained for twenty-four-hour-a-day continuous operation. 
(l)  The system shall produce for receipt on subscribers' receivers, which are in good working order, either monochrome or color pictures (providing the receiver is color capable) that are free from any significant interference, distortion, or ghosting which would cause any material degradation of video or audio quality. 
(m)  The system shall be capable of providing emergency override alerts whereby the city or other governmental units or agencies designated by the city may be able to issue a bulletin on all channels simultaneously. 
(n)  In connection with the system the company shall only employ personnel with necessary and sufficient skills and experience or training as such shall relate to their respective jobs and positions. 
(o)  The company shall not be liable for interruptions in service caused by strikes, war, civil commotion, acts of God, and other causes beyond the control of the company. 
(Ord. No. 1591, § 19, 7-6-1982; Ord. No. 2201, § 1(6a), 9-5-1989; Ord. No. 4025, § 2(S), 9-2-1997)  
Section 20. - Lockout device requirements. 
(a)  A franchisee shall not permit the transmission of any programming in violation of any federal, state or local law. 
(b)  The company shall make available to each subscriber a device capable of locking out any programming video and audio signal and shall provide such a device for each outlet to any subscriber upon request at no additional charge. The company shall inform each subscriber of the availability of such lockout device at the time of initial subscription to the service and at the time of each and every change in the subscriber's service. 
(Ord. No. 1591, § 20, 7-6-1982)  
Section 21. - Channels. 
(a)  The system shall have a subscriber network with fifty-four (54) downstream television channel capacity, as a minimum; and an institutional network, consisting of two (2) dark fiber optic strands and two (2) fiber optic terminations at each site, capable of carrying voice, full motion video, audio and data communications, which shall interconnect with West Chicago headend and the following public buildings on or before November 30, 1997: 
(1)  City Hall; 
(2)  City Museum; 
(3)  Police Station; 
(4)  Sewer Treatment Plant; 
(5)  Street Department Building; 
(6)  Water Works Building; 
(7)  West Chicago Fire Protection District Administration Building; 
(8)  West Chicago Public Library District Library Building; 
(9)  West Chicago Park District Administration Building; 
(10)  West Chicago High School; 
(11)  West Chicago Jr. High School; and 
(12)  West Chicago Elementary School District No. 33 Administration Building. 
The company shall maintain and replace, as necessary, said dark fiber optic strands. The city shall provide all equipment and materials necessary to activate and use said fiber optic strands. In the event that the city grants a competing franchise for the provision of cable television services within the city and the grantee of such competing franchise commences the provision of such services within the city prior to November 30, 2000, the company shall be entitled to a credit against the payment of franchise fees in the amount of twelve thousand five hundred dollars ($12,500.00). 
The company shall extend the institutional network so as to interconnect with specified additional public buildings and/or facilities of the city or other units of local government lying wholly or partly within the city, at the request of the city or such other unit of local government, provided, however, that the company may charge the requesting unit of local government for the actual material and labor costs of such extensions. 
(b)  The system shall have a broad band signal. 
(c)  [Reserved.] 
(d)  The system shall carry available local television stations in accordance with all applicable federal and state laws. 
(e)  The system shall carry at least one specifically designated channel for each of the following purposes. 
(1)  Municipal access 
(2)  Education access 
(3)  Public access 
(4)  [Reserved.] 
Upon request of the city and provided all the above channels are in use, the company will provide additional public service channels. The company shall provide the city with the capability to broadcast live, on a twenty-four (24) hour per day basis, on the municipal access channel and the public access channel, from the city council chambers located in the city hall and the local origination and access studio. In addition, the company shall broadcast, at the city's request, up to four (4) meetings per year of the governing body or specified committees or commissions of one or more units of local government lying wholly or partly within the city, provided, however, that the city shall make such requests to the company in writing not less than three (3) weeks prior to each such meeting, that such meetings shall not be conducted on a Saturday or Sunday, that such meetings shall commence not later than nine o'clock (9:00) p.m., and that each day of any multiday meetings shall be considered a separate meeting. The company shall not be responsible for the content of such meetings, or for any technical problems encountered during such broadcasts. 
(f)  In addition to the local television stations and access channels required pursuant to this section, the system shall provide cable programming services, premium services and/or pay-per-view services, in the following broad categories: 
(1)  Children; 
(2)  Family oriented; 
(3)  Educational programming; 
(4)  News and information; 
(5)  Weather; 
(6)  Sports; 
(7)  Ethnic/minority programming; 
(8)  Arts, culture and performing arts; and 
(9)  General entertainment. 
(g)  The company shall provide leased access on the system in accordance with all applicable federal and state laws. 
(Ord. No. 1591, § 21, 7-6-1982; Ord. No. 2201, § 1(6b, c), 9-5-1989; Ord. No. 4025, § 2 (T—Y), 9-2-1997)  
Section 22. - Local business office and service calls. 
(a)  The company shall establish, operate and maintain at 1101 East Roosevelt Road, Wheaton, Illinois, a business office and agent for the purpose of receiving inquiries, requests and complaints concerning all aspects of the establishment, construction, maintenance, and operation of the system and the payment of subscribers' service charges. The office shall have a listed telephone and shall be open during reasonable business hours. 
(b)  The company shall establish and maintain at 150 E. Roosevelt Road, West Chicago, Illinois, a local origination and access studio for the production of local programming by the city, units of local government lying wholly or partly within the city and public service organizations serving the city. 
(c)  The company will furnish mobile facilities for on location and remote taping or broadcasting upon request of the city made not less than two (2) business days prior to the event to be taped or broadcast. 
(d)  The company shall respond to and resolve subscribers' complaints or requests for service in connection with repairs and maintenance and malfunctions of the system facilities. The company shall respond as soon as possible on such complaints or requests, but not more than twenty-four (24) hours after receipt of a complaint. 
(e)  The company shall file with the city copies of all of its rules and regulations in connection with the handling of inquiries, requests and complaints. The company shall in writing furnish to subscribers at the time they connect to the system information concerning procedures for making inquiries, requests and complaints about the system. The information shall at least include names, addresses and telephone numbers of the business office and agent. The company shall provide such information as will reasonably permit subscribers to effectively submit inquiries, requests and complaints and to obtain satisfactory resolution or handling in connection therewith especially in connection with the quality of the company's delivery of service. 
(f)  The company shall keep full records in connection with all inquires, complaints and requests in connection with the system. Minimally, such records shall identify the person in contact, the subject matter of the contract and the resolution of the matter in question of the action taken by the company in connection with the contact. 
(g)  The company shall notify the city in the writing of the date on which services are first offered to subscribers. 
(Ord. No. 1591, § 22, 7-6-1982; Ord. No. 2201, § 1(6d), 9-5-1989; Ord. No. 4025, § 2(Z, AA), 9-2-1997)  
Section 23. - Protection of privacy. 
Neither the company nor any other person, agency or entity shall monitor, or arrange for the monitoring, of any cable, line, signal input device or subscriber outlet or receiver for any purpose whatsoever, without the specific authorization of the corporate authorities expressed by resolution and of affected subscribers unless the company is so ordered by a court or other lawful authority. The foregoing notwithstanding, the company shall be allowed to perform monitoring which is necessary to the normal delivery of system services; provided however, that such monitoring shall be done in a manner that does not infringe upon the rights of subscribers. If all respects in connection with the system, the company and the city shall protect the rights and privacy of subscribers and others. 
(Ord. No. 1591, § 23, 7-6-1982; Ord. No. 2414, § 1(5), 5-6-1991; Ord. No. 4025, § 2(BB), 9-2-1997)  
Section 24. - Use of city streets. 
(a)  All systems facilities erected, constructed or placed by the company within the city shall be located so as not to interfere with the proper use of streets, alleys, and other public ways and places, and to cause minimum interference with the rights or reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin any of the said streets, alleys, or other public ways and places, and not to interfere with existing public utility installations. All service lines shall be underground in those areas of the city where one or more utility service is underground at the time of installation. In areas where telephone and electric utility facilities are above ground at the time of installation, the company may install its service above ground. If, subsequently, such telephone and electric utility facilities are placed underground, the company's facilities in such area shall be placed underground. 
(b)  In case of any disturbance of pavement, sidewalk, driveway, or to other surfacing, the company shall, at its own expense, and in the manner required by the city ordinances or policies, replace and restore all paving, sidewalk, driveway or other surface of any street or alley disturbed. In case of any disturbance on either private or public property, the land surface, including plantings and trees, shall be restored by the company at its cost to substantially its previous condition. 
(c)  If at any time during the period of the franchise, the city shall lawfully elect to alter, or change the grade or location of any street, alley or other public way, the company shall upon reasonable notice by the city, remove, relay and relocate affected system facilities at its own expense, and in each instance comply with the requirements of the city. 
(d)  The company shall not place system facilities below ground where the same will cause service interruption with any gas, electric, telephone fixtures, water hydrants or other utility, and all such conduits or other fixtures placed in any street shall be so placed as to comply with all ordinances of the city. 
(e)  The company may be required by the city to permit joint use of its system facilities located in the streets, alleys or other public right-of-way of the city by utilities insofar as such joint use may be reasonably practicable and upon payment of reasonable rental therefore; provided that in the absence of agreement regarding such use, the corporate authorities consistent with law shall provide for arbitration of the terms and conditions of such joint use and the compensation to be paid therefrom, which award shall be final. 
(f)  The company shall hold the city harmless for any removal or damage to company facilities which results from a fire or other disaster necessitating city action. 
(g)  [Reserved.] 
(h)  If the company seeks to construct and maintain its cables and other system facilities on public or private property, and an easement for such use has already been granted to a telephone company, electric or other public utility, said easement shall, if at all possible, be interpreted so as to grant the company the same rights and privileges as have been granted to the telephone and electric companies and other public utilities. In such easements, the words "telephone" or "telephone company," "electric company" and the like shall be interpreted to include the company. The company shall not be required to install cable to service areas where the required easements are not reasonably obtainable. 
(i)  If the company abandons or unreasonably delays its work on the city's streets, the city has a right to have such work completed and to bill the company the expenses of such completion. 
(Ord. No. 1591, § 24, 7-6-1982; Ord. No. 4025, § 2(BB, CC), 9-2-1997)  
Section 25. - Timing of construction and operation. 
(a)  Within thirty (30) days after the effective date of this ordinance, the company shall file with the appropriate governmental authorities and with the necessary utility companies all initial papers, applications, contracts and other documents necessary to permit the commencement of construction and operation of the cable television system and shall thereafter make diligent efforts to obtain the proper execution and delivery of such documents. The company shall provide the city with a copy of each application and document and shall report bimonthly to the city its progress in obtaining necessary permits, contracts and other necessary documents as contemplated above. 
(b)  Within ninety (90) days after the effective date of this ordinance, the company shall furnish the city a construction schedule and map setting forth target dates by areas for commencement of services to subscribers. The schedule and map shall be updated whenever substantial changes become necessary. 
(c)  Construction of the system shall commence within thirty (30) days after all required utility company licenses have been obtained by the company, and service shall be available to all potential subscribers within twelve (12) months thereafter. 
(d)  If construction is not commenced within three (3) months of receipt of all necessary utility permits, the company shall be deemed in default and the franchise terminated. 
(Ord. No. 1591, § 25, 7-6-1982)  
Section 26. - Company's obligation to the community for local programming. 
(a)  In order to provide for local community programming activities, the company shall, within six (6) months of its acceptance of this grant, cause a charitable not-for-profit Illinois corporation (hereinafter the "foundation") to be formed in accordance with the following parameters: 
(1)  Name. West Chicago Cable Communications Foundation; 
(2)  Board of directors. Initial board of directors to be constituted of five (5) persons to be appointed by the mayor, with the advise and consent of the city council, plus an ex officio member designated by the company. 
(3)  Purpose. To foster the use of the public, educational, arts, and government access channels by promoting local programming, communication skills, and technology training among West Chicago residents of all ages, and to raise such funds as deemed necessary; 
(4)  Studios and facilities. In cooperation with the company, establish rules and regulations for scheduling the use of local access programming in the studio and other facilities, as well as channel access for local access programming; 
(5)  Investments. Establish an annual budget, receive and authorize the expenditure of revenues and manage the investments provided by the company for the financial support of local origination programming. 
(b)  The company shall provide the following financial support by direct funding, equipment, staff and services which shall be made available to the city and to the foundation for development of local programming activities. 
(1)  An initial cash grant of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) to the foundation upon its incorporation, and an annual grant of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) on the first anniversary of the date of this ordinance becoming effective and each anniversary date thereafter until this franchise is terminated, and an additional cash grant of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) on or before September 30, 1997; 
(2)  Conveyance, by appropriate bill(s) of sale, of all furnishings and equipment installed on or before September 30, 1997, in the local origination and access studio and/or city hall by the company and/or its predecessors in interest, including, but not limited to video and audio equipment, control equipment, teleprompters, racks, drapes, lights and cabinets, and the following additional items of equipment: 
A.  A three-quarter inch (¾?) video recorder; 
B.  A three-quarter inch (¾?) video player; and 
C.  A three-quarter inch (¾?) video editor-controller. 
Upon the request of the foundation, the company shall so convey the following playback equipment located at company's Wheaton facilities: A GVG 10x1 video-audio line switcher, two (2) three-quarter inch (¾?) video players, three (3) black and white monitors, a character generator, a time based corrector and a rack to house same. The company shall promptly move said playback equipment to the local origination and access studio and thereafter, the foundation shall be responsible for programming playback on the access channels. 
(3)  Local origination and access staff support over the life of the franchise, specifically including labor for installation, set up. maintenance and minor repair of all of the foundation's local origination and access equipment and provision of one (1) programming director to assist in local origination and access programming and training. 
(4)  Five (5) one-thousand-dollar-scholarships per year during the life of the franchise to students residing within the West Chicago School District 94 boundaries, with the award of the scholarships to be made by the foundation with the cooperation of the school district administration or equivalent. 
(5)  The company's intern program (CIP) to train local students in television technology and production in cooperation with area schools and institutions. 
(Ord. No. 1591, § 26, 7-6-1982; Ord. No. 1809, §§ 1—3, 5-6-1985; Ord. No. 2641, § 1, 5-3-1993; Ord. No. 4025, § 2(EE—GG, 9-2-1997)  
Section 27. - Performance guarantee. 
(a)  In addition to any construction guarantee, the company shall furnish the city an annual performance guaranty in the form of either case, irrevocable letter of credit, or surety bond in the amount of five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) as further guarantee for the faithful performance by the company of the provisions, terms and conditions of this ordinance. In case of any breach, the city shall be entitled to recover on said surety bond in the amount of any damages, and all costs and attorneys' fees incurred by the city, proximately resulting from the failure of the company to faithfully observe and perform under any and all provisions, terms, and conditions which this ordinance requires. 
(b)  No recovery by the city of any sum by reason of the surety bond required by this section shall be any limitation upon the liability of the company to the city, except that any sum received by the city by reason of said surety bond shall be deducted from any recovery which the city might have against the company. 
(Ord. No. 1591, § 27, 7-6-1982; Ord. No. 4025, § 2(HH), 9-2-1997)  
Section 28. - Minimum damages upon franchise revocation. 
In the event the company fails to perform in accordance with any of the provisions of this ordinance and a forfeiture is declared, then it is understood and agreed that the city shall be entitled to the sum of fifty thousand ($50,000.00) as and for minimum damages, which sum shall be in addition to any other remedies the city may have and which sum shall be covered by the performance guarantee bond posted by the company at the time of execution of the franchise. 
(Ord. No. 1591, § 28, 7-6-1982)  
Section 29. - Compliance with local, state and federal law. 
(a)  The company shall establish, construct, operate and maintain the system subject to the reasonable supervision of the city and in strict compliance with all applicable laws, ordinances, rules and regulations. 
(b)  If at any time the powers of the city, state or federal government or any agency or official thereof in connection with the system are duly transferred to or later reside in any other board, authority, agency or official, such board, authority, agency or official shall have the power, rights and duties previously vested in addition to any other which they may acquire. 
(c)  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this ordinance, the company shall at all times comply with all state and federal laws, rules and regulations, or any administrative agency thereof; provided, however, if any such ordinance, law, rule or regulation shall require the company to perform any service or shall permit the company to perform any service in conflict with the provisions and terms of this ordinance or of any law, rule or regulation, then as soon as possible following knowledge thereof the company shall notify the city of the point of conflict believed to exist. If the city determines that a material provision of this ordinance is affected by such action, the city shall have the right to modify or amend any of the provisions herein to such reasonable extent as may be necessary to carry out the full intent and purpose of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1591, § 29, 7-6-1982)  
Section 30. - City's reservation of rights. 
(a)  The right is hereby reserved to the city to adopt and enforce in addition to the terms, conditions and provisions contained in this ordinance and in otherwise existing applicable ordinances, such additional ordinances, rules and regulations as it shall find necessary in the exercise of the police powers; provided that such ordinances, rules and regulations shall be reasonable and not in material or substantial conflict with the rights herein granted. 
(b)  In addition to the specific rights of inspection otherwise provided for in this ordinance, the city shall also have the right to make such inspections as it shall find necessary to ensure compliance with the terms, provisions and conditions of this ordinance and other relevant provisions of law. 
(c)  Nothing in this ordinance shall limit the right of the city to acquire all or any part of the system through the exercise of eminent domain in the manner provided by law. 
(d)  From time to time the city may by ordinance amend this ordinance. No such amendment shall be effective as to the company until the company files with the city its acceptance, with specific reference to the ordinance amending this ordinance, substantially in the form set forth in Section 37. 
(Ord. No. 1591, § 30, 7-6-1982)  
Section 31. - Supervision of the company. 
(a)  Unless specifically otherwise provided in this ordinance, or unless the corporate authorities shall otherwise specify, all administrative actions required to be taken or which shall or may be taken by the city in connection with the system, shall be taken by the mayor or such other person designated by the mayor. 
(b)  Unless specifically otherwise provided in this ordinance, or unless the corporate authorities shall otherwise provide, all filings with the municipality required by this ordinance shall be made with the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 1591, § 31, 7-6-1982)  
Section 32. - City cable television committee. 
The city reserves the right to establish a cable television committee. If established, the committee shall constitute and shall exercise such powers and perform such functions in connection with the system and this ordinance as the corporate authorities shall from time to time provide, including but not limited to the following: 
(a)  The committee shall advise the corporate authorities with respect to all aspects of the company's actions in connection with the system in the city. 
(b)  The committee shall review all aspects of the company's actions in connection with the system. 
(c)  The committee, if it deems it necessary and according to such procedural rules as it may decide which affords the company and a subscriber a fair hearing, may conduct hearings in review of company decisions and actions with respect to this franchise ordinance. Decisions by the committee with respect to such hearings shall be binding upon the company, provided, however, nothing contained in this ordinance shall be construed to prohibit the company or the city from seeking or obtaining judicial relief for any resulting controversy. 
(Ord. No. 1591, § 32, 7-6-1982)  
Section 33. - Notices. 
All notices herein provided for shall be sent prepaid by registered or certified mail addressed to the parties, as follows: 
To the city: 	City of West Chicago 
	c/o City Administrator 
	475 Main Street 
	West Chicago, Illinois 60185 
With copy to: 	Gerald M. Gorski 
	GORSKI & GOOD 
	211 S. Wheaton Avenue 
	Suite 305 
	Wheaton, Illinois 60187 
To the company: 	Jones Spacelink 
	c/o General Manager 
	1101 E. Roosevelt Road 
	Wheaton, Illinois 60187 
With copy to: 	Jones Intercable 
	ATTN: Legal Department 
	9697 East Mineral Drive 
	Englewood, Colorado 80112 
 
(Ord. No. 1591, § 33, 7-6-1982; Ord. No. 4025, § 2(II), 9-2-1997)  
Section 34. - Incorporation of documents. 
The following documents and letters from officials of the company to the city are attached to this agreement and made a part thereof: [3] 
(a)  Company's "Overview of Centel's Proposal to the City of West Chicago," submitted on or about August, 1981. 
(b)  Company's "Proposal to Provide Cable Television Service to West Chicago, Illinois," dated July 6, 1981. 
(c)  Company's "Proposal to Provide Local Origination and Access Programming to West Chicago, Illinois," dated September 30, 1981. 
(d)  Company's letter to Ms. Sally Butler, CATV Committee Chairperson, dated August 26, 1981. 
(Ord. No. 1591, § 34, 7-6-1982) 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— The documents and letters have not been set out herein, but copies of same may be found on file in the office of the city clerk. 
 
Section 35. - Limits on company's recourse. 
Except as expressly provided otherwise in this ordinance, the company herein shall have no recourse whatsoever against the city for any loss, cost or expense or damages arising out of the terms, conditions and provisions or requirements of this ordinance or because of the city's enforcement of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1591, § 35, 7-6-1982)  
Section 36. - Number of potential subscribers. 
The city and company shall identify and mutually agree upon a specific number of potential subscribers. Said agreement shall be in writing and made a part of this ordinance. The agreement shall be mutually executed at the time of acceptance by the company of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1591, § 36, 7-6-1982)  
Section 37. - Acceptance of franchise.[4] 
(a)  The provisions, terms and conditions of the grant of the franchise or any amendment, extension or renewal thereof shall be accepted by the company by written instrument filed with the city clerk within thirty (30) days after the passage and approval of the ordinance providing for such grant, amendment, extension or renewal, unless said time period is extended by the city at its sole discretion. 
(b)  The company expressly acknowledges that upon accepting the right, privilege and franchise granted by this ordinance, it did so relying upon its own investigation and understanding of the power and authority of the city in connection with the system and the grant, or any amendment, extension or renewal thereof. 
(c)  The company by acceptance of the right, privilege and franchise under the grant, or any amendment, extension or renewal thereof, acknowledges that it has not been induced to act by any understanding or proviso or other statement whether verbal or written by or on behalf of the city concerning any term or condition of the franchise not expressed herein. 
(d)  The company further acknowledges by such acceptance that it has carefully read the terms and conditions of this ordinance and is willing and does accept all reasonable risks of the meaning of the provisions, terms and conditions herein. 
(e)  In the event the company shall accept the grant of the franchise, or any amendment, extension or renewal thereof, in accordance with and pursuant to the provisions, terms and conditions of this ordinance, the company shall execute an acceptance in substantially the form as follows: 
ACCEPTANCE OF CITY OF WEST CHICAGO CABLE 
TELEVISION FRANCHISE 
Jones Growth Partners, L.P., a Colorado limited partnership d/b/a Jones Spacelink (the "Company"), hereby makes the following express representations to the City of West Chicago, DuPage County, Illinois (the "City"): 
A.  The Company has carefully read the terms and conditions of the City of West Chicago Cable Television Franchise Ordinance, as amended, extended and/or renewed by the City's Ordinance No. 4025 (the "Ordinance"), and accepts all of such terms and conditions and agrees to abide by the same with respect to its franchise (the "franchise") to establish, construct, operate and maintain a cable television system within the City. 
B.  The Company acknowledges that it has carefully read the terms and conditions of the Ordinance and expressly waives any claims that any provisions thereof are unreasonable or arbitrary or void, except as to those provisions which are preempted now or hereafter by superseding provisions of federal or state law. 
C.  The Company acknowledges that it has not been induced to accept the franchise as amended, extended and/or renewed by the Ordinance by any promise, oral or written, or any other consideration, by or on behalf of the City or by any third person, regarding any term or condition of the Ordinance of the Franchise which is not expressed therein. 
D.  The Company represents that no promise or inducement, oral or written, has been made to any City employee, agent or official regarding the Ordinance or the Franchise. 
Dated this ________ day of ________, ___. 
Jones Growth Partners, L.P., a 
Colorado limited partnership d/b/a 
Jones Spacelink, 
By: 
	/s/   
      Ruth E. Warren 
 	 
Title: Group VP/Operations 
STATE OF COLORADO 	) 
	) SS. 
COUNTY OF ARAPAHOE 	) 
 
Title:___________ 
STATE OF ___________ 
COUNTY OF ___________ 
The undersigned, a notary public in and for the County and State aforesaid, does hereby certify that Ruth E. Warren, personally known to me to be the same person whose name is subscribed the above and foregoing instrument, acknowledged before me this 4th day of September, 1997, that s/he signed said instrument as the duly authorized Group VP/Operations of Jones Growth Partners, L.P. for the uses and purposes herein set forth. 
[Seal] 
	/s/   
      Terrie R. Thompson 
 	 
Section 4. That this Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage, approval and publication in pamphlet form as provided by law, provided, however, that the extension of the Franchise shall not be effective until Jones has filed its unconditional acceptance thereof with the City Clerk, in substantially the form attached hereto as Exhibit "A" and incorporated herein by reference. 
PASSED this 2nd day of September, 1997. 
APPROVED as to form: ___________ 
City Attorney 
APPROVED this 2nd day of September, 1997. 
_____
Mayor 
ATTEST: 
Nancy M. Smith 
City Clerk 
PUBLISHED: 9-10-1997 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 4025, § 2(KK), deleted former § 37 and substituted the language as set forth herein. It should further be noted that §§ 3 and 4 of such ordinance provided as follows: 
Section 3. That all other ordinances and resolutions, or parts thereof, in conflict with the provisions of this Ordinance are, to the extent of such conflict, expressly repealed. 
Section 4. That this Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage, approval and publication in pamphlet form as provided by law, provided, however, that the extension of the Franchise shall not be effective until Jones has filed its unconditional acceptance thereof with the City Clerk, in substantially the form attached hereto as Exhibit "A" and incorporated herein by reference. 
Exhibit A, reading the same as "Acceptance of City of West Chicago Cable Television Franchise" set forth in this section, is not set out at length herein, but is on file and available for inspection together with Ord. No. 4025, in the office of the city clerk. 
 
Section 38. - Delegation of powers. 
Any right, power or duty of the city, the corporate authorities of the city and cable television committee or any other official of the city under this ordinance may be transferred or delegated by ordinance, resolution, or other appropriate action of the corporate authorities to an appropriate officer, employee, department, or committee of the city or any legal authority, including any governmental agency created for the purpose of regulating the operation and development of an intercommunity cable communications system. 
(Ord. No. 1591, § 38, 7-6-1982)  
Section. 39. - Severability. 
If any section, paragraph or provision of this ordinance is held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction or administrative agency, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof, except as otherwise provided for herein. 
(Ord. No. 1591, § 39, 7-6-1982)  
Section 40. - Effective date. 
This ordinance shall become effective ten (10) days after its passage and publication as required by law. 
(Ord. No. 1591, § 40, 7-6-1982) 
PASSED, this 6th day of July, 1982. 
APPROVED as to form 
	/s/   
      City Attorney 
 	 
APPROVED this 6th day of July, 1982. 
	/s/   
      Mayor 
 	 
ATTESTED: 
/s/   
      City Clerk 	
 	 
 
APPENDIX F - ANNEXATIONS AGREEMENTS[1] 
The corporate authorities of the city may, in accordance with the procedures set forth in 65 ILCS 5/11-15.1-1, with the agreement of the owner, extend the term of any annexation agreement and/or amendment thereto previously entered into by the city for a term that may not exceed 40 years from the original date of the agreement and/or the amendment thereto entered into involving the territory affected by the extension. The extension of the original agreement and/or amendment thereto can be entered into any time after 5 years after passage of the original annexation agreement and may be entered into at any other time within that 40-year period, even after the termination of the original annexation agreement or any amendments thereto, provided that the total term of the annexation agreement or amendments thereto may not exceed 40 years. The city intends to fully exercise its home rule powers through the passage of this section and finds that it will benefit the citizens of the community and will assist in the appropriate planning and development of the city to provide an option for property owners and the corporate authorities of the city to mutually benefit from the terms of an extended annexation agreement or amendment thereto. 
(Ord. No. 08-O-0024, § 1, 5-19-2008) 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Formerly App. J, see editor's note at the beginning of App. E. 
 
APPENDIX G - FEE SCHEDULE[1] 
Sec. 1.1 Annexation Application Fees. 
In addition to the application fee, a five hundred dollar ($500.00) deposit shall be required. In the event that multiple applications requiring a deposit are being requested simultaneously, only one (1) deposit, equal to largest deposit required, shall be paid with the application fees. Upon notification by the city, the deposit shall be replenished if the fees incurred near the initial deposit amount, and review shall cease until such time as the deposit is replenished. Any remaining balance on a deposit will be refunded in a timely manner once all fees have been paid. 
Annexation — without an annexation agreement, up to two acres ..... $600.00 
Annexation — without an annexation agreement, 2+ acres ..... $800.00 
Annexation — with an annexation agreement, up to two acres ..... $1,200.00 
Annexation — with an annexation agreement, 2+ acres ..... $1,300.00 
Amendment to an annexation agreement ..... $700.00 
Pre-annexation agreement ..... $700.00 
_____
Sec. 2.1 Annual Licenses and Related Fees. 
Building contractors' license 
Initial application ..... $235.00 
Annual renewal ..... $175.00 
Business licenses 
Auctioneers ..... $105.00 
Day and temporary labor agencies ..... $650.00 
Junk dealer or junk peddler ..... $650.00 
Landscape waste transfer stations ..... $5,480.00 
Pawnbrokers and precious metals dealers ..... $650.00 
Peddlers ..... $650.00 
Transfer fee ..... $50.00 
Scavengers ..... $3,290.00 
Used car sales ..... $650.00 
Vending machines (tobacco, per machine) ..... $500.00 
Carnival or fair investigation fee (per employee) ..... $50.00 
Coin-operated amusements (per device) ..... $270.00 
Itinerant or transient photographers license ..... $105.00 
Massage establishments and therapists 
Business license (annual) ..... $250.00 
Fingerprinting fee (one time) ..... $65.00 
Repossession of relocation fee (per vehicle) ..... $15.00 
Residential rental property base license (annual) 
Single-family, two-flats and townhomes (per building) ..... $265.00 
Condominium units (per unit) ..... $265.00 
Multi-family buildings 
Per building ..... $265.00 
Per unit (added to per building fee) ..... $40.00 
Rental re-inspection fee (each re-inspection) ..... $ 40.00 
Solicitors ..... $50.00 
Tattoo and body piercing establishments 
Business license (annual) ..... $650.00 
Application fee ..... $105.00 
Taxicabs 
Business license (annual) ..... $650.00 
Fee per vehicle (annual) ..... $100.00 
Fingerprinting fee per driver (one time) ..... $65.00 
Late filing fee ..... $50.00 
Tobacco license ..... $650.00 
(Ord. No. 18-O-0038, § 2, 7-16-2018; Ord. No. 19-O-0033, § 1, 11-4-2019) 
Sec. 2.2 All annual fees listed in section 2.1 shall not be prorated or refundable. 
_____
Sec. 3.1 Building Permit Fees. 
In addition to the fixed fees provided for, the applicant shall also pay the city for its actual costs of consultant's fees including, but not limited to, plan review and inspections in connection with said application. 
Miscellaneous permit fees* 
Accessory building — up to 200 square feet ..... $80.00 
Accessory building — 200+ square feet ..... $135.00 
Ansul fire protection system — commercial ..... $265.00 
Construction without a permit — resident ..... permit fee x 1.5 
Construction without a permit — contractor ..... permit fee x 3 
Construction/temporary trailer ..... $80.00 
Covered porch ..... $135.00 
Construction water — 1 and 2 family ..... $105.00 
Construction water — all others ..... $210.00 
Deck/porch (no roof/mechanical) ..... $105.00 
Deck, detached with roof (gazebo) ..... $135.00 
Demolish building — up to 768 square feet ..... $80.00 
Demolish building — 768+ square feet plus ..... $210.00 
Demolish commercial building ..... $315.00 
Driveway — 1 and 2 family dwelling only — private and parkway ..... $80.00 
Driveway/parking area — all others (per square foot; minimum $80.00) — private and parkway ..... $0.05 
Driveway — resurfacing existing (per square foot; minimum $80.00) — private and parkway ..... $0.02 
Each inspection after required and follow-up inspection ..... $100.00 
Elevator or chairlift ..... $210.00 
Fence — over ten feet in length (no fee for less than ten feet in length) ..... $55.00 
Fireplace/wood stove ..... $135.00 
Fire sprinklers — up to 100 heads, per head (minimum $125.00) ..... $7.00 
Fire sprinklers -100+ heads, per head ..... $630.00 plus $1.60 per head over 100 
Natural landscaping permit ..... $80.00 
Patio ..... $80.00 
Range hood — commercial ..... $265.00 
Roof — 1 and 2 family dwelling and accessory building ..... $55.00 
Siding ..... $55.00 
Spa/hot tub ..... $105.00 
Spray booth/dip tank ..... $265.00 
Sump pump/downspout relocation ..... $80.00 
Swimming pool — above ground ..... $135.00 
Swimming pool — below ground ..... $315.00 
Tanks, storage — above or below ground ..... $105.00 
Tents/temporary structures ..... $55.00 
Utility connection ..... $105.00 
Utility disconnection ..... $80.00 
New construction 
Single-family dwelling 
Minimum building permit fee for a single-family dwelling ..... $600.00 
Minimum building permit fee for a single-family building addition ..... $300.00 
All levels, including basement and garage (per square foot) ..... $0.40 
Other than a single-family dwelling 
Up to 25,000 square feet per square foot ..... $0.50 
25,000+ — 75,000 square feet per square foot ..... $0.40 
75,000+ square feet per square foot ..... $0.25 
Alterations, Remodeling and Repairs. Building permit fees for alterations, remodeling, repairs, roofs (for other than one (1) and two (2) family dwellings and accessory buildings) and for other items not clearly identified in the permit fee schedule shall be determined by the dollar estimate of the activity being performed (including labor and materials). These permit fees shall be based on the following schedule: 
Single-family dwelling only (based on valuation) 
Up to $500.00 ..... $65.00 
$500.01+ — $5,000.00 ..... $80.00 
$5,000.01+ ..... $80.00 + $6.50 per $1,000.00 over $5,000.00 
Other than a single-family dwelling only (based on valuation) 
Up to $1,000.00 ..... $80.00 
$1,000.01 — $5,000.00 ..... $160.00 
$5,000.01 -$10,000.00 ..... $315.000 
$10,00.01+ ..... $315.00 + $16.00 per $1,000.00 over $10,000.00 
Electrical fees 
Basic plan review ..... $80.00 
Circuits (minimum $75.00) ..... $1.30 per circuit space 
Service, single-family — new/upgrade ..... $80.00 
Service, commercial — each 100 amp or fraction thereof ..... $80.00 
Plumbing fees 
Basic plan review — up to three fixtures ..... $55.00 
Basic plan review — four plus fixtures ..... $90.00 
Fixture, per fixture opening (minimum $75.00) ..... $8.50 
Lawn, sprinkler ..... $105.00 
Meter installation inspection ..... $55.00 
Sewer repair ..... $80.00 
Sign permit fees 
Sign — permanent, freestanding illuminated ..... $130.00 
Sign — permanent, freestanding non-illuminated ..... $105.00 
Sign — permanent, wall illuminated ..... $100.00 
Sign — permanent, wall non-illuminated ..... $80.00 
Sign — temporary, 14-day period ..... $105.00 
Sign — change of copy only ..... $30.00 
Sec. 3.2 The fees listed in section 3.1 may be partially refunded if the project did not commence and the refund request is made within six (6) months of said fees being paid. After subtracting the cost of plan review and any other out-of-pocket costs incurred by the City in reviewing the permit application, the city will retain fifty (50) percent of the amount that remains, retaining a minimum fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) and a maximum fee of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). 
_____
Sec. 4.1 Business Registration. 
Initial registration ..... $55.00 
Renewal paid prior to December 31 ..... $30.00 
Renewal paid after December 31, in addition to any penalty imposed as provided for in chapter 1, section 1 -8 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of West Chicago ..... $110.00 
_____
Sec. 5.1 Cemetery Fees and Charges. 
(a)  Sale price of graves. 
(1)  Adult grave: 
Resident ..... $1,200.00 
Nonresident ..... $1,350.00 
(2)  Infant to age two (2) years: 
Resident ..... $375.00 
Nonresident ..... $450.00 
(3)  Internment of ashes: 
Resident ..... $800.00 
Nonresident ..... $950.00 
(b)  Grave excavation. 
(1)  Adult grave: 
a.  Internment Monday through Friday, each grave ..... $1,425.00 
b.  Internment Saturdays, each grave ..... $1,550.00 
c.  Internment Sundays and holidays, each grave ..... $1,650.00 
(2)  Infant to age two (2) years: 
a.  Internment Monday through Friday, each grave ..... $500.00 
b.  Internment Saturdays, each grave ..... $550.00 
c.  Internment Sundays and holidays, each grave ..... $600.00 
(3)  Internment of ashes: 
a.  Internment Monday through Friday, each grave ..... $800.00 
b.  Internment Saturdays, each grave ..... $875.00 
c.  Internment Sundays and holidays, each grave ..... $925.00 
(c)  Memorial foundations. The memorial foundation charge in all city-owned cemeteries shall be one hundred fifty ($150.00) for markers or monuments up to one and one-half (1½) feet in length plus an additional charge at a rate of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per one (1) foot of length in excess of one and one-half (1½) feet, and two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) plus one hundred eighty dollars ($180.00) per cubic yard of foundation concrete for mausoleums. 
(Ord. No. 19-O-0001, § 1, 1-7-2019) 
_____
Sec. 6.1 Commuter Parking Lot Fee (daily) ..... $1.75 
_____
Sec. 7.1 Engineering Fees. 
Plan review fee 
Consultant reviewed plans ..... Consultant fee plus 25% 
Commercial development staff reviewed plans ..... 3.25% of approved engineer's estimate of engineering improvements cost for 3 reviews plus 0.5% of approved engineer's estimate of engineering improvements for each subsequent review 
Single-family home staff reviewed plans 
Infill lots (3 reviews) ..... $790.00 
Subdivision lots (3 reviews) ..... $525.00 
Additional reviews beyond 3 (per review) ..... $110.00 
As-built plans that are submitted more than 18 months after issuance of building permit ..... 0.5% of approved engineer's estimate of cost 
Inspection fee 
Single-family lots ..... $265.00 
Non-single-family lots ..... 3.25% of approved engineer's estimate of engineering improvements cost 
Stormwater management permit fee 
Proposal that does not require a tab submittal ..... $525.00 
Proposal that does require a tab submittal ..... $2,100.00 
Proposal that is over 10 acres ..... $2,100.00 plus $20.00 per acre for every acre or portion thereof over 10 acres 
Best management practice, non-residential and multi-family ..... $1,050.00 
Best management practice, single-family ..... $265.00 
Work in right-of-way: permit fees 
Impacting pavement ..... $525.00 
Not impacting pavement ..... $265.00 
Driveway apron/sidewalk/curb cut ..... See section 3.1 
Work in right-of-way: refundable security (contractor license bond is acceptable) 
Impacting pavement ..... $10,500.00 
Not impacting pavement ..... $2,625.00 
Field change fee (minimum $525.00) ..... 5% of approved engineer's estimate of cost 
Sec. 7.2 In the event that the subdivision and/or design plans are not submitted in a format compatible with the city's geographic information system (G.I.S.), an additional fee in an amount equal to one-half (½) percent of the cost of such improvements shall be charged. 
Sec. 7.3 In the event that the required land improvements for an approved subdivision or PUD are not constructed within twelve (12) months of issuance of the approval letter, a re-review of the plans will be required and fees, therefore, shall be paid by the applicant. 
_____
Sec. 8.1 Liquor Licenses. 
Class A-1 ..... $3,500.00 
Class A-2 ..... $4,150.00 
Class A-3 ..... $2,150.00 
Class B-1 ..... $3,950.00 
Class B-2 ..... $6,850.00 
Class B-3 ..... $5,650.00 
Class B-4 ..... $4,600.00 
Class B-5 ..... $4,150.00 
Class C-1 ..... $3,350.00 
Class C-2 ..... $4,400.00 
Class C-3 ..... $2,800.00 
Class C-4 ..... $2,800.00 
Class C-5 ..... $3,250.00 
Class D (per day) ..... $115.00 
Class E-1 ..... $2,550.00 
Class E-3 ..... $1,450.00 
Class F ..... $1,200.00 
Class G ..... $1,450.00 
Filing fee per program where club facilities are rented ..... $10.00 
Class H ..... $1,600.00 
Class I ..... $1,250.00 
BYOL ..... $1,300.00 
Liquor license renewal late fee (per week after second Friday in December) ..... $75.00 
Sec. 8.2 The initial application fee for a license shall be accompanied by a non-refundable deposit of four hundred ten dollars ($410.00), except in the case of a Class D license. An additional fee of two hundred ten dollars ($210.00) shall be required for each additional individual or authorized agent for which an investigation must be conducted. Application fees are in addition to the annual license fee. 
_____
Sec. 9.1 Miscellaneous Planning and Zoning Fees. 
In addition to the application fee, a five hundred dollar ($500.00) deposit shall be required for an amendment to the comprehensive plan or a local landmark or historic district designation. In the event that multiple applications requiring a deposit are being requested simultaneously, only one (1) deposit, equal to largest deposit required, shall be paid with the application fees. Upon notification by the city, the deposit shall be replenished if the fees incurred near the initial deposit amount, and review shall cease until such time as the deposit is replenished. Any remaining balance on a deposit will be refunded in a timely manner once all fees have been paid. 
Amendment to comprehensive plan ..... $2,200.00 
Local landmark or historic district designation ..... $200.00 
Temporary use fee ..... $100.00 
Zoning verification letter, per zoning lot ..... $60.00 
_____
Sec. 10.1 Occupancy Permit Fees. 
(1)  Fees for occupancy permits for any newly constructed, moved, remodeled or reconstructed building or structure or addition thereto for which a building permit is required shall be included in the fee of the building permit, therefore, as provided for in this section. 
(2)  Fees for occupancy permits issued pursuant to changes of occupancy are as follows: 
(a)  For unimproved real estate, there will be a fee of twenty dollars ($20.00) charged for one (1) inspection. There shall be no fee assessed for the first re-inspection. A fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be charged for each re-inspection thereafter, payable prior to such re-inspection. 
(b)  For real estate improved only with a mechanical vault, transmission tower, sign, or other structure not intended for human habitation, there shall be a fee of twenty dollars ($20.00) charged for one (1) inspection. There shall be no fee assessed for the first re-inspection. A fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be charged for each re-inspection thereafter, payable prior to such re-inspection. 
(c)  For all other units or structures, there shall be a base fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) plus twelve cents ($0.12) per square foot charged for one (1) inspection. In no case shall the fee exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00). There shall be no fee assessed for the first re-inspection. A fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be charged for each re-inspection thereafter, payable prior to such re-inspection. 
(d)  A person, firm or corporation shall be exempt from the inspection fees provided above if that person's, firm's, or corporation's change of occupancy is from premises located within the city's limits, but shall be subject to all other provisions of section 4-1 (I). 
(e)  Temporary occupancy permit fees as subject to section 4-1 (I) are as follows: 
During allowable dates ..... $500.00 
Outside allowable dates ..... $1,000.00 
(f)  All fees contained listed in section 10.1 are not refundable. 
_____
Sec. 11.1 Raffles ..... $10.00 
_____
Sec. 12.1 Recapture Agreement Fees. 
In addition to the application fee, a five hundred dollar ($500.00) deposit shall be required. In the event that multiple applications requiring a deposit are being requested simultaneously, only one (1) deposit shall be paid with the application fees. Upon notification by the city, the deposit shall be replenished if the fees incurred near the initial deposit amount, and review shall cease until such time as the deposit is replenished. Any remaining balance on a deposit will be refunded in a timely manner once all fees have been paid. 
Recapture Agreement ..... $500.00 
_____
Sec. 13.1 Public Works Permit Application Fee, Unless Otherwise Provided by Franchise, License or Similar Agreement. 
First two reviews ..... $100.00 
Each subsequent review beginning with the third review ..... $50.00 
License or Franchise Fee — Placement of telecommunications and utility facilities within Public Ways ..... $0.10 per lineal foot 
_____
Sec. 14.1 Subdivision and PUD Application Fees. 
In addition to the application fee, a five hundred dollar ($500.00) deposit shall be required. In the event that multiple applications requiring a deposit are being requested simultaneously, only one (1) deposit shall be paid with the application fees. Upon notification by the city, the deposit shall be replenished if the fees incurred near the initial deposit amount, and review shall cease until such time as the deposit is replenished. Any remaining balance on a deposit will be refunded in a timely manner once all fees have been paid. 
Minor subdivision ..... $300.00 
Re-subdivision — consolidation or abrogation, up to 5 acres ..... $300.00 
Re-subdivision — consolidation or abrogation, 5+ acres ..... $500.00 
Preliminary plat of subdivision, up to 5 acres ..... $700.00 
Preliminary plat of subdivision, 5+ acres ..... $850.00 
Final plat of subdivision, up to 5 acres ..... $400.00 
Final plat of subdivision, 5+ acres ..... $500.00 
Combined preliminary/final plat of subdivision, up to 5 acres ..... $800.00 
Combined preliminary/final plat of subdivision, 5+ acres ..... $1,100.00 
Subdivision/deviation ..... $500.00 
Plat of dedication/vacation ..... $400.00 
Easement encroachment agreement ..... $400.00 
Special Use — preliminary PUD ..... $1,200.00 plus $50.00 per acre 
Special use — final PUD ..... $1,100.00 
Combined special use — preliminary/final PUD ..... $1,600.00 plus $50.00 per acre 
Amendment to a special use PUD ..... $800.00 plus $20.00 per acre 
Amendment to a final PUD, major ..... $700.00 
_____
Sec. 15.1 Vehicle Immobilization ..... $75.00 
_____
Sec. 16.1 Weed/Grass Cutting by Contractor — Administrative Charge ..... $100.00 
_____
Sec. 17.1 Zoning Application Fees. 
In addition to the application fee, a five hundred dollar ($500.00) deposit shall be required. In the event that multiple applications requiring a deposit are being requested simultaneously, only one (1) deposit equal to the largest deposit required shall be paid with the application fees. Upon notification of the city, the deposit shall be replenished if the fees incurred near the initial deposit amount; review shall cease until such time as the deposit is replenished. Any remaining balance on a deposit will be refunded in a timely manner once all fees have been paid. 
Amendment to a special use (except PUD) ..... $700.00 
Extension of a special use ..... $300.00 
Minor zoning variance ..... $200.00 
Special use (except PUD) ..... $700.00 
Text amendment ..... $2,200.00 
Text amendment (minor, no uses, bulk <15%) ..... $300.00 
Zoning map amendment (rezoning) ..... $2,200.00 
Zoning variance — residential ..... $400.00 
Zoning variance non-residential ..... $600.00 
_____
Sec. 18.1 The city Administrator or his designee may, without amending this Appendix, impose new administrative fees not otherwise listed in the code so long as they are fifty dollars ($50.00) or less. 
_____
Sec. 19.1 In addition to the fees set in this Appendix (except those designated with an "*"), each petitioner/applicant and property owner shall reimburse the city for such professional fees and costs as shall actually be incurred by the city, plus an additional twenty-five (25) percent administrative fee, in the event that the city, in its sole and exclusive discretion, determines that it is necessary or desirable to obtain professional services, including, but not limited to, attorneys, engineers, planners, architects, surveyors, traffic, drainage or other consultants, and/or to incur costs related to any required notices or recordations, in connection with the application or petition, and/or any related application or petition filed by the petitioner/applicant. 
_____
Sec. 20.1 Small Wireless Facility Fees and Penalties 
Permit Fees—All applications for permits pursuant to this Ordinance shall be accompanied by a non-refundable application fee according to the following schedule: 
Single wireless telecommunications facility on an existing structure ..... $650.00 
Multiple wireless telecommunication facilities (maximum 25) included in a single application to collocate 
on existing structures ..... $350.00 per each facility 
Wireless telecommunication facility that includes the replacement or installation of a new structure or tower ..... $1,000.00 
Annual Recurring Rate—The wireless services provider shall pay to the City an annual recurring rate for each permitted location of two hundred ($200.00) dollars per year or an amount equal to the City's direct costs, whichever is greater, to collocate telecommunication facilities on City-owned infrastructure. Initial payment shall be received prior to permit issuance by the City. Thereafter, payment shall be received annually beginning on the second January 1 following the initial payment. 
Penalties—Any person who violates any provision of this Ordinance or fails to comply with the requirements thereof, or who constructs, alters, repairs, disconnects, removes any facility within the City rights-of-way in violation of an approved plan or directive of the Director of Public works or his designee, or fails to apply for or obtain a permit issued under the provisions of this Ordinance shall be guilty of an offense punishable by a fine equal to the greater of: 
Seven hundred fifty ($750.00); or 
Twice the assessment application fees under this Ordinance; or 
An amount sufficient to correct any deficiencies or maintain the proper movement and safety of the City rights-of-way users. 
Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. The imposition of ay fine shall not exempt the offer from compliance with the requirements of this Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 18-O-0045, § 1, 7-16-2018) 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 18-O-0020, § 1(Exh. A), adopted May 7, 2018, repealed the former App. G, §§ 1.1—19.1, and enacted a new App. G as set out herein. The former appendix pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 14-O-0012, § 1(Exh. A), adopted April 7, 2014.   Amendments to the fee schedule are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note means the provision remains unchanged from the original ordinance. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

